Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
Rwanda for having organized this briefing on the annual
report of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2013/63).
Allow me to congratulate Ambassador Momen on
his dynamic chairmanship of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in
2012 and to thank him for his briefing. I also welcome
the statement of Ambassador Ranko Vilovie, which
quite rightly focused on the strengthening of the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

As our exchanges on the subject have shown, there
is consensus on how important the work of the PBC is.
Its mandate, which is based on resolutions 1645 (2005)
and 1646 (2005)and has been refined through the work
of the Organizational Committee and the country-
specific configurations, is to ensure that the countries
on its agenda do not relapse into conflict and violence.
It seeks to achieve that noble goal by providing political
support and advocacy, support to coordination among
international partners, and support for resource
mobilization. Thanks to the help of all its members and
the concerned parties in the countries on its agenda,

and with the support of the Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO), the Commission achieved encouraging
success in 2012, as documented in the report before us.

Despite the progress achieved by the PBC in 2012,
the report notes that much remains to be done. I would
therefore like to focus on what we, as members of the
Security Council, can do to support the Commission in
its mandate in service to our common objective. From
the experience I have gained as Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau country-specific configuration since February
2011 and as a member of the Council for several months
now, I would like to address three conditions that we
believe are important for the success of the PBC.

The first condition is to be found within the
countries supported by the PBC. They must find the
political will to rise above the deeply rooted causes
of the conflicts of the past: poverty; socioeconomic
exclusion; political, ethnic and identity-based rivalries;
corruption; bad governance; and external impacts and
interference. We all recognize that those primarily
responsible for peacebuilding are the State entities of
the country in question, foremost among which is the
Government. It is in that respect that the Commission
can and must establish trusting partnerships in
which it identifies and supports the reformers within
Governments who are prepared to fully invest in the
future of their country and work for the good of its
citizens.

The six countries supported by the PBC have
highlighted their willingness to emerge from their
fragile situation by joining the Group of Seven Plus
and contributing to the creation of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. That solemn commitment
is primarily centred on cooperation between a
national Government desirous to fulfil its duties and
its international partners desirous to cooperate in
a responsible and sustainable manner. It also sets
the milestones for an irreversible exit from a fragile
situation by putting forward a unique national vision
and transition plan. In that respect, we believe that
additional efforts must be made to align peacebuilding
commitments with a given country's vision for the
success of its transition.

On a more technical level, we believe that the
civilian capacities initiative is a good chance to simplify
and accelerate the strengthening of the institutional
capacities in the countries on the PBC agenda. At the
same time, we must remain aware of the fact that the
countries supported by the PBC should be viewed in
their regional context. The common and cross-border
challenges and obstacles involved in peacebuilding
must necessarily be part of our analysis so that we can
find appropriate solutions to them. To that end, the
country-specific configurations ofthe countries that are
members of the Mano River Union - Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone - are planning a meeting on
the challenges that face the region as a whole, with the
help and under the guidance of the Secretary General
of the Union.

In 2012, during the debate held on this issue
(S/PV.6897), almost every Council member highlighted
the importance of the improved coordination of
peacebuilding activities, and most wanted to see it
done by the country-specific configurations of the
Commission. Such coordination requires close ties
among all the international stakeholders that support
peacebuilding and the strengthening of the State in the
countries in question. That will be carried out primarily
within the countries themselves, through the United
Nations high representatives on the ground, as well as
in New York.

The second condition that is necessary for
the success of the Peacebuilding Commission is a
Peacebuilding Support Office that is strong and capable
of playing the support and coordination role within the
United Nations system that is expected of it. Under the
firm hand of Assistant Secretary-General Judy Cheng-
Hopkins, the personnel of the Peacebuilding Support
Office has done commendable work.

Like other Council members, we believe that
the Peacebuilding Commission is most useful in its
country-specific configurations. Therefore, the Office
must devote more significant resources to support for
those configurations. The PBSO must also take on a
central role as coordinator of peacebuilding work
within the United Nations system, both to ensure a
better exchange of information and analysis between
the various departments and entities of the system and
the country-specific configurations, and to contribute
to including, in a crosscutting manner, the idea of
peacebuilding in the work of the United Nations.
In that context, maintaining triangular, close and
constructive relationships of trust between country
configurations, high United Nations officials on the
ground, the Special Representatives and executives of
the Secretary-General, the resident coordinators and the
Peacebuilding Support Office is particularly important.

The third condition for success is that we must
overcome the uncertainties that seem to persist
in relations between the Security Council and the
Commission. The success or failure ofa peacebuilding
process affects the Council as well as the Commission.
The work and responsibilities of the Council and the
Commission are inextricably entwined - a fact that
is also reflected in their overlapping makeups. Thus
the five permanent members of the Council also
have permanent seats on the PBC's Organizational
Committee. Guatemala and Morocco will participate
in its work in 2013. As one of the principal troop-
contributing countries, Pakistan is active in the
Commission.

Finally, Luxembourg, a non-permanent member
of the Council in 2013 and 2014, has chaired the
Guinea country configuration since February 2011.
I would therefore like to reiterate in particular the
recommendation that the Chairs of the country
configurations be allowed to participate in the Council's
private consultations. Luxembourg is convinced that
it can bring added value in terms of analysis and
perspective. It can help shed light on the root causes
of conflicts, especially socioeconomic factors and the
effects of exclusion, through which countries run the risk
of relapsing into conflict. The country configurations
may be able to support States more closely than the
Council can; their input, based on a relationship oftrust
established with the country's authorities, can only
be of benefit to the Council's consultations. I would
also like to encourage my colleagues on the Council
who will be assuming the presidency in the next few
months to consider inviting the Chairs of the country
configurations to private consultations, particularly
when discussing mandate renewals.

I welcome the possibility of engaging in deeper
discussions at the interactive dialogue that will be
held tomorrow between the country representatives,
along with the Commission, the Chairs of the country
configurations and the members of the Security
Council.

