Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Russia for its initiative in convening
this meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for his briefing.

Recently, the security situation in parts of Syria,
including its capital, Damascus, and the eastern Ghouta
region, has escalated, causing significant civilian
casualties, which is drawing broad attention from the
international community. China would like to express
its profound sympathy to the Syrian people for their
suffering. We condemn all acts of violence that target
civilians and civilian facilities and harm innocent lives.
China has always believed that there is no military
solution to the Syrian issue; it would only aggravate the
suffering of the Syrian people. A political settlement is
the only way out.

The present situation is now such that the
international community needs to support the Syrian
parties in the resumption of dialogue and negotiations
under the United Nations mediation as soon as possible
and in seeking a solution that is accepted by all parties
through a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political
process. That is the only way to fundamentally ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria and rid the Syrian
people of their suffering at an early date.

Terrorist organizations are still launching attacks
in Syria, which have caused significant civilian
casualties and impeded humanitarian relief efforts
by the United Nations. The international community
should strengthen its cooperation on counter-terrorism,
adopt unified standards and resolutely combat all
terrorist organizations designated as such by the
Security Council.

As part of the Syrian issue, the humanitarian
aspect in the country is closely linked to Syria's overall
situation, in addition to its political process. Actions
taken by the Security Council on Syria's humanitarian
issue should not only help ease the overall humanitarian
situation in the country, but also help consolidate the
momentum for a ceasefire in Syria and be conducive
to the bigger picture of a political settlement to the
issue. China calls upon the Security Council to remain
united on the issue of Syria, speak with one voice and
create favourable conditions for substantive progress in
Syria's political process at an early date.

