Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to join others in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. I also want to thank and commend the
delegation of the Russian Federation for its professional
and successful presidency in September. And I thank
today's briefers for their comprehensive briefings.

Earlier this year, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2457 (2019), which welcomed the African
Union's initiative of Silencing the Guns by 2020. It
is a crucial effort, as peace and security are critical
enablers in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Young people are central to the
initiative, which aims to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. Yet there are many challenges
confronting those generations. Today more than
600 million young people in the world live in fragile
and conflict-challenged areas, many of them in Africa.
They also suffer from a lack of basic services in areas
such as health and education, as well as from a lack of
economic opportunities.

Against that backdrop, I would like to highlight
three points regarding mobilizing young people
towards silencing the guns. We must first address their
vulnerabilities. We should create an environment that
enables them to access opportunities and participate in
a functioning society, thereby dissuading them from
committing acts of violence. That can be achieved by
combating poverty, investing in inclusive education
and training, ensuring gainful employment and
promoting a culture of peace, among other things. Such
efforts should be focused on those who need them the
most, including former members of armed groups and
young refugees.

Secondly, we should mainstream youth
participation in the initiative. There are several areas
that can benefit from the involvement of young people.
Their participation can increase the legitimacy, vitality
and sustainability of a peace process. It is also crucial
to engage them in efforts to prevent the spread of
terrorism and involvement in organized crime. In
addition, young people often make up the largest share
of armed groups, and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes should therefore take their
needs into account. We must also ensure meaningful
youth participation in transitional justice initiatives in
order to promote reconciliation and social cohesion.
We could take advantage of their familiarity with
technology to raise awareness of such initiatives and
advocate concrete actions in support of that cause.

Thirdly, we should ensure the coherence of
efforts at the international, regional and national
levels. Resolution 2457 (2019) recognizes the need
for partnerships to help accelerate progress towards
realizing the initiative to silence the guns by 2020.
It is important that national Governments, regional
actors and the whole United Nations system work in
harmony, with clearly defined areas of focus. As an
example, in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), we are focusing on developing digital skills
and institutionalizing young people's engagement in
the region's policy discourse by operationalizing the
ASEAN Youth Volunteer Programme and ASEAN
youth dialogues. Our objective is to foster ASEAN youth
who are ready for the future, to the benefit of ASEAN's
socioeconomic development, peace and security.

Lastly, mobilizing youth towards silencing the guns
requires that we change our mindset. We must view
young people not merely as victims or perpetrators
of violence, but as powerful agents of change who
can contribute positively to the maintenance and
promotion of durable peace and stability. In turn,
youth empowerment will contribute to creating the
just and peaceful societies envisioned in Sustainable
Development Goal 16, and to the overall achievement
of the SDGs.

