Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on issues
related to United Nations sanctions.

This Security Council discussion on sanctions is
set against a backdrop of wide-ranging and sustained
challenges to international peace and security. New
crises are straining the collective capacity to respond,
while older conflicts are simmering, without resolution
and with the potential to reignite. It seems timely,
therefore, to take stock of the efficacy of United
Nations sanctions, as was recently done for peace
operations, peacebuilding and the women peace and
security agenda.

Just as the causes of conflicts are complex
and interlinked, the responses must be effective,
complementary and mutually reinforcing. Sanctions
are not an end in themselves. At their most effective,
sanctions should contribute to a comprehensive political
strategy, working in tandem with other Charter-based
instruments, to prevent and peacefully resolve conflicts.

Today, 13 Security Council sanctions regimes play
an enabling role in preventing conflict, countering
terrorism and constraining the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The Council has adopted tailored and
calibrated sanctions measures to deter unconstitutional
change of government; the illicit exploitation of
natural resources, which funds the activities of armed
groups; as well as violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular sexual
violence in conflict as an act of terror. Conversely,
sanctions measures have been adopted to support the
implementation of peace agreements and peacebuilding
efforts. The Council's sanctions regimes on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh and Al-Qaida,
as well as the regime under resolution 1718 (2006),
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, are
central to international efforts to tackle terrorism and
proliferation, respectively. Both have been continually
adjusted to meet specific and evolving challenges, with
due regard to the impact on civilian populations.

Security Council sanctions are also a flexible
instrument, subject to regular reviews, adjustments and
terminations. In 2016, three sanctions regimes i those
concerning Iran, C6te d'Ivoire and Liberia - were
terminated. While the Council has adopted 26 sanctions
regimes since 1966, it has also terminated 15 regimes
to date. That invalidates the often-heard criticism
that the Council establishes but does not terminate its
sanctions regimes.

In its commitment to continually reviewing its
sanctions regimes, the Council has also requested the
Secretary-General to take stock of various elements
of sanctions regimes. Since 2014, the Secretary-
General has provided assessments to the Council
on the arms embargoes in Somalia and the Central
African Republic, as well as on the sanctions regimes
in Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. In his next report to the
Security Council on small arms and light weapons, the
Secretary-General will provide lessons learned on the
implementation of arms embargoes in field missions.

Reviews of sanctions regimes have also resulted
in strengthening responses to growing threats. Last
year, the Council adopted resolutions 2270 (2016)
and 2321 (2016), which considerably strengthened the
existing sanctions regime on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. In Libya, the Council expanded the
prohibitions on the export of petroleum products and
designation criteria were adopted this year for acts of
sexual violence in the Central African Republic, as well
as in the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh
and Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Moreover, the Council
has combined the robust enforcement of sanctions with
due respect for human rights through the Focal Point
for Delisting in the Secretariat and the Office of the
Ombudsperson for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Over the
past decade, the Council has made important strides in
its due process commitments when imposing targeted
sanctions on individuals and entities.

Effective United Nations sanctions require
the broad-based support of Member States and the
international community at large. Even the best
designed United Nations sanctions resolutions are not
self-implementing. Member States still need to fulfil
their implementation obligations. While there may
have been different assessments of the implementation
gap of United Nations sanctions, it is undeniable
that the diversity and complexity of targeted United
Nations sanctions regimes have imposed a considerable
burden of implementation on Member States and other
implementing entities.

In order to mitigate those difficulties, the Security
Council and its sanctions committees have enhanced
outreach to Member States, especially to regional
countries affected by sanctions. Sanctions committees
routinely meet with regional countries to discuss
implementation challenges. Chairs of sanctions
committees have also held open briefings, including
for regional groups, in order to promote awareness of
Council sanctions regimes. Those are supplemented
with the travel of committee Chairs to countries and
regions impacted by sanctions. That allows for the
accrual of first-hand understanding of the effectiveness
of sanctions measures.

Furthermore, all Security Council sanctions lists
have been made available in the six official United
Nations languages, with linkages to Security Council-
INTERPOL Special Notices, where available. The
Secretariat has also been working on the implementation
of an enhanced data model of United Nations sanctions
lists in order to deepen the information base, which will
allow for more accurate screening of individuals and
entities by relevant national and international authorities.

While those are all useful means to enhance the
application of sanctions, the implementation of United
Nations sanctions is necessarily awhole-of-Government
endeavour. Member States would benefit from even
greater in-country assistance. Sanctions are adopted in
New York, but they are mainly implemented at border
crossings, ports and airports, as well as in banking and
financial institutions, bringing together a multitude of
Government institutions at various levels, as well as
the private sector. Beyond Member States, the positive
experience of Council's partnership with INTERPOL,
especially through the use ofthe Special Notices, should
be applied to other important partnerships, especially
the aviation and financial sectors.

All previous State-led reviews of United Nations
sanctions have stressed the importance of coordinated
United Nations system-wide support to sanctions
regimes. Since 2014, under the leadership of the
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Inter-Agency Working Group on Sanctions, which is
comprised of 26 United Nations entities, has continued
its work to ensure system-wide support to United
Nations sanctions. The Working Group is an important
forum for promoting better understanding of United
Nations sanctions regimes, facilitating the preparation
of sanctions assessment reports, and promoting
productive interactions among United Nations entities,
sanctions committees and sanctions experts.

The Department of Political Affairs, through its
Security Council Affairs Division (SCAD), has also
continued its support to the Security Council in the
design, implementation and evaluation of United Nations
sanctions. In recent years, SCAD has further enhanced
its support to the Council, sanctions committees and
their experts on substantive, procedural and technical
issues. Sanctions workshops and regime-specific
briefings were organized for incoming members of
the Council in order to explain working methods and
procedural issues, as well as the substantive aspects
of each sanctions regime. Furthermore, advisory
support was also provided to Member States in order
to facilitate the implementation of United Nations
sanctions regimes, in particular regarding exemption
requests and implementation reports.

The Security Council Affairs Division also
plays a key role in supporting and managing the nine
sanctions monitoring groups, teams and panels, which
are comprised of 59 sanctions experts. Since 2013, the
Division has organized an annual inter-panel workshop
for all sanctions experts. Since 2015, it has organized
an investigative techniques workshop for relevant
experts, in partnership with the United Nations Office
for Internal Oversight and Audit.

The importance of our support to sanctions experts
was, tragically, brought into sharp focus with the killings
in March of Ms. Zaida Catalan and Mr. Michael Sharp,
members of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Even as we continue to press
for full accountability for those abhorrent crimes, we
need to also reassess the security arrangements that
govern the work of sanctions experts in order to ensure
that such crimes never happen again. In that regard, the
findings and recommendations of the board of inquiry

will be instructive. We look forward to the support
of the Security Council in the implementation of the
necessary changes that may be required.

United Nations sanctions are a formidable
instrument for global peace and security. It is important
that they continue to be deployed in tandem with other
Charter-based instruments in the service of clearly
established objectives, and with respect for due process
and human rights.

