Mr. Cerdenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): I wish at the outset to express my delegation's
satisfaction at the results of the recent peace talks on the
crisis in the former Yugoslavia. The initialling in Dayton,
Ohio, of the documents that constitute its legal structure
marks a significant step forward. It consolidates the
process that perhaps began to take clear shape with the
cease-fire and gives us grounds for hope that lasting
peace can finally be established in the Balkans.

The suffering civilian population of that area can
now dream of a violence-free future that will allow all
their children to live in diversity, with respect for each
other's dignity and rights.

My delegation wishes to express its deep
appreciation for the work for peace done by the Contact
Group, especially by the United States, as well as that of
the troop-contributing countries and their valiant and
noble personnel. All those tireless efforts have produced
the results I have just described.

In particular, with respect to the indefinite - and,
for now, conditional - suspension of the economic
sanctions imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and, as appropriate, of those on the Bosnian Serbs, I wish
to stress that sanctions have on this occasion proved their
effectiveness; they have shown that they can be a
valuable instrument, as envisaged in the Charter, for the
international community to persuade those against whom
they are directed to pursue the objectives of peace sought
by the international community through this Organization.

While, as has been said, the work of the Security
Council sanctions Committee established by resolution
724 (1991) does not necessarily end here, as has been
mentioned, I wish to draw attention to the tribute in
operative paragraph 9 of today's resolution to all those

 

who worked tirelessly with us to make the sanctions regime
effective. It was precisely this shared and coordinated
endeavour that made the sanctions effective.

As Chairman of the sanctions Committee, I have had
the opportunity daily to witness the dedication of all those
with whom I have worked directly and indirectly. As a
result of that dedication, the difficult task entrusted to us
has been performed to date in a satisfactory manner.

We must now quickly study and amend the existing
operational guidelines in the light of the resolution that has
just been adopted. This will not be easy, either, since
certain important questions remain to be answered. For
example, we must decide what policy to follow with regard
to the ongoing investigations. But I have no doubt that
between us we can, with due diligence, agree on answers.

It is vital, at least for the time being, to maintain the
Committee's monitoring capacity, in particular that
provided by SAMCOMM, whose cooperation, in my view,
will continue to be necessary, at least for the foreseeable
future. For all these reasons, I appeal for the understanding
of those ultimately responsible to ensure that this
cooperation continues for as long as necessary. I take that
for granted.

Our last thought on this issue is for the people of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, whose daily lives - as
usually happens - have for long been gravely affected by
the burden of sanctions. Their leaders were certainly
responsible for that. Now that the correct course has been
set, the people must strive to avoid any backsliding or
deviation from the cause of peace. In that way - and only
in that way - will the sacrifices made assume their proper
significance.

I wish to say a few brief words on the resolution
ending - again, conditionally for now - the embargo on
arms and military equipment imposed by resolution
713 (1991). My comments are addressed specifically to
those responsible for the decisions that will need to be
taken on this issue in the future. May God give them eyes
to see that progress towards peace will be strengthened if
they resist the temptation to enter into an arms race, with
all its destabilizing effects, and if they commit themselves
sincerely to the arms control and reduction efforts provided
for in the agreement initialled in Dayton. I hope they will
understand that at this time the best thing to strive for is the
greatest possible degree of disarmament for all.

While the tragic violations of humanitarian law in
the region are still fresh in our minds - events that we
have witnessed with disbelief or horror - we must
continue our efforts to replace armed violence with
peaceful dialogue and atrocities with mutual respect.
Coexistence involves not only preserving the identity of
others, but also benefiting by them and maximizing the
mutual enrichment that is always the reward of life lived
in diversity.

