Mr. Johnson (United States of America): It is an
honour to address this distinguished group of leaders.
This is an unprecedented event - a meeting of the
Security Council convening key interior ministries. I
express my appreciation to Lithuania for its leadership
is convening this event, as the President of the Council,
and its efforts as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism. It is an important and timely gathering to
review our progress against foreign terrorist fighters.
Our Ministries are responsible for domestic action
to address the foreign terrorist fighter issue and we
know the importance of working together across our
Governments and across borders.

It has been eight months since the adoption of
Council resolution 2178 (2014). The resolution creates
a new legal and policy framework for international
action against an emerging threat to the security of
our homelands. In making the case for resolution 2178
(2014), my country's President Obama, said,

"we must come together as nations and an
international community to confront the real
and growing threat of foreign terrorist fighters"
(S/PV7272, p. 3).

Our task, today, is to assess how we are coming together
and building the capacity to confront this phenomenon
and to make sure that when we reach the one-year mark
we have achieved substantial progress on the actions
called for in resolution 2178 (2014).

Recent events in Libya, Denmark, Tunisia, Yemen,
France, Belgium and elsewhere reveal the way in which
this global terrorist threat has evolved. Terrorists of
today have considerable resources and use sophisticated
communications technologies. They are increasingly
mobile, adaptable and brutal. Terrorist organizations
include foreign terrorist fighters travelling to participate
in other people's conflicts. The threat increasingly
includes people carrying out attacks where they live,
after returning home.

Much more work needs to be done. We must
fulfil the provisions of resolution 2178 (2014) in five
general respects. First, we must criminalize the travel
and attempted travel of foreign terrorist fighters and
certain forms of support; secondly, adopt effective
border controls and issue secure travel documents,
as well as the corollary need to exchange operational
information concerning terrorists; thirdly, expand
criminal investigations and prosecutions; fourthly,
counter violent extremism; fifthly, encourage a
greater role on the part of the United Nations and its
counter-terrorism bodies such as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

In recent years, however, we have witnessed
an unprecedented flow of foreign terrorist fighters
to conflict zones, including Afghanistan, the Horn
of Africa, Yemen, Libya, Syria and Iraq. That new
challenge requires a new response and our response must
include stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and their facilitators and identifying and helping those
that are disillusioned before they succumb to violent
extremism ideologies.

More than 22,000 foreign terrorist fighters from
over 100 nations have travelled to Syria since the
beginning of the conflict there, including at least 4,000
from the West. Over 180 Americans have travelled, or
attempted to travel to Syria. Governments all over the
world are mobilizing to deal with this new threat and
the United States is eager to work closely with all of our
partners in doing so.

President Obama has directed all elements of the
American Government to focus on the problem. We
are therefore focused on improving border and aviation
security, bolstering legal and prosecutorial capacity,
improving information-sharing and addressing
the underlying conditions conducive to terrorism,
thereby preventing the problem by countering violent
extremism.

It is encouraging to see that many countries have
taken steps to respond to threats from foreign terrorist
fighters. The threat is truly global and involves
crossing borders. At the United States Department of
Homeland Security, we are expanding the security of
our visa-waiver programme to bolster the screening of
citizens from even our closest partners and friends and
supporting the expansion ofpre-clearance processes that
screen travelers en route to the United States. That will
protect travelers of all nations on flights to the United
States. Other countries have taken their own national
measures. Our safety and security is inextricably tied
up with theirs. Therefore, my Government regularly
consults with other partners concerning foreign
terrorist fighters in an ongoing effort to prioritize the
threat, assess vulnerabilities and adapt measures to
prevent and interdict.

We are also encouraging greater law enforcement
cooperation through INTERPOL's notice advisory
system and foreign terrorist fighter database. As the
world's largest international police organization,
INTERPOL has a vital role to play in foreign terrorist
fighter interdiction. Through INTERPOL, United
States authorities are sharing information in real time.
During the past year, the United States has shared a
dramatically increased number ofterrorist identities via
mechanisms offered by INTERPOL. Two United States
personnel will soon be assigned to the INTERPOL
foreign terrorist fighter fusion cell in Lyon, France,
as part of a programme funded by the United States
Department of State. I urge all of our partners to
consider actively exchanging information with the
foreign terrorist fighter fusion cell and to provide
financial or in-kind contributions to the cell.

The United States Government has also established
over 80 bilateral arrangements with 45 partner countries
to share information on known and suspected foreign
terrorist fighters for use by law enforcement, border
authorities and security services. It includes important
information on those we believe to be radicalized to
violence by terrorist groups operating in Syria and Iraq.

We also continue to share information on a
case-by-case basis with partners with whom we have
had longstanding relationships. Our Federal Bureau of
Investigation continues to aggressively pursue counter-
terrorism investigations in the United States. United
States Departments of Treasury and State are working
closely with foreign partners to disrupt access by
foreign terrorist fighters and their support networks to
the United States and international financial systems to
finance travel. United States designations trigger asset
freezing against those providing supports to terrorist
networks. The international community must continue
to develop and update countermeasures to deprive our
enemies of resources.

We are eager to assist our international partners
in their own efforts. Alongside our State Department,
justice personnel are providing technical assistance and
expertise to our partners in reviewing their investigative
tools and their law enforcement and prosecution
legislation for compliance with resolution 2178 (2014).
More than 30 countries have updated their laws since the
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014). Others are reviewing
them. More needs to done to strengthen legal systems
Where needed, particularly in order to criminalize the
intent to travel as foreign terrorist fighters to commit
terrorist acts, as well as to counter acts such as training
and facilitating terrorism activities. And we must do
that as expeditiously as possible.

Terrorists are always looking for ways to
circumvent border security and security at airports.
At the Department of Homeland Security we are
continuously evaluating, modifying and enhancing
our security measures in order to stop them,
working in cooperation with our foreign partners.
Last summer, example, the department required
enhanced screening at certain overseas airports with
direct flights to the United States of America. The
United Kingdom and other countries followed suit in
order to further enhance the security of global aviation.
It is essential for countries to cooperate more in that
area.

As outlined in resolution 2178 (2014), the collection
and analysis of travel data is an important instrument
for border control and aviation security. It provides
the basis for countries to work together to counter
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, or their
supporters and financiers. Yet according to the CTED
report, only 51 States employ this vital tool. I encourage
additional countries to use travel information like
advanced passenger information and passenger name
record data to identify both known and previously
unknown foreign terrorist fighters. We recognize that
the use of such information may be new to some of our
partners, and some may looking for ways to facilitate
the adoption of those interdiction mechanisms.

My department is committed to helping our
partners better use traveller screening information.
Within the next twelve months, the Department of
Homeland Security, through our customs and border
protection component, will be developing a new
passenger data screening and analysis system. That
global travel assessment system will be made available
at no cost to the international community, for both
commercial and Government organizations, to use
maintain, customize and enhance as needed. In order
to maximize the adoption and accessibility of that
system, it will be developed on free and open-source
platform technology and optimized to operate on low-
cost community hardware or cloud infrastructure.
Once the initial software is released to the international
open-source software community, Member States will
be able to make software enhancements and contribute
software code to the project.

More broadly, all Member States need to work
more closely to take steps that will increase security,
particularly with respect to border controls. The
development of the global travel assessment system is
one such step, but we encourage other Governments
and the United Nations to take action. For instance, it
is important that the United Nations system and donors
move expeditiously to provide capacity building and
technical assistance to the most affected States in order
to fill critical gaps in countering the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. Close work between CTED and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office
can contribute to this effort. July's high-level special
meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, to be
hosted by Spain, as well as CTED's technical sessions
leading up to it, provide another opportunity. Ministries
of the Interior and security services need to lead efforts
to address this evolving and unprecedented threat.

I encourage all of us to continue to invest in
addressing the conditions that lead to violent extremism.
The Department of Homeland Security is building
partnerships with State and local law enforcement
agencies, community leaders and private institutions
that are in a position to deter those who may turn to
violence. As part of that effort, I have personally met
with community leaders in Boston, Chicago, Columbus,
Los Angeles, Minneapolis and here in New York. Last
February, my Government hosted at the White House a
summit on countering violent extremism. Many of the
countries represented here today attended.

Groups like Daesh use the Internet to radicalize
people to violence, but the Internet does not belong
to them. The Internet is a tool that we can use to help
parents, friends and religious leaders to save people
from turning to terrorism and violence. We need to
engage and challenge extremist ideas online and in our
communities in order to counter the ability of terrorists
to recruit foreign terrorist fighters. It is imperative
that we, as ministers of the interior, regularly and
systematically track our efforts to fulfil our obligations
under resolution 2178 (2014). I urge those present
today to participate in the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Committee's special meeting in Spain in
late July. That event will bring together experts - on
border management, countering recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters, prevention, criminalization and
prosecution - from all around the world. Challenging
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters remains a
daunting task. Progress has been made, but we still
have much to learn from each other. I remain optimistic
and encouraged by the cooperation of United Nations
States Members to detect and defeat today's enemies of
peace, security and decency.

Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), we
have increasingly shared our vision for countering this
threat, and the tools to do so. The time to take action is
now. I look forward to hearing from those around the
table about their efforts in this shared task.

