Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the delegation of Cameroon, I would like to
thank Presidents Theodor Meron and Erik Mase and
the Prosecutors, Ms. Carla Del Ponte and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, for the clear and exhaustive
presentation of their reports, which, together with the
contents of the reports, enables the Council to assess
the work done and the efforts that still need to be made
to achieve the set objectives.

I shall limit my comments to the following
matters.

Regarding progress made, we have noted with
much interest that the pace of the activities of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) has been unprecedented in the period under
review. To a large extent, that has also been true of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
These meritorious efforts are the result of internal and
external reforms that have been vigorously
implemented by the leaders of the Tribunals.

As for future action, the reports emphasize the
importance of the cooperation of the States concerned
for the success of the completion strategy. My
delegation therefore calls for the strengthening of open
cooperation between the two Tribunals and States
directly involved, particularly with regard to the ICTY.
We believe that a regular exchange of views between
the two Tribunals is necessary for the harmonious
accomplishment of their respective tasks.

The two Tribunals must also be given the means
necessary for their functioning and for carrying out
their worthwhile reforms. We believe that for the
Rwanda Tribunal to accelerate its work, strengthening
its capacity is essential. Its leading figures have indeed
asked for that, and particularly for an increased number
of ad litem judges.

In conclusion, allow me to ask one or two
questions.

The ICTY has presented a detailed completion
strategy plan, which requires a number of reforms. My
delegation would like more precise information about
the implementation of such a strategy for Rwanda and
about the assistance to be provided to the Rwanda
Tribunal - for example, in terms of training and
applicable law. How will the current system reconcile the
need for punishment with the need for reconciliation,
not only in Rwanda, but in the entire region?

We note that the Prosecutor will be concluding
investigations by the end of 2004. What are the
possible implications of that decision for the normal
functioning of the special War Crimes Chamber?

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts being made by the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals and
their staff to bring to justice those individuals who, as
President Meron has said, bear the greatest
responsibility for the greatest atrocities.

