Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of the Secretary of State for
International Development of the United Kingdom,
Ms. Justine Greening. We are also grateful for
the briefings by the Deputy Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O'Brien; the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura; and the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui.

We extend our condolences and solidarity to the
families of the victims, the people and the Government
of France, as well as to the people and the Government
of Lebanon. We also extend our condolences to all
countries and regions that suffer daily from the scourge
of terrorism. Any act of terrorism is criminal and
unjustifiable, and the perpetrators, organizers and
backers must be brought to justice for their crimes.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/ 862) is just one of several alerts that the situation
in Syria has become untenable. The conflict breaks
down the basic conditions for the identity, security and
dignity of Syrian society. It is impossible to remain
indifferent, faced with the enormous vulnerability
and the effects of the crisis on the civilian population,
which cannot access essential basic elements needed
for their survival. All parties are aware of the grave
consequences of those acts, which must not be shielded
by impunity. Those responsible must be brought to
justice.

We reiterate the need to promote mechanisms to
protect the civilian population, such as the reopening
of humanitarian corridors to facilitate access for aid for
the population found in the internally displaced persons
camps, and especially in areas where it is difficult to gain
access. It is imperative to generate conditions needed to
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
to effectively implement the humanitarian resolutions
calling on the parties to refrain from ongoing attacks
on medical facilities, schools and basic infrastructure.

The briefing that we have just heard from Special
Representative Bangura simply confirms the gravity
of the situation of sexual and gender violence in the
Syrian conflict, in which such violence is being used
not only as a tactic ofwar, but also as a terror tactic. It is
essential that the United Nations system recommend and
implement measures based on the situation observed on
the ground. We must fully implement resolution 2106
(2013) and insist on zero tolerance for sexual violence.

We are also concerned about the devastating
consequences of the ongoing attacks on children and
about their limited access to education, among other
fundamental rights. We cannot, as Ms. Zerrougui
pointed out, allow a generation to be lost, and we
have a responsibility as the Security Council when it
comes to that tragedy. It is essential to implement the
Oslo Safe Schools Declaration, the Lucens Guidelines
for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict and resolution 2143 (2014),
on protecting schools from military use during armed
conflict.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that
a political solution is the only path to respond to
humanitarian needs. The recent talks in Vienna of
the International Syria Support Group and the joint
statements of 30 October and of 14 November are a
reason for hope. We appreciate the fact that concrete
goals have been sought in the humanitarian plan. A
ceasefire is essential.

It is also crucial that the political process be led
by the Syrians themselves, as enshrined in the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). However, a political
solution will continue to be far offas long as the conflict
is militarized. We therefore categorically call for an end
to the supply and flow of weapons to all parties.

