The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity.

South Africa welcomes the Iraq Security
Conference held in Baghdad on 10 March 2007 and
supports attempts to achieve an all-inclusive political
process and national reconciliation in Iraq as well as
constructive dialogue with the neighbouring States. We
look forward to participating tomorrow in the
International Compact with Iraq. We remain concerned
at the extremely high levels of violence and abuses of
human rights by all sides, which have overshadowed
any peace and reconstruction efforts in Iraq.

This violence has exacerbated the humanitarian
situation and led to increased numbers of internally
displaced persons and refugees. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
estimates that there are at least 1.6 million Iraqis
displaced internally and up to 1.8 million Iraqis in
neighbouring States, particularly Syria and Jordan.
This situation has undoubtedly placed a particular
strain on Iraq's neighbours and has the potential of
grave negative spillover effects for the region.

Notwithstanding the events that led to the current
situation in Iraq, the Security Council has a
responsibility to ensure that the powers granted to the
Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I) are exercised in a
manner consistent with the decisions of the Security
Council and that international law and human rights
are upheld and respected by all parties. It is for this
reason that we support and wish to pay tribute to the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
for its fearless service in Iraq. The grave situation in
Iraq and the wider Middle East demands the concerted
attention and action of both the countries in the region
and the rest of the world.

The United Nations has a particularly important

role to play. But the full potential of the United Nations

to assist the Iraqi people can only be realized when its

personnel can operate freely in a secure environment.
As President Thabo Mbeki wrote recently,

"... the question can no longer be avoided. Is it
not time that the United Nations, genuinely
representing all nations, assumes its rightful
position and leads a global process to address all
the interconnected challenges facing the peoples
of the Middle East and West Asia?"

I now resume my duties as President of the
Council. I shall now give the floor to Mr. Qazi to
respond to comments and whatever questions may have
been raised.

