Mr.Iliichev(RussianFederation) (spokeinRussian):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
today's meeting. This is a timely exchange ofviews that
we hope will help us find a common denominator during
the current talks on a draft resolution in the General
Assembly and in Security Council on the reform of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

We carefully listened to the briefings by the
current and outgoing Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission - the Permanent Representatives of
Sweden and Kenya - as well as by Mr. Gert Rosenthal,
Chair of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.

Peacebuilding systems are one of the most
important instruments of the United Nations for
effectively resolving conflicts, stabilizing post-conflict
situations and preventing new outbreaks of disastrous
crises. We welcome the contribution made to the
process by the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
(see S/2015/490). The document offers a basis on which
Member States can take informed decisions. Currently,
there are ongoing discussions at the inter-State level
regarding which of the constructive recommendations
could be implemented in practice. The report stresses
the need for peacebuilding efforts at all stages of the
conflict cycle.

Without a doubt, preventing the resumption of
conflict takes up much of the international agenda.
Seventy years ago, the task was enshrined in Chapter
I of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
Organization subsequently took additional decisions on
that important sphere of activity, which strengthened
the basis for international efforts in that area. We think
it is necessary to draw on the expertise and know-how
we have garnered over time.

Furthermore, the report of the Group of Experts calls
on States to look into the concept of sustaining peace,
which concerns reconciliation and building a common
vision of a society that only national stakeholders
can undertake. The United Nations and international
entities can support and facilitate the process, but not
lead it. We fully agree that the primary responsibility
for defining priorities and implementing strategies is
borne by States themselves and that corresponding
international efforts should be focused, first of all, on
capacity-building in affected countries. That assistance
should be provided to States upon request, in line with
their action plans and based on the national sovereignty
and independence of States.

We are sure that the principle of national
responsibility is the linchpin in peacebuilding
efforts. In current crises, which are often domestic,
national Governments continue to bear the primary
responsibility for their people's security. At the same
time, societies themselves play a key role in creating
lasting peace, as they can and must do their utmost to
assist the peace process, shoulder responsibility and
more fully realize their constructive potential. That is
why inclusive national processes and a single vision
within countries based on shared responsibility for
lasting peace are of critical importance.

We recognize the productive role of women in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, as well as
the importance of their equitable participation in that
process. However, we believe that excessive focus
on the gender issue is counterproductive, as there is
no direct link with the root causes of conflict - and
eradicating such root causes is the main task.

With regard to the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) - a
singular, intergovernmental advisory body-plays a key
role. We support its efforts to increase the effectiveness
and coordination of international assistance to countries
that have requested such assistance or to those countries
that are placed on its agenda by the Security Council.
We believe that the PBC will continue to increase
the quality of its advisory assistance to the Security
Council regarding countries within the remit of both
bodies. We expect that the work conducted by the Group
of Experts will, in the final stage, be carried forward
by Member States through specific steps to increase
the Commission's effectiveness, while preserving
its mandate in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 60/180 and Council resolution 1645 (2005).

We also note the role of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF), which is an important mechanism for urgent
financing that brings in long-term resources for aid
in rebuilding and development. We have constantly
advocated the country principle in the distribution
of the PBF's funds. It is important that the work of
the Fund be buoyed by relevant financial resources.
Member States need to take a look at the possibility
of more actively and voluntarily providing assistance.
Each year, Russia provides the Fund with $2 million,
with a total contribution of $12 million. It would be
useful to take a closer look at all existing possibilities
for raising funds, but the idea of moving the PBF to
the regular budget is contradictory. That step would not
only create an additional load for payers in a difficult
economic context, but would also strip the Fund of its
chief advantage, which is effectiveness and flexibility
in chanelling funds to meet the urgent needs of States
calling for assistance. On the whole, we would like
to see PBC interaction with international financial
institutions be bolstered.

While many initiatives developed outside the
United Nations merit our attention in general, they
cannot be automatically considered to be already
approved and officially adopted by the Organization,
and that definitely applies to the so-called New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States, launched in line with the
policies of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development.

In conclusion, would like to emphasize that the
issue of adapting the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture to modern realities requires a responsible,
balanced and in-depth discussion. It is vital that we
achieve the kind of result that will help to build peace
rather than create new risks.

