Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin
by thanking the United States for initiating today's
important briefing. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant Secretary-
General Coninsx and Ambassador Umarov for their
valuable contributions to our discussion.

The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
touches all countries and is constantly evolving. In
the case of Sweden, of the approximately 300 Swedish
citizens who have left the country to join terrorist groups
in Syria or Iraq, we estimate that, to date, half have
returned, 50 have died in conflict and 50 are still outside
Sweden. The profile of returnees is mixed - men,
women and children, some disillusioned, others still
ideologically committed.

It is the obligation of all Member States to
criminalize the travel, training and financing of foreign
terrorist fighters. In Sweden, we have amended the
existing criminal legislation on terrorism to address the
evolving threat and meet the penal law requirements
outlined in resolution 2178 (2014). The amendments
entered into force last year and contain new provisions
on terrorist travel, training and financing. Next
year, the legislation will be tightened even further,
including through an expanded definition of terrorist
offences. Since 2015, we have tried and convicted seven
individuals for terrorism-related offences, including
crimes committed abroad. So far, one person has been
prosecuted under the new amended legislation on
terrorism travel.

We recognize the important work being done
by both United Nations actors and civil society in
trying to better address the root causes of violent
extremism. We were a sponsor of the groundbreaking
report of the United Nations Development Programme
entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa, launched in
September. The report concluded that the main reasons
underlying recruitment are not religion or ideology but
socioeconomic conditions and a breakdown in the rule
of law.

With that in mind, we have sought to address the
issue of foreign terrorist fighters through a whole-of-
Government approach that involves, among other
elements, the police, social services and prison
and probation services at the municipal, regional
and national levels. As part of our strong focus on
prevention, we are putting in place mechanisms aimed
at safeguarding individuals and targeting, in particular,
those at risk of radicalization. A new national centre for
the prevention of violent extremism will be launched in
the new year. New guidelines are being issued by our
national board of health and welfare to municipalities
and practitioners that deal with returnees and defectors.

Resolution 2178 (2014) provides a robust policy
framework for addressing the challenges of foreign
terrorist fighters. We would, however, welcome a new
Security Council resolution to address the new trends
and challenges and look forward to engaging with other
Council members in the upcoming negotiations. In that
regard, the situation of children in terrorist-related
activities needs special attention. Children's full
enjoyment of their human rights must be safeguarded.
Children returning from armed forces or groups must
be provided with proper community-based support in
order to avoid stigmatization and future radicalization.
Children should always be treated primarily as victims.

Several of the foreign terrorist fighters from
Sweden have been women. We would like to see an
integrated gender approach in the new draft resolution
that emphasizes the multiple roles played by women
in relation to terrorism, including as perpetrators,
supporters, facilitators, victims and preventers. The
global framework and programmes for preventing
violent extremism and countering terrorism should
reflect that reality.

As the Secretary-General told the General
Assembly in September,

"As soon as we begin believing that violations
of human rights and democratic freedoms are
necessary to win the fight, we might as well have
lost the war" (A/72/PV3, p. 2).

For that reason, States must comply with their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law, as well as
the principle of the rule of law, in all measures to
combat terrorism.

Collaboration among countries and with partners
across the globe will be central to defeating the
terrorist threat. Sweden remains fully committed and
will continue to play its part in that global effort.

