Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings by Martin Griffiths, Mark
Lowcock, David Beasley and Rasha Jarhum, who, from
different perspectives, have agreed in describing a
distressing situation that needs the urgent support of
the international community and the rapid action of the
Security Council.

Peru notes with deep concern the destructive cycle
that has taken root in Yemen, where spiralling violence
such as that seen in recent weeks is followed by brief
periods of tense calm, while the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world today and regional instability
continue to worsen. Approximately 22 million people,
three of every four Yemenis, require humanitarian
assistance. The extreme vulnerability of the population,
exacerbated by the collapse of public services and the
economy, is claiming more lives than military action
and creating conditions conducive to violent extremism
that leads to terrorism.

As was pointed out to us, the situation is particularly
fragile in Al-Hudaydah, which, even before the most
recent escalation, saw the worst conditions in terms
of food and health care, including 100,000 cases of
girls and boys under 5 years of age with severe acute
malnutrition. Many of the 300,000 civilians left in the
city live in the worst conditions, unable to pay the cost
oftransport to flee the fighting. The bombings in recent
weeks have continued to cause fatalities, including
children, and to destroy the health infrastructure.

We deplore the evil pursuit of the conflict and
the repeated violations of international humanitarian
law that have been committed by all parties, while
the Security Council has failed to fully assume its
responsibility to protect the civilian population by
imposing a humanitarian ceasefire and ensuring
due accountability.

We wish to express our full support for every
humanitarian worker of the United Nations and the
other agencies deployed in Yemen and to once again
emphasize the moral and legal duty to allow their full
access to those in need. At the same time, we must point
out that that will be possible only as we make progress
on the political track.

The looming widespread famine and the exponential
increase in cases of cholera and other diseases show the
urgent need to acknowledge with deeds and actions, not
only with words, that there is no military solution to
the conflict, as well as the necessity for consistency in
prioritizing the protection of civilians.

That requires the Yemeni parties committing to
participating without preconditions and in good faith in
inclusive negotiations sponsored by the United Nations.

We therefore welcome the fact that the members of
the coalition and other actors involved in the conflict
have decided to support that course of action with the
meeting to be held in Sweden in the coming days.

We also emphasize that the members of the Council
are united in supporting a political solution and in
believing that that is possible. That should spur us to
express our full support to Mr. Griffiths, emphasizing
the need to act rapidly, pragmatically and fairly.

We also emphasize the urgent need for the Council
and the parties to the conflict to meet Mr. Lowcock's
five requests, including implementing an immediate
cessation of all hostilities, and to ensure full access
for the humanitarian assistance and commercial goods
needed by the population.

We wish to highlight the important steps taken
recently by countries with influence over the parties
aimed at building the necessary trust to bring the
parties closer together and take the conflict back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible. We particularly
welcome the confidence-building measures that the
Special Envoy has been supporting, such as the transfer
of the wounded and the exchange of prisoners.

I conclude by reaffirming Peru's commitment to
achieving a sustainable peace in Yemen and our full
support for the swift adoption of a resolution by the
Council that would help to put an end to one of the
worst humanitarian tragedies created not by nature but
by the violence and callousness of humankind itself.

