Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I would like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu and Ambassador Zlauvinen for their informative briefings. We would also like to welcome to the Chamber the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and to the full and effective implementation of the three pillars on which it stands. We urge those countries that have not yet become parties to the Treaty to do so in our collective pursuit of achieving a world free from nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons have the capacity to decimate us and set us back decades in the achievement of our development goals. To that end, Saint Vincent and theGrenadines has taken several positive steps to grapple with that existential threat. We are party to the 1967 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America - the Treaty of Tlatelolco - which established our region as the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely populated area. Furthermore, we proudly became the 24th State party to the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in July 2019. We are committed to ensuring that our region remains a zone of peace, as declared by the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States in 2014. While the global number of nuclear weapons has declined, complete disarmament has not yet been achieved and geopolitical tensions are made worse by the existence of those weapons. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is a significant step in the total elimination of that threat. It remains the cornerstone of the global non-proliferation regime. We emphasize the need for multilateral cooperation in effectively addressing the threat of nuclear weapons. We reaffirm the continued need for nuclear-weapon States to engage in in-depth and open dialogue on their respective nuclear doctrines and policies. Doing so increases mutual trust and confidence among all relevant parties. We maintain our respect for the sovereignty of all States, and in our pursuit of non-proliferation policies we reaffirm that they should not undermine the rights of States to peacefully use nuclear technologies. We continue to support the oversight that the International Atomic Energy Agency provides in that regard. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is committed to working with the international community to ensure that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is effectively implemented. We look forward to the 2020 Review Conference, and it is our hope that it will yield success. Indeed, nothing said in the Chamber today should operate so as to prejudge or pre-empt the outcome of the 2020 Review Conference. The most inclusive and representative organ of the United Nations - that is, the General Assembly - has the mandate to deal with that issue in the upcoming review. In closing, we highlight that the total elimination of nuclear weapons should remain a top priority on the agenda of the international community. We must return to a common vision and path leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons. Let us work together to protect the future of humankind.
