Mr. Chandrtri (Thailand): Allow me briefly to
congratulate Kuwait for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I would
also like to express my appreciation to the Kuwaiti
presidency for convening today's open debate on the
Council's working methods under the item entitled
"Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)".

The items on the Security Council's agenda are
increasing in number, complexity and sensitivity.
They require the Council to be ever more effective and
efficient. The working methods of the Security Council
therefore require constant review, so as to enable the
Council to adapt and better fulfil its obligations in
maintaining international peace and security. Many of
the proposals and points raised by previous speakers
have merit and enrich our discussions today. We would
like to draw the attention of the Council to two areas we
believe would benefit greatly from our combined focus
on improvement.

First, Security Council sanctions remain an
indispensable tool for global collective action in
maintaining international peace and security. We firmly
believe that any such sanctions, when imposed, should
continue to be targeted in order to minimize unintended
economic and social consequences. Furthermore,
sanctions achieve their intended goals when Member
States implement them fully and effectively. As such,
Member States rely heavily on clarity of measures and
definitions of scope.

In that respect, we welcome the inclusion of the
harmonized system codes for prohibited items in the
latest sanctions resolutions, and hope that will continue
to be the practice in the future. We also welcome ongoing
coordination efforts between sanctions committees and
the practice ofupdating the consolidated sanctions lists.
The relevant sanctions committees should be further
encouraged to assist Member States by consolidating
and regularly updating lists of all prohibited items,
again with specific harmonized system codes and lists
of all sanctions measures, especially on the inspection
of cargo and means of transportation. Such consolidated
lists will serve as useful implementation guidelines for
national undertakings and enhance collaboration across
Security Council mechanisms.

Secondly, Thailand urges members of the Council
to continue convening public meetings and engaging the
wider membership of the United Nations, particularly
on issues with broader impacts and complexity. That
will ensure a healthy exchange of ideas and lead to a
thorough understanding of how the Council's action, or
inaction, will impact people on the ground. It will also
go a long way in ensuring that the Council is held to the
highest standards of transparency in its deliberations
on matters that, essentially, have a much larger and
more far-reaching impact than the current membership
of the Council. In the same vein, Council members
should share information, developments and outcomes
with the wider membership of the United Nations,
the public, non-governmental organizations and civil
society, as appropriate, through frequent debriefing
sessions. That will help to promote understanding and
support for the work of the Council.

In conclusion, I would like to remind ourselves
that the issue of the working methods of the Security
Council should not be limited to issues particular to the
Security Council. It is also important to understand that
improving the Council's efficiency should be viewed
within the context of a whole-of-system approach, in
support of the mission of the entire United Nations.

