The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

I thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing
and his report.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has
remained stable, and good progress has been made
in economic development and the rule of law. China
welcomes that progress and respects the independence,
sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It also respects the choice
made by the Bosnian people with regard to the future
of their country.

We support the harmonious coexistence of all
ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina and their joint
efforts for development. We hope that Bosnian people
of all ethnic communities will consolidate the results
achieved in the political process, solve their differences
through dialogue, comprehensively implement the
Dayton Peace Agreement and continue to advance the
work ahead in various fields.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. Maintaining the peace and stability
and promoting the economic and social development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are in the common interests of
the international community, especially of the countries
of the region. The international community should take
a balanced and prudent approach with regard to the
question of Bosnia and Herzegovina and seek and heed
the views and concerns of all parties concerned.

China welcomes the efforts made by High
Representative Inzko in advancing the political
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and hopes that he
acts according to his mandate and continues to play a
positive role in promoting the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

China welcomes the adoption by the Council of
resolution 2123 (2013), which extends the mandate of
the multinational stabilization force - the European-
union-led Operation Althea, which we hope will
continue to closely cooperate with the armed forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and play a constructive role in
maintaining the peace and stability of the country.
China is willing to work with the international
community and continue to make its due contribution
to the realization of lasting peace, stability and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

