Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its gratitude to the President of the
Security Council for this month, the United States,
and the members of the Council for this opportunity to
address the Council.

Furthermore, we wish to thankAmbassadorUmarov,
Chairman of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea,
for his briefing to the Security Council.

With respect to Somalia, we share the Chair's
assessment that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious
threat to peace and security in Somalia. It has been
ramping up attacks after rejecting President Farmajo's
amnesty offer. In light of the gravity and viciousness
of the threat, we support the request of the Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
for a surge in troops to enable AMISOM. forces and
the Somali National Army to decisively degrade and
defeat Al-Shabaab.

Likewise, we echo the call made by Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres to provide enhanced logistical
support for under-equipped African Union forces in
Somalia, in particular force enablers and multipliers,
including helicopters. We are indeed confident that with
the enhanced, sustained and coordinated support of the
international community, the new Somali leadership
will be able to deliver significant peace dividends to the
population and improve security and access to justice.

Turning to Eritrea, we are deeply troubled and
concerned by the fact that the distinct lack ofcooperation
that characterized previous mandates continues to date.
Eritrea has deliberately chosen to obstruct the work of
the Monitoring Group. It has consistently and arrogantly
refused to allow the Monitoring Group to verify the
facts. Instead of openly and transparently cooperating,
as directed by the Council, it has slammed the door on
the Group and denied it any access to the information
it needs to determine whether or not Eritrea was in
compliance with the Council's resolutions. In other
words, Eritrea cynically seeks to be rewarded for its
defiance of Security Council resolutions. It seeks just
to stonewall, refuse to cooperate, prevent the missions
from finding the facts and hold on until the Council is
sufficiently frustrated by the failure of its actions and
sufficiently troubled by the impact of its sanctions to
throw up its hands in surrender.

In support of that strategy, it has formulated a
victimhood narrative that may sound appealing to
those who do not know the facts of the situation in
the region. The facts have nevertheless come to the
surface, as highlighted both in numerous Security
Council monitoring reports and the report of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
on transnational threats in the IGAD region. Conversely,
Djibouti has twice welcomed experts of the Monitoring
Group to Djibouti this year and has been able to share
valuable information.

On Eritrea's support to Al-Shabaab, Djibouti is of
the view that Eritrea continues to provide support to
Al-Shabaab. It has shared information that it deems
credible and verifiable with the members of the
Monitoring Group.

On the prisoners of war, Eritrea should be urged
to clarify the situation of 13 remaining Djiboutian
prisoners of war still unaccounted for. Not only is that
a requirement of the Security Council, but it is also
required by the international treaty and customary law
by which Eritrea is bound.

On Eritrea's compliance with the 2010 Qatar
mediation agreement, the Security Council has
determined that the border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea continues to constitute a threat to international
peace and security in the region. It has urged Eritrea to
implement in good faith the dispositions of the accord
and enter into talks with Djibouti with the ultimate
objective of reaching a final and binding agreement on
the border dispute, in accordance with international law.
Djibouti promptly submitted to His Royal Highness the
Emir of Qatar a comprehensive statement of pertinent
facts and legal principles applicable to this matter. To
date, seven days later, Eritrea continues to refuse to
comply with the provisions of the agreement.

On Eritrea's support to armed groups, Eritrea
continues to harbour, train, equip and provide logistical
support to armed groups seeking to overthrow and
destabilize the Government of Djibouti. It continues
to do so, without an ounce of remorse, in violation
of its obligations under Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations, customary international law and
its obligations under Security Council resolutions.
Djibouti urges Eritrea to permanently cease and desist
from such activities.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our profound
gratitude to the members of the Council for their
continued vigilance and support. Indeed, no country can
continuously defy the Security Council's resolutions
and expect not to face the consequences of its actions.

