Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I wish to reassure you, Sir, that I
will be brief. At the outset I would like to express my
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, preside over the Council
during this month of October. I also take the
opportunity to associate myself with the unanimous
congratulations addressed to the United States
delegation for last month's presidency. Finally, I note
the importance of the Secretary-General's twenty-ninth
report on the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
(S/2009/472) and thank him. I also welcome the
presentation and briefing just made by his Special
Representative.

I will limit my comments to two aspects of
importance to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The first is MONUC.

For all things, there is a beginning and there is an
end. We human beings are born and we die. That is
God's will and nature's law, but the important thing is
to succeed in life. It is the duty of MONUC to succeed
in Congo. Our future generations must remember this
as having been, at a specific moment in history, the
largest United Nations peacekeeping operation, which
by its deployment made it possible to end the first
African world war and which successfully oversaw a
lengthy disengagement process, managed a difficult
political transition, assisted in organizing free and
democratic elections and, finally, laid the foundations
for renewal of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That means that to be a complete success, it is
imperative that MONUC succeed in its exit.

We are thankful that the international community
has finally deigned - even one year late - to follow
through on the request of the Secretary-General for a
temporary increase in the number of MONUC military
and police unit personnel. This was important in order
to strengthen MONUC's capacity to truly protect the
Congolese civilian population and for MONUC to
commit itself more firmly than it has to date, alongside
the Congolese army, in the fight against the residual
armed groups that still abound in the eastern part of my
country. It is necessary to significantly reduce, even
annihilate, the capacity of those armed groups to harm
in order to make peace a reality. Restoring peace,
which the people of Congo yearn for, will promote
healthy, calm consideration of the future of the United
Nations presence in the Congo.

Here I wish to be clear. The Congolese people do
not wish for a hasty withdrawal of MONUC. At the
same time, the Congolese people do not want MONUC
to remain forever. It thus behooves my country to take
with the Council the multidimensional strategic
decisions - including military and non-military
measures - aimed, inter alia, at enabling the
Congolese Government to fully take on and ensure
security, State authority throughout the national
territory, good governance, strengthening the rule of
law and the economic development of the country.

In order to do this we must work together, both at
Headquarters and in the field, to define the parameters
for drawing up not only a timetable for the
disengagement of United Nations troops in parallel
with the setting up of the Congolese army, but also,
more generally, a road map which would sanction the
transition from a peacekeeping operation to a

peacebuilding operation, an operation to bolster
stability in an area which could transcend Congo's
borders. On that subject, I have already exchanged
letters with the Secretariat on setting up a United
Nations office for Central Africa. Once that has been
established, simple logic would dictate that this office
be located in the country which symbolizes Central
Africa and whose capital is Kinshasa.

My second point is sexual violence, a topic I hold
close to my heart. On 10 January 2000, I addressed the
Security Council as the embassy counselor I was then
on the topic of the impact of AIDS on peace and
security in Africa. (S/PV.4087 (Resumption l)). I
seized that opportunity to draw the Council's attention
to the inhuman and degrading treatment and violence
suffered by Congolese heads of households - mainly
men who were victims of the war. I also drew the
attention of the international community to the very
heavy toll paid by women, children and especially
young girls in the eastern provinces, victims of
systematic rape by the occupiers, and highlighted the
use of seropositive soldiers. Still today, the prevalence
rate of AIDS in Orientale province and in North and
South Kivu is four times the national average.

I remain convinced that if at that time the Council
had deigned to take on its responsibility, this virus of
sexual Violence that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo inherited would not have spread. It would not
have contaminated on such a scale the various armed
groups, Congolese armed forces and peacekeeping
contingents. I feel no pride, I feel no honour to find
myself 10 years later before the Council addressing
virtually the same issue and continuing to report on
these massive violations of human rights, especially
violence against women and children.

With the passage of time, the vast majority of
those who committed atrocities at the beginning of
hostilities will slip through the net of justice. However,
their bosses and masterminds are well known. It is
important that those soldiers and others convicted of
crimes of sexual violence be brought to justice in their
respective States. In fact, one could come up with and
develop a mechanism by which international justice
could be correctly rendered.

Turning to the actions of my Government, all
Council members heard the head of my delegation
affirm, during the general debate in the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly, that

"The sexual violence perpetrated against

women and girls in the eastern part of Democratic

Republic of the Congo is, in our View, the most

shameful and gravest crime witnessed by

humankind in the twenty-first century." (see A/64/PV.II)

The Minister for Foreign Affairs assured Member
States of the firm resolve of His Excellency President
Joseph Kabila Kabange to put an end to impunity for
the perpetrators of these heinous acts. He informed
Member States that a number of officers of the
Congolese armed forces and a good many civilians
who had committed such hateful crimes have been
brought before the national courts.

The international community represented in the
Congo should also show itself above reproach, as
sometimes its behaviour leaves something to be
desired. By way of example, I can cite the umpteenth
case of a sexual offence committed by Blue Helmets,
which occurred during the night of 31 July/1 August at
N'Djili International Airport. While all the parties
involved do not deny the commission of an act that I
consider reprehensible, the MONUC spokesperson
deemed it correct to declare, with regard to the
complaint lodged by an 18-year-old woman of gang
rape that night, that there was insufficient evidence to
continue the investigation.

If the decision not to press charges had come
from Congolese justice I would not have commented.
But as a Congolese citizen, I believe that I have the
right to know how that conclusion was reached. If it
was a United Nations decision, most likely the result of
some arrangement, that would be regrettable and the
Security Council should have taken the matter up. In
this specific case, whether gang rape occurred or not,
09-56206
because they were dealing with a presumed
streetwalker, did these United Nations Blue Helmets
have the right to turn N'Djili International Airport into
a sex pad, without any reprimand or sanction? This is
shocking. I ask, what happened to the zero-tolerance
policy declared in 2005?

On the matter of sexual violence, it is important
that all of us together send the right message. Maybe
the creation of the post of special representative of the
Secretary-General on sexual violence in armed conflict
will be a sufficient response. However, to be frank and
candid, I must say that people would find it difficult to
understand if the post were not filled by a woman,
especially a woman from a region affected by the
plague of sexual violence.

Finally, I would be remiss if, after what was said
by the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Sir John Sawers - whose departure
I regret - I failed to recognize the efforts of all those
women and men who have deeply felt the unspeakable
suffering and burdens of Congolese women. To the list
of those mentioned on 30 September by the British
Permanent Representative (see S/PV.6195), I should
like to add the diplomats of the United States Mission
to the United Nations and especially the informal
group United for Women of All Nations, whose
activities have been decisive in ensuring that the plight
of Congolese women is not forgotten.

