Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the important issue of
children and armed conflict.

Since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), a
number of important steps have been taken, including
the appointment of a new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. I should like to thank her
and others for the introductory statements they made
this morning.

We have also witnessed the ongoing
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism set up to collect and provide timely,
objective, accurate and reliable information on the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, in violation of
applicable international law. We are gratified that
resolution 1612 (2005) underlines that the mechanism
must operate, inter alia, with the participation and
cooperation of national Governments. We take special
satisfaction that the resolution also stresses that all
actions undertaken by United Nations entities within
the framework of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism must be designed to support and
supplement the protection and rehabilitation roles of
national Governments.

My delegation, in previous debates on this issue,
has stressed the importance of objective, accurate and
verified information with regard to reports that come
before the Security Council. We have also stressed that
the issue of the protection of children - an issue to
which all of us attach special importance - must not
be politicized. I have also refuted the unfounded
allegations regarding my country from sources
originating from exiles and remnant insurgent groups.
Those falsehoods were mentioned this morning in the
statement made by a member of the Council.

Let me put on record once again that the
Myanmar armed forces are an all-volunteer army and

that those entering military service do so of their own
free will. Under the Myanmar Defence Services Act
and the War Office Council instruction of 1974, the
minimum age for recruitment into the armed forces is
18 years.

The reports of the Special Rapporteur on Human
Rights in Myanmar have underscored the fact that the
insurgent groups in Myanmar extensively practice the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. I wish to stress
that the Government is taking measures to prevent
children from being recruited into the insurgent groups.

With regard to its own recruitment, the
Government has taken effective measures to ensure
that, even when volunteering, no underage children are
recruited into the Myanmar armed forces. To that end,
an entity on the prevention of military recruitment of
underage children, a high-level inter-ministerial
committee headed by the First Secretary of the State
Peace and Development Council, was established.
Stringent monitoring and inspection are made both at
the recruitment stage and again at the training stage.
Applicants who fail to meet the minimum age
requirement are turned away at the recruitment stage.
Additionally, those few that have slipped through the
scrutiny and who are found to be under 18 at the
training stage are discharged from the military.

The Government, of its own volition, has also
drawn up an action plan that includes the protection of
children's rights, prevention measures, the promotion
of public awareness and coordination with UNICEF.
The Government has also arranged visits of the United
Nations Development Programme Resident
Coordinator and a UNICEF representative to the two
main military recruitment centres in Yangon and
Mandalay and has enabled them to interact freely with
the recruits. The action plan includes provisions for the
discharge of children under 18 from military service
and their reintegration into families and communities.
We have been cooperating with both the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and with UNICEF with regard to
the issue and, in December 2005, we again provided
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Executive Director of UNICEF with a list of
newly recruited soldiers who were discharged from
military service during that calendar year.

For over 40 years since regaining its
independence in 1948, Myanmar suffered the scourge
of insurgency. However, today, as a result of the
national reconciliation efforts of the Government, out
of 18 major insurgent groups, 17 have come back to the
legal fold and are working together with the
Government for the development of their respective
regions. As a result, we have been able to restore peace
and stability to almost all corners of Myanmar. The
Government has also extended an olive branch to the
remaining groups and will continue to do so. We
strongly believe that the best way to protect children in
armed conflict lies in conflict prevention and
resolution.

