Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, we thank the President of the Republic of
Croatia for presiding over the open debate today. We
also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
participation in our debate.

The presidential statement that you, Sir, will issue
on behalf of the Security Council fully reflects the
international community's consensus on counter-
terrorism and has the support of the Chinese delegation.

A series of alarming acts of terrorism took place
recently in Mumbai, claiming numerous innocent
victims. The Chinese delegation conveys its
wholehearted condolences to the victims. These cruel
realities remind us once again that terrorism remains a
potent threat to the peace and security of the
international community. As the heart of the
international collective security machinery, the
Security Council should play a central role in the
international fight against terrorism.

Over the past few years, the Council has adopted
a series of resolutions and statements on counter-
terrorism that create a solid legal basis for the
international community's common struggle against
terrorism. The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
have made fruitful efforts in the implementation of the

relevant resolutions. The Chinese delegation hopes that
the three Committees will further incorporate the
voices of all Member States, particularly the
developing countries, into their work in order to ensure
that the Security Council's counter-terrorism
mechanisms will be better able to meet the needs of the
broader membership.

Terrorism is a common threat to the international
community. It is imperative to continue to enhance
multilateral counter-terrorism cooperation within the
United Nations framework. Recently, the General
Assembly unanimously adopted resolution 62/272 on
the review and assessment of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, demonstrating the
deep solidarity and firm resolve of the Member States
with respect to counter-terrorism. China believes that
all United Nations Members should strive to enhance
counter-terrorism measures and to eradicate the root
causes of terrorism. They should seek to eradicate
poverty, promote development and, by encouraging
dialogue among religions and civilizations, eliminate
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism,
thereby implementing the four pillars of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in a comprehensive and
balanced manner.

China supports the Security Council's three
counter-terrorism Committees' active participation in
the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in the context of their respective mandates so
as to ensure the coordination of the Council's counter-
terrorism efforts with those of the General Assembly,
which will consolidate the United Nations central role
in the international struggle against terrorism.

The Member States are the true owners of the
implementation of all United Nations counter-terrorism
resolutions. Their resolve and capacities to fight
terrorism determine the degree to which those
resolutions are implemented. However, inadequate
resources and counter-terrorism capacities have made
many countries, especially the developing countries,
unable fully to honour their counter-terrorism
obligations and have thereby seriously limited the
international community's achievements in the struggle
against terrorism.
China hopes that the international community
will devote greater attention to counter-terrorism
capacity-building and invest further resources in
providing counter-terrorism assistance that answers the
genuine needs of the developing countries and helps
them to improve their counter-terrorism capacities
expeditiously. That will ensure a solid basis for the
implementation of all United Nations counter-terrorism
resolutions.

The rise of terrorism has complex political,
economic and social roots. China has therefore
consistently called for integrated counter-terrorism
measures and emphasized both the prevention of
terrorist acts and the elimination of the causes of
terrorism in an effective effort to address the symptoms
and causes of that scourge. In that way, we will be able
to eradicate terrorism at its roots.

