The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Ahmed Karti, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karti
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
welcome Mr. Karti.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Amum to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel for Sudan.

It is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to welcome
Mr. Mbeki, who is joining today's meeting via video
teleconference from Johannesburg.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council emphasizes that the
situation in the Sudan represents one of the most
urgent challenges facing the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
peace and stability of the Sudan, and to a
peaceful and prosperous future for all Sudanese
people, and underlines its support for the
Sudanese parties' full and timely implementation
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA),
including the holding of the referendums on the
self-determination of the people of Southern
Sudan and on the status of Abyei, and of the
popular consultations in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile, and for a peaceful, comprehensive and
inclusive resolution of the situation in Darfur.

"The Security Council recalls that the
Sudanese parties have full responsibility for the
implementation of the CPA, reaffirms its support
for and encourages their further efforts to that end
and welcomes the leadership of the African
Union and the support provided by the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under
the leadership of President Thabo Mbeki, and by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

"The Security Council recognizes the
parties' commitment to CPA implementation,
remains actively seized of the matter and
expresses its readiness to act as necessary in
support of full implementation of the CPA by the
parties. The Council underlines the importance of
close coordination between international actors
involved in assisting the Sudanese peace
processes.

"The Security Council urges the CPA
parties, while working to make unity attractive
and recognizing the right to self-determination of
the people of Southern Sudan, to take urgent
action to implement their commitment,
reaffirmed at the High-Level Meeting on the
Sudan held in New York on 24 September, to
ensure peaceful, credible, timely and free
referendums that reflect the will of the people of
Southern Sudan and Abyei, as provided for in the
CPA.

"In this regard, the Security Council
welcomes the start of registration for the
Southern Sudan referendum on 15 November and
10-64056
encourages further efforts to ensure that the
referendums are held on 9 January 2011 in
accordance with the CPA and as scheduled in the
timeline published for the Southern Sudan
referendum by the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission.

"The Security Council is concerned by the
continued delays in releasing to the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission the full funding
needed for preparations to continue to move
forward. The Security Council calls on the parties
and all Member States to respect the outcome of
credible referendums, held in accordance with the
CPA, that reflect the will of the people of
Southern Sudan and Abyei. It requests all parties
to refrain from unilateral action and to implement
the CPA.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of the CPA parties' making rapid
progress on a way forward for Abyei's
referendum and outstanding CPA issues, and on
resolving critical post-referendum issues in a
peaceful, mutually beneficial manner, including
the border, security, citizenship, debts, assets,
currency and natural resources.

"In this context, the Security Council
welcomes progress in the negotiations, led by
President Mbeki, towards a framework for
resolving outstanding issues relating to the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the future relations of North and
South Sudan, on which agreement was reached on
13 November. The Security Council urges the
parties to resume negotiations on Abyei
expeditiously and to reach agreement on all
outstanding issues without further delay.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for the CPA parties to promote calm, including by
providing immediate and ongoing reassurance to
people of all nationalities in the Sudan, including
southerners in the North and northerners in the
South, that their rights, safety and property will
be respected whatever the outcome of the
referendums. The Security Council calls for an
immediate end to statements threatening the
security of vulnerable populations. The Security
Council also emphasizes that protection of
civilians is primarily the responsibility of the
10-64056
Sudanese authorities. The Security Council urges
the parties to work actively with local leaders to
mitigate tensions in Abyei and other border areas.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) and reiterates its call for all parties to
cooperate fully with the Mission in the discharge
of its mandate in this crucial period, in particular
by ensuring full, unhindered access and freedom
of movement for UNMIS personnel and
equipment, and for the delivery of referendum
materials. The Security Council welcomes and
encourages the United Nations work in
contingency planning around the referendums and
calls on Member States to support UNMIS
efforts.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the United Nations Secretary-General's Panel
for the Referendums led by President Benjamin
Mkapa. The Security Council underlines the
importance of close coordination between the
Panel and all domestic and international
observation missions.

"The Security Council underlines that,
whatever the outcome of the referendums,
continued cooperation between the CPA parties
will remain essential for managing the transition
process, implementing the post-referendum
arrangements and maintaining peace and
prosperity, and stresses the mutual benefits of
partnership in this regard. The Council
encourages the international community to
support these efforts. The Council urges the CPA
parties to respect their obligations.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union/United Nations-led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the State of Qatar,
the work of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole
and the principles guiding the negotiations. The
Council strongly urges all rebel movements to
join the peace process without further delay or
preconditions, and all parties immediately to
cease hostilities and engage constructively in
negotiations with a View to finding a lasting
peace in Darfur. The Security Council expresses
concern about attacks on civilians by militias and
calls for all support to such groups to cease. The
Security Council expresses its willingness to
3
consider measures against any party whose
actions undermine peace in Darfur.

"The Security Council expresses deep
concern about the increases in violence and
insecurity in Darfur, including ceasefire
Violations, attacks by rebel groups, aerial
bombardment by the Government of the Sudan,
increased inter-tribal fighting, and attacks on
humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers, which
have restricted humanitarian access to conflict
areas where vulnerable populations reside. In this
context, the Security Council calls on all parties
to protect civilians and maintain full, safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian workers to
the population in need of assistance. The Security
Council notes the need to support efforts to halt
arms flows into Darfur in contravention of the
arms embargo strengthened by resolution 1945
(2010). The Security Council recalls the
importance it attaches to an end to impunity, and
to justice for crimes committed in Darfur.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and reiterates its call on the
Government of the Sudan and all relevant parties
to cooperate fully with the mission in discharging
its mandate, and to provide full unhindered
access and freedom of movement, as well as its
call for an end to impunity for those who attack
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.

"The Security Council welcomes improved
relations between the Sudan and Chad and
encourages them to cooperate further in order to
contribute to peace and stability in Darfur and the
wider region.

"The Security Council encourages full
implementation of the Eastern Sudan Peace
Agreement, including the provisions regarding
rehabilitation, recovery and development, and
welcomes the initiative of the Government of
Kuwait to hold a conference on investment and
development in Eastern Sudan in December 2010.

"The Security Council calls for respect for
international law, international human rights law
and humanitarian law; protection of freedom of
expression; humanitarian access across the
Sudan, including in the border areas; and an end
to all harassment of civil society. The Security

Council underlines the importance of increased
participation of women in the Sudanese peace
processes.

"The Council notes the considerable
humanitarian, early recovery and peacebuilding
needs of the Sudan and encourages the Sudanese
authorities and international donors to fulfil their
pledges to address them.

"The Security Council underlines that full
and timely implementation of the CPA is essential
to peace and stability in the Sudan and the region
and to future cooperation between the Sudan and
the international community, and recognizes that
enduring cooperation between the parties will be
essential for the benefit of all Sudanese people.
The Council affirms that the core objective of the
international community and all stakeholders in
the Sudan is the peaceful coexistence of the
people of the Sudan, democratic governance, rule
of law, accountability, equality, respect, human
rights, justice and economic development, in
particular the establishment of the conditions for
conflict affected communities to build, strong,
sustainable livelihoods."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/24.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.


