Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We, too, are
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Vieira de Mello for
his informative and stimulating briefing.

Having spent three weeks on the Security Council
this time round, we are struck by the dominant role that
humanitarian issues play on the Council's agenda. Almost
every subject discussed in the Security Council has a
clear humanitarian side to it. It is difficult to imagine a
security issue that does not entail human suffering, either
as a direct result of armed conflict or indirectly, for
innocent civilians, refugees or displaced persons as a
consequence of the use of violence.

In this connection, the Netherlands is particularly
concerned about the growing number of attacks on

 

humanitarian workers. This phenomenon is doubly
unacceptable, because in addition to threatening the lives of
the humanitarian workers concerned it also jeopardizes the
whole concept of humanitarian assistance.

At this time the Security Council is discussing a
situation where this is precisely what is likely to happen.
The nature of armed conflict has not fundamentally
changed over the past decade. Indiscriminate use of
violence, even the intentional targeting of innocent civilians,
has characterized many conflicts since the end of the
Second World War. What has changed, however, is the
quantity. The number of intra-State low- and medium-
intensity conflicts has increased substantially over the past
10 years. Another change concerns the impact on public
opinion abroad. Modern communications technology
facilitates the dissemination of images of indiscriminate
violence to the public at large, which puts pressure on
policy makers to do something.

What we have learned from the genocide in Rwanda
is that humanitarian action cannot serve as a substitute for
political action, but it is not easy to put this lesson into
practice. Unfortunately, most of our Governments are better
at providing humanitarian aid to Victims of violence than at
taking political action to prevent such violence from
breaking out.

There is a growing awareness of the need for a more
integrated approach to crises. A coherent set of diplomatic,
political and military measures has to be complemented
with measures related to economic, humanitarian and
development aspects of conflict management. Some
progress has been made in this respect, for example the
establishment and mandate of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) as part of
the United Nations reforms and the formulation of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development/
Development Assistance Committee (OECD/DAC)
guidelines on conflict, peace and development cooperation
of 1998.

But more needs to be done to bring about a truly
integrated approach. Allow me to suggest six steps in that
direction.

First, we should always aim for coherent and adequate
decision-making in the Council. The question of the
protection of humanitarian workers is a case in point. We
cannot expect humanitarian organizations to provide aid
without adequate political or military backing.

Secondly, we should try to enhance the performance
of special representatives of the Secretary-General by
facilitating more interface and coordination with special
envoys of, for example, the European Union or the United
States.

Thirdly, we should promote a coherent approach
from all United Nations institutions to a given crisis, for
example through the establishment of strategic
frameworks.
Fourthly, we should devise more sophisticated
sanctions, with minimum impact on the civilian
population and maximum impact on warlords and their
assets.

Fifthly, we should try to do the same with our
military capability, that is, improve procedures to avoid
collateral damage involving innocent civilians.

And sixthly, we should make better use of existing
instruments of international humanitarian law. One
example would be that the International Humanitarian
Fact-finding Commission, pursuant to article 90 of the
First Additional Protocol to the 1949 Geneva Convention,
would be systematically called in whenever a breach of
humanitarian principles is reported.

As the representative of the country that a century
ago hosted the Hague Peace Conference, I should like to
conclude by briefly commenting on the centennial of that
event. This centennial, together with the fiftieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva Conventions at
the end of the Decade of International Law, provides an
excellent opportunity to reflect on the item we are
discussing today. It is important in this respect to note
also that the Hague Permanent Court of Arbitration will
celebrate its one-hundredth birthday this year.

In this framework, the Netherlands and the Russian
Federation will organize commemorative and seminar
sessions in May and June in The Hague and St.
Petersburg, respectively, in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. The Secretary-General of
the United Nations will attend part of these events. The
non-governmental organization community will also hold
a major event in May in The Hague on the subject of
peace as a human right.

It is important to address the deficiencies in several
areas of the law, and a number of highly respected
international lawyers are in the process of preparing

 

reports which will serve as the basis for discussions in The
Hague and St. Petersburg with a view to reporting and
suggesting recommendations for progress in the new
millennium to the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly.

The Netherlands congratulates OCHA in general and
Mr. Vieira de Mello in particular on the progress achieved
so far. We will continue to support the important
humanitarian work of this Office and look forward to close
cooperation in future.
