Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ms. Reena Ghelani for their information on the situation
in the Central African subregion.

We firmly believe that the approach that is
fundamental to effective crisis prevention and conflict
resolution in Africa is one that combines a leading role
for the African people themselves with support for
their efforts on the part of the international community.
In that connection, we welcome the efforts by the
countries of Central Africa to counter the threats and
challenges that they face, including through the joint
programmes and initiatives to combat Boko Haram and
ensure maritime security. Those efforts unquestionably
need additional international support. In that context,
we note the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa in strengthening peace and
security in the region, as well as Special Representative
Fall's personal good offices.

It is important to continue to expand our
engagement with regional stakeholders, including the
Economic Community of Central African States. We
concur with the assessment in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/1065) that Central Africa is dealing with
a huge number of challenges on the security, political
and economic fronts. Boko Haram's terrorist activity
remains one of the chief threats to regional peace and
stability and also brings with it serious humanitarian
consequences, particularly in the Lake Chad basin
region. In that context, we must not lose sight of the
fact that the destabilization in the region assumed
catastrophic proportions in the wake of the collapse
of statehood in neighbouring Libya. The situation in
Libya is still far from normalized and continues to have
negative repercussions for the situation in the region
in general. We welcome the efforts undertaken by
Africans themselves to eradicate the terrorist threat,
and we hope that the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel can make a meaningful contribution to
stabilizing the security situation in the subregion.

The situation in the Central African Republic is
very worrying. Armed groups have engaged in brutal
clashes over resources and territory. We support
President Touadera's efforts to hold an inclusive
political dialogue, work quickly to reform the security
sector and improve the armed forces' capacity. For our
part, we will continue to fully support the country's
nascent national reconciliation, acting in coordination
with the authorities in Bangui and with the African
Union and the leadership of the Sudan, as well as
with other stakeholders seeking ways to normalize the
situation there.

One ofthe other factors behind the instability in the
Central Africa is piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. In the
light of the unceasing attacks on vessels along the coast
of Somalia, a dangerous trend is emerging. We must
not forget the importance of a comprehensive approach
to combating piracy. We hope that with the support of
the international community the pan-regional efforts
will help to solve the problem of piracy in an area as
economically important as the Gulf of Guinea.

We note that the destructive capacity of the Lord's
Resistance Army has shrunk considerably in the past
few years. Its numbers have fallen and its activity is
limited to sparsely populated areas in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We believe that it should no longer be seen as
a significant threat to peace and security in the region.

Like my colleagues, I would like to briefly touch
on Cameroon. We are monitoring developments there
closely. The information we have is troubling but so
far extremely contradictory and not something that we
should base any hasty or far-reaching decisions on. We
understand the concerns of our British and American
colleagues about the information on violations of the
rights of the English-speaking population. I have to
say that I can only hope that London and Washington
will display an equally principled attitude to the
infringements on the rights of the Russian-speaking
population that are happening right under our
colleagues' noses in the Baltic States and Ukraine.
With respect to Cameroon, it is important not to cross
the line between prevention and intervention in States'
internal affairs. There is every evidence that a number
of our colleagues have come very close to that. For
the time being we have every reason to believe that
Cameroon is capable of dealing with this tricky issue
by itself. We are willing to help, but only if our partners
in Cameroon deem it necessary. At this stage, we urge
all the parties in Cameroon to refrain from violence and
focus on substantive national dialogue.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that
the threats and challenges that the Central African
region is dealing with today are closely entwined and
interrelated, while the States themselves are highly
dependent on one another. The destabilization of the
situation in one country is liable to ignite the entire
subregion, shattering the security of its neighbours. It
is therefore exceedingly important to keep a finger on
the pulse of evolving events, for which the activity of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
is useful.

