The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

Like my colleagues, I would like at the outset to
extend our condolences following the tragedy that
struck northern Burkina Faso. The attacks claimed the
lives of 29 people.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.

Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the United
Nations in the area of maintaining international peace
and security for several decades and has had a direct
impact on the lives ofmillions. Peacekeeping operations
are the source of great hope, as they are intended to
address pressing issues and facilitate the long-term
settlement of disputes.

The current challenging working conditions of
missions and the shifting nature and unique features
of conflicts undoubtedly make it necessary for
peacekeeping mechanisms to be adaptable. There
is also a pressing need to enhance the effectiveness
of peacekeeping. We value the personal efforts of
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to that end.

We agree with the overarching message of his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative - the importance
of meaningful partnership and concerted efforts on the
part of the members of the international community
to ensure that peacekeeping operations can operate
successfully. As we understand it, that presupposes the
need for stringent and scrupulous compliance by all
parties, with the agreements and obligations undertaken
at the intergovernmental level.

In that regard and in the light of persistent
divergence among States vis-a-vis their understanding
of the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, we believe that
the General Assembly's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations took an important decision,
to align, on a trial basis, the structure of its reports
with the main thematic elements of the Declaration at
its forthcoming session in 2020. We trust that that will
help synchronize the peacekeeping processes initiated
by the Secretariat with the consensus-based decisions
and recommendations adopted by the States Members
of the United Nations.

Regardless of the shape peacekeeping reform
may take, the following need to remain at the heart of
transformation processes: unconditional respect for
the sovereignty of host States and adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations and the core principles
of peacekeeping, which are the consent of parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in the
case of self-defence and the defence of mandates. In
all circumstances, peacekeepers must remain neutral;
otherwise, they run the risk of being drawn into
conflict. That, in turn, will spawn additional threats
to the safety of Blue Helmets. The same applies to
the proposal for peacekeepers to conduct robust and
preventive operations. We believe that the existence of
such mandates does not create a precedent.

The functions of contingents, such as so-called
peacekeeping intelligence, data-collection and analysis,
can be conducted only within frameworks agreed upon
by States. Data-collection must be conducted strictly
in line with the Charter of the United Nations, with
respect for the sovereignty of the host State, through
purely legitimate methods and only for the protection of
civilians and the safety ofpeacekeepers. In that context,

the reliable storage and secure processing of sensitive
information are, of course, of particular importance.

We believe that it is important to bolster trilateral
cooperation among the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat
to generate a spirit of partnership, cooperation and
mutual trust. In that connection, we welcome the
participation of the major TCCs in today's meeting.
We believe that there is a need to establish trust-
based cooperation with host States, which bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians,
the elimination of the main causes of conflict and
post-conflict recovery. Priority should be given to
cooperation between missions and the Secretariat and
the host State, which cannot be supplanted by civil
society or non-governmental organizations.

Effective cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, on the basis
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, undoubtedly has added
value in fine-tuning United Nations peacekeeping.
The fruitful cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union attests to that. We see good
potential for developing partnerships among the United
Nations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which
are improving their political standing and helping to
bolster regional and international security.

The importance of the Security Council setting
clear, focused and realistic mandates is indisputable. At
the same time, the main objective of the Blue Helmets
is to set the stage for political dialogue and national
reconciliation. In that connection, we deem it wise to
curtail secondary peripheral tasks of Blue Helmets,
including those of a human rights, humanitarian or
social nature, which distract them from performing
their main functions and require considerable funding.
That is relevant, in particular, in the light of the policy
to make peacekeeping more cost-effective.

To a large extent, the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping hinges on respect for the
appropriate division of labour within the Organization,
with due coordination and mutual complementarity of
efforts. The key role in defining shared approaches to
peacekeeping and in establishing relevant instructions
for the Secretariat is played by the General Assembly's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Logistical, budgetary and staffing issues must be
discussed in the Fifth Committee. The Security
Council should in turn account for the fruits of those
discussions when making informed decisions in
the process of designing the individual mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ethiopia.

