Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I wish to react to statement
made by the representative of the provisional institutions
of Kosovo and Metohija.

Before every Security Council meeting, the
representatives of the European Union, the United
Kingdom and the United States give us suggestions
on how to act in the spirit of reconciliation so as to
comport ourselves more calmly. Do they offer the same
recommendations to the representatives of Pristina that
they give to us? Do they expect us to sit here and listen
to the most ferocious accusations directed against us
and events of the 1950s and 1960s, when the former
Yugoslavia and Tito were paragons of democracy
compared to Enver Hoxha. We could go back even
further in time to the fourteenth century. We are not
competing for an Oscar for our performance in the
Security Council.

I should therefore like to point out to the
representative of Kosovo that no matter how many
often we extend our hand, there is no one on the other
side to accept that gesture of reconciliation. There has
been no mention of the topic before us today - the
current situation in Kosovo. What does Serbia have
to do with Kosovo's problems in Pristina? What does
Serbia have to do with Kosovo's inability to hold a
session of Parliament without having to resort to tear
gas? I have to say that the representatives of Serbia are
the most active in Kosovo's Parliament. Serbia has no
role and does not participate in Kosovo's political life.

The representative of Kosovo cannot lecture us
with regard to witnesses. She knows what happened
in the Haradinaj case - all participants were either
killed or are inactive. Whoever perpetrated the crime
should be brought to justice. When we listen to the
representative of Kosovo, we might conclude that there
were no Serbs living in Kosovo and that only police
and military officers are present there. However, she
knows only too well that the Serbs were once a majority
in Kosovo. Those are historical facts. She knows how
many religious and cultural sites remain in Kosovo. I
would ask her not to say that 200,000 Serbs are forbidden
to return to Kosovo when she has no right to say so.
Kosovo is not hers, and Kosovo is not mine. Kosovo
is not Albanian, nor does it belong to Serbia. Kosovo
is in the hands of the people who live there - Serbs
and Albanians - and depends on their votes. One
cannot conclude an agreement and then say "we need
to consult our constitutional court"; if so, then we can
consult our own court in Belgrade. A criminal charge
was brought against me for that.

When Ms. Citaku speaks about national minorities
in Serbia, she cannot say that there are Albanian or
Kosovar national minorities in Serbia. She cannot have
the Albanian national minority on her behalf as well as
on behalf of Albanians living in Albania.

Ms. Citaku spoke ofthe right to self-determination,
which she has already used: there is a State where
Albanians live, and it is called Albania. She does not
have that right, because she was a national minority in
the former Yugoslavia and in Serbia and, without any
agreement from the country from which she seceded,
they unilaterally declared independence. I must
warn that happened to us could tomorrow happen to
any country. Please do not say that principles do not
count. That is why we do not recognize the unilateral
declaration of independence. If Kosovo were sovereign
and independent, she would not be sitting here under
this format as "Ms. Vlora Citaku", but would be "the
representative of the Republic of Kosovo". If Kosovo
were independent, it would sign an association and
stabilization agreement with the European Union as a
country, not as a territory.

I did not want to raise this issue, instead I wanted
to talk about what we have been able to achieve thus far
and to look towards the future. However, Ms. Citaku
has chosen not to do that and uses each and every
opportunity and meeting of the Security Council to call
on others to recognize the independence of Kosovo. I
should therefore like to take this opportunity to thank all
the countries that have not recognize the independence
of Kosovo - not because they did so as a favour to
Serbia, but because that is in line with international
law. I cannot wait to see the day when another country
faces this problem. I have said that it is easy to speak of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of other States.
But this is not something on which this organ should be
founded and based upon.

I would therefore ask the representatives of the
European Union, the United Kingdom and the United
States, when speaking to us in these meetings, to take
into consideration one fact: Serbia cannot be a punching
bag for the representatives of Kosovo's institutions. If
they think that we are afraid of these meetings, they
should know that our strength is not our weakness.
Participating in this dialogue is something we are
determined to continue to do.

I have had to intervene to react to the statements
of Ms. Citaku, for they were not conducive to
reconciliation; in fact, they were a step backwards.

