Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Let me begin, Sir, by
extending to you our most sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of July. We have full confidence in your
leadership. I also wish to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby of Egypt, for his efficient
and - let me stress - pleasant conduct of the business of
the Council during the month of June.

The civil war that has ravaged Angola for the last 20
years is one of the most bloody and long-lasting internal
conflicts in Africa. It has devastated that beautiful, rich
country. Almost half a million Angolans have perished in
its wake and three million people remain internally
displaced today.

A ray of hope, none the less, shone on Angola in
November 1994 at the signing of the Lusaka Protocol
between the leaders of the warring parties. The international
community in general had good reason to be satisfied -
above all the United Nations and, particularly, this body. It
was, after all, very much as a result of the active, strong
and unanimous position of the Security Council that the
parties to the conflict in Angola began the difficult task of
national reconciliation. There is no doubt that the Lusaka
Protocol represented a turning-point and, at the same time,
an auspicious start for the building of a peaceful,
prosperous and, most important, unified Angola.

Following the signing of the Lusaka Protocal, it has
clearly emerged from the Security Council debates on
Angola that the process of national reconciliation is a far
more complex undertaking than could have been predicted.

The report of the Secretary-General presenting
developments in the situation in Angola since May 1996,
contained in document S/1996/503, is slightly more
optimistic in tone than previous reports. Unfortunately, it
does not contain significantly different observations. We are
encouraged to note positive elements such as the
promulgation of the Amnesty Law, completion of the
quartering of the rapid reaction police, some progress in the
quartering of UNITA troops and the beginning of the
incorporation of UNITA military personnel into the
Angolan Armed Forces.

At the same time, we are disappointed to note
negative elements such as the high number of desertions
from the quartering areas, the unsatisfactory quality and
quantity of weapons handed over by UNITA, the failure
to quarter UNITA police personnel, delays in the
quartering of all UNITA troops, and the incomplete
withdrawal of Government troops from forward positions.
Factors such as these do not allow us to claim that the
peace process in Angola has already reached that critical
point from which we need fear no return to a state of
war.

We fully share the opinion of the Secretary-General
that the coming weeks will be crucial for the future of
Angola. The first important task to be accomplished
during this time is the integration of Government and
UNITA troops into the joint Angolan Armed Forces. This
should be accompanied by the demobilization of the
remaining troops and the demilitarization of the civilian
population. The next step in national reconciliation, we
believe, should be to establish a new political dimension,
the most important feature of which will be a fully
inclusive Government and State administration in which
both parties are properly represented.

Good will and the full engagement of all parties
concerned are needed now more than ever. We call upon
the Government of Angola, and in particular upon
UNITA, to ensure that all their declarations and
commitments are put into effect and that the schedules
adopted are fulfilled in appropriate and timely fashion.

Angola is now confronted with enormous economic
and social challenges such as reconstruction of the
national economy, preparation for a possible food
shortfall, reintegration of the demobilized troops into the
social life of Angola and, last but certainly not least, the
clearance of the mines that continue to endanger the life
and health of civilians. The international community will
certainly continue to offer its assistance, provided that the
people of Angola demonstrate their willingness to
cooperate actively to restore long-lasting peace and
stability to their country.

The international community has made a concerted
effort to help Angola in the best way it can. The proof is
embodied in UNAVEM. in all its phases. UNAVEM,
already in phase III, is the largest United Nations
 

peace-keeping operation anywhere in the world. However,
it must be clear that the presence of UNAVEM. in Angola
can be justified only if there is visible progress in the
process of national reconciliation.

Today we are going to extend the mandate of
UNAVEM. III for a further three months. Our delegation
very much hopes that the presence of UNAVEM. III will be
properly and effectively utilized by the leaders and the
people of Angola, who have been given a great opportunity
to return promptly to a state of normalcy. That opportunity
must not be missed.

