Ms. Power (United States of America): The
challenge posed by these back-and-forth statements is
that Russia no longer has any credibility whatsoever.
None. Russian representatives months ago, at one of
the first of the 32 meetings so far on this topic, said
that Russia had no soldiers, no heavy weapons and no
presence in Crimea. Later, they not only acknowledged
having a Russian presence in Crimea but announced the
annexation of Crimea - an annexation made possible
with the use ofmilitary force, the use ofRussian military
forces. The pretence ends; then the facts retrospectively
change.

Russia said not long ago that it would observe
the ceasefire agreed upon in the package of measures
to implement the September Minsk agreements.
Oops - that was until Debaltseve became a target
for Russia and the separatists. Now Russia says that
Debaltseve is part of the territory controlled by the
separatists, even though it was not during the time that
the package of measures was agreed upon.

Today, Russia has made the claim that the
separatists have complied with the Minsk agreement
in withdrawing their heavy weapons. Yet, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
cannot get access to the heavy weapons, so we are told
to rely upon Russian claims about what the fate of those
heavy weapons is - heavy weapons that Russia has
provided to the separatists. These heavy weapons do
not just fall from the sky. These are massive weapons
systems, used to shoot down planes and bombard
civilian centres, such that 500 people are killed, left in
their basements to die and be discovered by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

The information that the United States has provided
over time to the Security Council has, unfortunately,
proven accurate. And indeed the facts on the ground
regarding what Russia has absorbed into its current
territorial claims are the facts that we have described,
day in and day out, at every one of these meetings. In
contrast, the claims that Russia makes in the Council
give way to new claims at subsequent meetings, but the
facts on the ground contradict the prior claims, and the
same will be true with regard to the claims that have
been made today.

The facts on the ground - which are really all
that matter and all that anyone in this Chamber cares
about - show Russian aggression, Russia having
lopped off part of someone else's country and trying to
keep it. The only way that we have a chance of getting
to peace in Minsk is if Russia leaves Ukraine and takes
its heavy weapons with it.

