Mr. Ward (Jamaica): Our delegation would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
briefing on the recent developments in Kosovo.

Jamaica continues to acknowledge the important
work that the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo's (UNMIK) undertakes, and we
welcome improvements and progress in this regard. We
would, however, like to focus our remarks on a few
areas that are of particular concern.

The violence in the region continues, and ethnic
minorities, in particular Serbs and Romas, have little
protection and security, despite the efforts of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK. We urge UNMIK
to continue its efforts to protect the freedom, security
and fundamental rights of the minority population.

With regard to the recent takeover by KFOR of
the lead smelting factory in the Trepca complex, we
hold the view that UNMIK has the legal authority for
the interim administration of the territory, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), and, therefore,
its decisions should be respected.

However, the protests that have resulted from this
incident are a cause for concern. We are concerned
about the deterioration in relations between the United
Nations and Serbs that seems to be occurring. Jamaica
has always encouraged efforts to increase the
participation of Serbs and other ethnic minorities in the
political and administrative process, and we are pleased
at the progress made thus far, with the inclusion of the
Serb National Council in the decision-making process.
Last month we welcomed the signing of an agreement
between UNMIK and the Serb National Council
Gracanica; today, we wonder whether the recent
problems in Trepca do not run counter to those efforts.

Preparations continue for municipal elections
scheduled for October. Those elections are aimed at
bringing us closer to the goal of creating a multi-ethnic
society and establishing viable democratic structures.
The issue of Serb inclusion and participation is crucial
to this process; this is acknowledged by all. Events in
Trepca are particularly worrying when viewed in that
context.

We are encouraged by UNMIK's efforts to ensure
adequate security during and after the elections. We
have noted that the first phase of the civil registration
process has come to a close. We regret that there is a
lack of Serb participation in the process. My delegation
wishes to reiterate a position we have stated in the past:
the full participation of all ethnic groups in the process
is essential. Indeed, it is an absolute necessity if a
lasting and sustainable peace-building effort is to be
achieved. We urge the Serb community to participate
fully in the democratic process, and we urge UNMIK
to continue its efforts to create an environment that will
make their participation possible.
Finally, KFOR reports indicate that the Force
continues to uncover and confiscate caches of weapons,
ammunition and explosives while at the same time
reporting no violations of Security Council resolution
1160 (1998), that is, of the arms embargo. My
delegation would like to hear from Mr. Annabi an
explanation of the origin of these weapons. If the
information is not readily available, I trust that the
information will be provided in due course.

