Ms. Holguin Cuellar (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of Colombia, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on France's presidency
of the Security Council this month, as well as on your
initiative in convening this important meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Syria and in inviting Syria's
neighbours to participate.

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees Antonio Guterres for their briefings and
clear explanations of the situation of refugees in Syria.
I would also like to thank the Ministers from Syria's
neighbours Lebanon, Iraq, Turkey and Jordan for their
presence here and for their support to Syrian citizens
in need of protection. Let me say that their first-hand
testimony is extremely worrying.

Syria's humanitarian situation cannot be settled
without a political solution. For long and painful months
the international community has witnessed a deepening
crisis and worsening humanitarian situation in Syria.
Despite the efforts of the international community, it
has been impossible to end the conflict. Unfortunately,
we in the Security Council have been unable to do
anything to halt the crisis. We have failed.

The impact of the conflict on the civilian
population is enormous. According to reports, more
than 2.5 million people have been affected, the majority
of them internal displaced persons, as well as almost
250,000 registered as refugees in Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey and Iraq. Beyond the thousands of displaced
people and refugees, the widespread violence also
hurts the families who have lost their loved ones. The
destruction done by the bullets and attacks to homes
and the national infrastructure, as well as to economic
activity, will affect Syria's recovery in both the short
and long term. Unfortunately, what has been destroyed
in just a few months will take years to restore.

Colombia joins the international community in
calling on all the parties to respect their obligations as
laid down in international humanitarian law. While the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
resides with the Syrian authorities, all the parties
involved must abide by international humanitarian law,
which sets out clear rules for that protection. We deplore
the fact that neither party has accepted the proposals
for a peaceful solution and that both have rejected a
ceasefire and a path leading to political dialogue. We
reaffirm our call for an end to all attacks and for efforts
to seek a political solution that takes into account the
legitimate aspirations of all sectors of Syrian society.
We hope that the Syrian people can find an effective
alternative that will allow negotiations to start with
the help of the international community. In the process
of reaching a political solution, we must focus on the
civilian population and on the young people and women
and men who are the victims of this war.

We acknowledge once again the mediation efforts
of Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan. We hope that
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, recently appointed as Joint
Special Envoy, will be able to bring the parties together
so that they can take the path of dialogue. However,
we must bear in mind that for Mr. Brahimi's mandate
to succeed it is essential that the parties be genuinely
committed and that we can guarantee the unified and
coherent support of the international community,
particularly the Security Council. We welcome the
Secretary-General's decision to maintain an efficient
and flexible United Nations presence in Syria, designed
to support the Organization's efforts and any progress
that may be achieved between the parties towards a
negotiated political settlement.

In a region crucial to international peace and
security, we must work together to prevent any
escalation of the conflict from exacerbating existing
tensions in an already complex environment. Resorting
to violence is not the right way to solve the Syrian crisis.
We reiterate that is up to the Syrians to take the lead in
the peace and reconciliation process. The international
community should promote a dialogue conducive to a
political solution in a coordinated and unified manner.

In the short term, the urgent task is to ease
the humanitarian crisis. We must strictly enforce
international humanitarian law and respect for the
human rights of the Syrian people. We welcome the
steps taken by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in seeking ways to speedily
expand reliefefforts and reduce the suffering ofcivilians
caught in the crossfire. Attention should be given to
the most pressing needs of those affected, particularly
the most vulnerable, who are in urgent need of basic
housing, food, health, water and sanitation.
As we have heard, the worsening of the crisis, and
particularly of the humanitarian situation, is also having
a negative effect on those neighbouring countries
that have made huge efforts to meet the needs of the
thousands of Syrians who have sought refuge in their
territories. Those countries, as well as the humanitarian
agencies, need more international cooperation to ensure
that they are able to assist the growing number of
refugees.

Colombia reaffirms its commitment to promoting a
political solution to the Syrian crisis and believes that
the six-point plan proposed in resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012) represents a consensus on the part
of the international community as to how to address
the situation. Its implementation would help to lay
the foundations for a political solution. To that end,
we must persist in bringing together the positions of
the various players involved in order to consolidate a
common strategy under Syrian leadership that solves
the most pressing problems with long-term proposals
and commitments.

