Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): Through you,
Mr. President, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report and Mr. Vieira de
Mello and Mr. Ramos-Horta for their briefings at the
beginning of our deliberations. Their personal
observations on the current situation on the ground in
East Timor and their views on the way forward have
added a valuable additional dimension to today's
discussion.

The United Kingdom welcomes the good progress
that is being made to prepare for the democratic
elections in East Timor on 30 August. These elections
will be a huge milestone in East Timor's development
and in its journey towards independence. In this
respect, we are very encouraged that 14 out of the 16
parties contesting the election have signed up to the
pact of national unity and thereby have committed
themselves to respecting the outcome of the election
and to defending multi-party democracy. We hope that
this augurs well for a peaceful election campaign and
the acceptance and full implementation of the election
results. It is very good that there has been some in-kind
donor assistance for the political parties as they prepare
for the election.

The United Kingdom endorses the Secretary-
General's analysis of the registration exercise for
refugees remaining in West Timor. The decision of the
majority of refugees to remain in Indonesia at this time
should not be seen as a final one. We firmly believe
that refugees should retain the right to change their
minds and to return to East Timor in the future if they
so wish.

We also welcome the increased effort made by
the East Timorese leadership in recent weeks towards
reconciliation. In particular, we believe that the
establishment of the Truth, Reception and
Reconciliation Commission is a very positive step,
which will serve to promote community reconciliation
and, perhaps more importantly, to relieve the pressure
on the formal justice system. The United Kingdom is
providing funding to support this Commission.

We are, on the other hand, very concerned that
political instability in Jakarta has weakened efforts to
initiate the establishment of the ad hoc tribunal for the
prosecution of serious crimes committed in East Timor
or the appeal against the Atambua murder verdicts. We
very much hope that the recent change in Indonesia's
political leadership will result in great progress on that
front, and we call on the new Indonesian Government
to fulfil its obligation to make early progress in this
area. It is vital for the long-term stability of East Timor
that those responsible for serious crimes be seen to
receive fitting punishment.

I should like to end by looking ahead. We have
achieved great progress in East Timor, more than I
think any of us would have dared to hope during the
dark days of 1999. As Mr. Vieira de Mello said, we
started from absolutely nothing. The United Kingdom
pays tribute to all those involved who have contributed
to those achievements: to the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, and in
particular to the people of East Timor themselves.

But we cannot afford to be complacent. It is clear
from the Secretary-General's report and from the
presentations of Mr. Vieira de Mello and Mr. Ramos-
Horta that much remains to be done before we have the
stable and fully independent East Timor which we all
hope for. We must remain vigilant, and we must protect
the investment that we have all made. As Mr. Ramos-
Horta said, peace remains fragile. So there should be
no hasty withdrawal, even though there should be no
permanent presence. I am sure we all heard
Mr. Ramos-Horta's appeal to support the careful
recommendations of the Secretary-General. My
delegation also listened very carefully in that regard to
the careful and detailed arguments put forward by
Ambassador Mahbubani, which we endorse.

The United Kingdom recognizes the importance,
therefore, of a continued United Nations presence in
East Timor after independence, and we welcome the
planning which is already under way for that successor
mission. We look forward to receiving fuller
information in the Secretary-General's next report,
including details on the shape of the follow-on mission
and a clear timetable for its implementation. In
particular, we look forward to a comprehensive
analysis of the military and civilian police
requirements, based on a full review of East Timor's
security needs, and to a thorough exposition of the
proposed working relationship among the successor
mission, the new East Timorese Administration and the
United Nations agencies.

