Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for the timely introduction
of the issue of demining in the context of peace-keeping
operations into the agenda of the Security Council.

 

The problem of mines continues to worry all of us.
The efforts to resolve it have not yet produced satisfactory
results. I refer in particular to the negotiations on a
multilateral agreement concerning the ban on the use,
stockpiling, production and transfer of anti-personnel
land-mines. Poland is in favour of a resumption of those
negotiations. Poland is on the record as supporting an early
entry into force of Geneva Protocol II to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons. In accordance with the provisions
of the resolutions of the General Assembly calling for a
moratorium on the export of anti-personnel land-mines, the
Government of my country decided to introduce such a
measure. The production of mines has been discontinued
since the mid-eighties.

In approaching the problem of mines, we are greatly
encouraged to find ourselves among many other
like-minded countries. We favour an integrated approach to
this issue. We are pleased to observe that this is the line
followed by the United Nations. In the same context, my
delegation welcomes the seven-point action programme on
anti-personnel mines presented recently by Mr. Klaus
Kinkel, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.

We have devoted much attention to the problem of
mines in its global dimension because of its obvious
importance to the issue we are considering today: the
peace-keeping context of demining.

Mines are indiscriminate by nature. They are designed
to make people - military personnel and civilians alike -
suffer. The United Nations experience indicates that when
it comes to civil wars, to conflicts within States - the
environment that prevails in contemporary peace-keeping
operations - mines cease to be mere combat tools. They
are targeted against civilian populations and are meant to
spread terror and hopelessness. Their effects go far beyond
the battlefield itself. They not only bring unspeakable
suffering to people and adversely affect the humanitarian
efforts of the international community, they are also
directed against post-conflict peace-building and the
prospects for rehabilitation of various segments of life in
war-stricken countries.

Mines could seriously limit the operational potential of
United Nations peace-keeping forces leading, at times, to
the complete cessation of one or another of their mandated
activities.

Allow me to address briefly the possible ways of
dealing with the problem of mines in the context of
peace-keeping operations.

First, the Polish delegation believes that while
discussing the establishment of new peace-keeping
operations or reviewing the mandates of existing ones, we
have to take the issue of mines into consideration. In
several ongoing peace-keeping operations demining is
already a matter of routine. Polish contingents, among
others, are known for having gained considerable
expertise in this respect. We are therefore in a position to
assess how demining influences the operations' activities.
When appropriate and necessary, we should staff
peace-keeping operations properly and equip them with
technical and financial resources for demining. This in no
way releases the parties to the conflict from their
responsibility for mine clearance. On the contrary, one
might think about making it even clearer by, for instance,
including demining clauses in the agreements between the
parties to conflict.

We are in favour of intensifying the educational
efforts of the United Nations and the further development
of training and mine-awareness programmes. We also
share the opinion of those who point out the necessity of
making the parties to conflicts follow to the letter the
provisions of international law. I refer in particular to the
documentation of minefields and the protection of the
civilian population.

We are discussing a problem which is extremely
complex. There is no part of United Nations work that is
not affected in one way or another by the mine-infested
environment in different regions of the world which
urgently need the assistance of the international
community.

We hope that today's debate will give new
momentum to the international efforts aimed at resolving
the growing problem of mines, and in particular to its
peace-keeping dimension.

Those are the Polish delegation's comments, made
in addition to the statement to be delivered on behalf of
the European Union, with which Poland associates itself.

