Ms. Sison (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank the Chairs of the three
Committees, the Ambassadors of Spain, Lithuania and
New Zealand, for their briefings.

I would like to start with some observations on the
Committee established pursuant to resolutionin 1540
(2004). We congratulate Spain for its active leadership
role since assuming the Chair in January - particularly
its focus on planning for the comprehensive review.
The fact that 174 countries have submitted national
reports since the resolution came into effect, in 2004,
is a strong testament to the global effort to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring and using weapons
of mass destruction. We believe that the Committee's
efforts have prompted States to take measures that will
lead to improved implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

The United States views monitoring the status
of implementation as the most important task of the
Committee, as it creates a solid foundation on which
depend all the rest of the work of the Committee and
our efforts to foster the full implementation of the
resolution through effective assistance efforts. In that
regard, we appreciate the work of the Committee and
its Group of Experts to revise the matrices of all United
Nations States Members, which is nearly complete. We
welcome the response to the Committee's efforts to
increase its direct engagement with States, which we
believe has produced an increase in submissions of new
and additional 1540 national implementation reports,
particularly in the form of national action plans and
effective national practices.

Since the last Council briefing on this topic (see S/PV.7331), the United States has continuedto strengthen
its efforts to combat proliferation. Notably, the United
States has moved towards the ratification of four
important international non-proliferation instruments,
namely, the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material, the International Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and
two protocols to the Convention for the Suppression
on Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation. We urge all Member States to cooperate
with the 1540 Committee in supporting the review. With
regard to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the United States remains unwavering
in its support for the NPT and for achieving the peace

and security of a world without nuclear weapons. The
lack of a consensus final document at the latest Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty does not change
that central fact or the role the Treaty will continue to
play in promoting global security.

Turning to counter-terrorism, I must stress that,
despite the significant blows to Al-Qaida's leadership,
terrorist threats persist around the world. We are also
deeply concerned about the evolution of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the emergence of
groups that have pledged allegiance to ISIL in Libya,
Egypt, Nigeria, Afghanistan and elsewhere, and the
tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters who
exacerbate conflicts and then return to pose a threat to
their home countries. Against that backdrop, resolution
2178 (2014) has special importance, because it created
a new legal and policy framework to counter foreign
terrorist fighters.

As part of our ongoing follow-up, we look forward to
the special high-level meeting of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) technical meetings
that Spain will host in Madrid in late July. We expect
the meetings to highlight effective ways to prevent
recruitment; improve border controls and information
sharing; criminalize, prosecute or rehabilitate foreign
terrorist fighters; and boost momentum for providing
technical assistance where it is needed.

The United States welcomed the announcement
that later this year the Secretary-General would present
to the General Assembly a plan of action for preventing
violent extremism, which we hope will establish the
important role the United Nations can play in that
area. For the United Nations to successfully counter
such threats, the various parts of the Organization's
system have to be able to work well together. We also
welcome the efforts of CTED, the close partner of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, to focus on its
core mandate of providing analyses and assessments of
counter-terrorism capacity-building gaps and serving
as an essential facilitator for matching donors with
recipients. In that context, we urge CTED and the
Monitoring Team to work closely with the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which has a
central role in coordinating efforts with the 34 United
Nations counter-terrorism entities and INTERPOL
in helping to build Member States' counter-terrorism
capacity.

That leads me to the important role of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee. Bolstering implementation must
be the Committee's first priority. We have to prevent
ISIL and other terrorists from travelling internationally,
acquiring weapons and raising money to fund acts
of terrorism. As part of that, the Committee and its
Monitoring Team must continue to explore ways to deal
with non-compliance. We are therefore encouraged that
they are continuing to engage with States in identifying
situations where sanctions are not being implemented.
When the issue of non-compliance involves a lack
of capacity, we should support efforts to strengthen
Member States' legal and technical capacities. When
the cause of non-compliance is a lack of political will,
the Committee's Chair can be helpful by engaging
States - privately, if necessary - in order to educate
them on the usefulness of that tool for their national and
regional counter-terrorism strategies.

In addition, we would also like to thank the
outgoing Ombudsperson, Kimberly Prost, for her five
years of dedicated, active and outstanding service, her
integrity and her emphasis on due process. We are also
grateful for the Monitoring Team's important work
and particularly appreciative of the many efforts of
its outgoing Coordinator, Alexander Evans. The Team
has done a superb job of documenting and analysing
challenges from ISIL and foreign terrorist fighters, and
has provided actionable recommendations for tackling
them.

