Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate Kuwait, Ambassador Alotaibi and his
team for a very successful presidency. I would also
like to wish you all the best, Mr. President, in your
endeavours this month.

Allow me also to warmly welcome Ambassador
Nicolas de Riviere and thank Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu
for the very fruitful cooperation and wish them good
luck in their new assignments.

I would now like to thank our briefers their
informative briefings and their work aimed at
addressing the nexus between organized crime and
terrorism. I would also like to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, and for Peru's efforts in bringing
this issue into the spotlight.

The briefings highlight the significance of
further study of the nature, scope and dynamics of
the linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
It is clear that, without a comprehensive approach and
enhanced cooperation by stakeholders at every level,
we will not be able to effectively prevent and counter
the threats they pose. Let me focus on a few measures
that could be taken in that regard, while ensuring that
the ones already being taken by States comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law.

First, with regard to collecting, analysing and
exchanging information, we believe that further
development and standardization of research and
analytical capabilities by the relevant bodies is needed,
including the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and its Global Research
Network. Greater information-sharing is also needed,
both between local communities and non-governmental
actors, including non-governmental organizations
and the private sector, and the Government, within
regional frameworks, such as Eurojust and EUROPOL,
and global ones, such as INTERPOL. Of particular
importance is developing appropriate frameworks
to prevent the financing of terrorism. The European
Union's recent legislation and the combining of the
Financial Intelligence Unit Network with EUROPOL'S
products and services are examples of good practices in
that regard. Such practices could be followed, as should
the standards of the Financial Action Task Force. We
call on all Member States to strengthen information-
and intelligence-sharing at both the national and
international levels.

Secondly, with respect to capacity-building and
cooperation, developing inter-institutional cooperation
and providing the training and tools to build
capabilities to identify, prevent and disrupt the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime are of crucial
importance. We should also pay special attention to law
enforcement, intelligence, financial intelligence units,
border customs and, in some cases, military personnel.
Cooperation by States with relevant bodies focused on
countering terrorism and organized crime, including
CTED, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and UNODC,
could also be beneficial in that regard. Therefore,
we encourage States to continue dialogue, host-
country visits and follow-up on the recommendations
they receive.

Finally, with regard to addressing the root causes,
we consider developing cooperation and empowerment
to be vital - in particular for local communities - in
building awareness of the impact of illegal activities,
including through media, while ensuring the inclusion
of the perspectives of different members of society and
launching initiatives to offer rehabilitation, reintegration
and employment to build resilience. In that endeavour
it is crucial to ensure coordination among stakeholders,
including donors, to maximize outcomes and avoid the
duplication of activities.

We must not only implement relevant international
instruments and Security Council resolutions, but also
constantly consider ways of adapting and refining our
responses to terrorism and organized crime and their
linkages. That is why we welcome the development
by the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute and the Global Counterterrorism
Forum ofa policy toolkit on that topic. We also commend
Peru's initiatives concerning the nexus between
terrorism and organized crime, including the Council's
draft resolution that is being negotiated. We would
like to reiterate Poland's support for, and cooperation
on, those efforts. We express our hope for the swift
adoption and implementation of the draft resolution.

