Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): In exercising
my delegation's right of reply, I would like to make the
following statement in response to the allegations made
by the representative of the Israeli regime this morning.

In general, by continually attacking my
Government, the Israelis seek to divert international
attention from their own unlawful policies and
practices. The Iranophobia and Islamophobia that they
try to spread are a smokescreen for hiding the atrocities
they perpetrate against Palestinian civilians, such as
occurred last summer in Gaza. It is indeed ironic that a
regime notorious for such unlawful acts, for terrorism
and apartheid policies and war crimes, well documented
by the United Nations, should allow itself to make such
sinister accusations against other countries. Moreover,
a regime that stockpiles all kinds of weapons of mass
destruction is not in a position to make false claims
about others in the region. The same goes for its baseless
accusations that my Government supports terrorism,
since the Israeli regime has an unparalleled and perverse
record of using terror to further its aims. Contrary to
what the Israeli representative claimed, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has always been a responsible and law-
abiding member of the international community.

Where Iranian domestic affairs are concerned,
unlike the situation created by the apartheid policies
in place in Israel, harmony and regular elections
at all levels have always formed the sole basis for
the decision-making processes in the executive and
legislative branches of the Government. While Iran has
always tried to foster peace and stability in the region
and beyond, the Israeli regime has shown that it can
thrive only in a tense and troubled environment. Its
agitation and destructive approach to the negotiations
between Iran and the group of the permanent five
members of the Security Council and Germany is
indicative of the provocative policies it pursues.

A policy of occupation is a grotesque manifestation
of terrorism and a denial of human rights. We believe
that Israel's occupation of Palestinian lands lies at the
heart of the Palestinian question. It is also responsible
for the greater part of the tension and conflicts in
the Middle East. The region cannot enjoy peace and
security while the occupation continues and the Israelis
persist with criminal acts designed to perpetuate their
grip on the land they occupy.

