Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity you have provided us by convening
this meeting to once again examine the situation
in Afghanistan. At the outset, allow me to thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom for the report (S/2016/532) he has
just introduced to us and to commend his extraordinary
work as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Recent developments in Afghanistan show the
persistence of the political, security and humanitarian
problems, as well as others, which this country
continues to experience and which represent a serious
source of concern. Indeed, the situation in the country
unfortunately continues to be marked by increased
armed clashes and drug trafficking, a weakened
economy and political divisions, not to mention the
worsening of the humanitarian situation, which all
make the stabilization and national reconciliation
process difficult.

It must therefore be said that, despite the
important meetings that have been held within the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process and the significant
progress made towards an agreement with Hezb-i-
Islami Gulbuddin, efforts continue to fall short owing
to the demands of the Taliban for the withdrawal of
international forces, the recurring attacks during
the spring offensive and the reprisals following the
execution of the members of that group. The situation is
worsened internally by the political divisions, which I
just mentioned, and regionally by the recent tensions on
the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan, which
led to deadly armed clashes.

Despite this difficult security environment,
UNAMA - and I pay tribute to its efforts once
again - has fortunately done everything possible
to support the peace and reconciliation process of
the Afghan people. With regard to the international
technical and financial partners and other donors that
continue to invest in the stability of the country and the
security of its people, we encourage them to continue
their efforts to support Afghanistan's reconstruction
and development, but also to continue to lend their
support to the Government's efforts to restore peace
and security.

In this regard, we welcome the valuable support
provided by the international community and various
other partners active in that country. We strongly
urge all other partners who have not yet done so to do
the same, because technical assistance and expertise
continue to be necessary to ensure the capacity-building
of the Afghan army to allow it to assume responsibility
for the country's security by preventing the advances of
the Taliban and curbing the spread of the Islamic State.

We must also point out and welcome the substantial
progress that has been achieved thanks to regional
cooperation, in particular through the Istanbul process
on regional security and cooperation for peace and
stability in Afghanistan. Such progress must be
encouraged, in particular in the context of combatting
terrorism and especially in combatting the Islamic
State, which represents a genuine threat to the region.
In that spirit, my delegation would like to solemnly
call upon Afghanistan and Pakistan to continue to
work together to find an agreed solution to the difficult
problem of regional security in general and the problem
of the Taliban in particular.

The humanitarian and human rights situation, like
the political and security situation, to which we have
just referred, remains a source of concern. There are
close to 1.2 million internally displaced persons within
Afghanistan, which also has one of the largest refugee
population in the world. According to recent estimates,
2.6 million Afghans are living outside their country.
Added to that is the high price that continues to be
paid by the civilian population, in particular women
and children. My delegation would therefore like to
reiterate its appeal to host countries to demonstrate
greater flexibility in the manner in which they deal
with Afghan asylum-seekers.

While welcoming some of the initiatives taken by
the Government with regard to freedom of expression,
we call on all Afghan parties to ensure that they protect
the media andjournalists. My delegation, while paying
tribute to the courage shown by the Afghan Government,
which has resolutely undertaken to combat corruption,
calls upon the international community, and in
particular the United Nations and other partners with
expertise in this area, to provide the necessary support
to the Afghan authorities to help them to eradicate this
scourge, which continues to pose a serious threat to the
security, stability and economy of the country.

In closing, I should like to express once again
my delegation's full support to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and recall the fact
that the combination of regional and international
efforts, in support of all of the efforts being made by
the Afghan parties, remains vital in order to enable the
country to overcome, on a lasting basis, the political,
security and economic challenges that it has been
facing for so many decades.

For that reason, my delegation hopes that at the
upcoming Brussels conference it will be possible to
make progress towards economic reconstruction and
stabilization in Afghanistan. We hope also that solutions
will be found very soon, particularly in terms of a
consensus with regard to the presence of the Resolute
Support Mission, and that lasting solutions will also be
arrived at with respect to the financing ofAfghan forces
that would make it possible to resolve issues related to
the peace process and the combat against terrorism.

