Mr. Ramos-Horta: I would like to join all others
in expressing my most sincere condolences to the
Governments and peoples ofIndia and Pakistan.

At the outset, allow me to extend to everyone the
warmest greetings of President Xanana Gusmao, who
apologizes for not being here today in person. I am
conscious that I am a poor substitute for him and beg
the Council's indulgence.

I thank you, Sir, for giving me the opportunity to
address the Council today. I am honoured to do so as a
Cabinet member for foreign affairs of the East Timor
Transitional Administration and to speak on behalf of
all my Cabinet colleagues in East Timor.

I would like to take a moment to commend the
Secretary-General for his leadership, compassion and
staunch commitment to East Timor. Without him and
his leadership, we would not be here today. We thank
the Secretary-General for everything he has done for
East Timor since he took office in 1997. I remember
that he promised at that time that, during his term in
office, he would see the conflict in East Timor
resolved. He kept his promise. We take note of and
commend his report to the Security Council.

In 1999, he appointed one of his most competent
and trusted international civil servants as his Special
Representative. We thank him for having loaned Sergio
Vieira de Mello to us and commend Sergio for his
commitment, patience, hard work and, most of all, for
his friendship. Some have remarked that Sergio Vieira
de Mello has aged much since he took up his latest
challenge. He is only a couple of years older than me,
but I have to admit he looks much, much older and I
apologize to him for having caused him this early
ageing. When he referred in his speech to the energetic,
robust discussions in the Cabinet and the National
Council, I know he was being very diplomatic and
using British understatement. He was very polite to us.

This being the first time I have addressed this
Council since the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) was
established, allow me to extend to you, Sir, your
Government, your country and all members of the
Security Council, past and present, our most heartfelt
appreciation for the dedication, compassion and firm
determination shown by all in the worst period of our
recent past. It was their collective compassion and
sense of responsibility that compelled the Council to
act in a swift manner, thus bringing to an end the
extraordinary injustice and suffering visited upon our
people.

I most sincerely regret that I have missed here by
only a few days our good friend, Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke. He was a true friend of East Timor and of
the United Nations. His intellectual brilliance, energy
and dynamic leadership will be missed. We look
forward to a close and fruitful collaboration with the
new United States representative to the United Nations,
whoever it may be.

Before I continue, allow me to introduce someone
sitting in the gallery. His name his Greg Smith. He is
only 11 years old. He is already in his second year of
university, which I really envy. He began his work for
peace when he was seven, when he established his first
non-governmental organization. Right now, he is
extremely busy mobilizing resources for East Timor -
textbooks, medical supplies and vitamins 7 both in the
United States and in Australia. I thank him and his
parents for bringing him here. His mother had to leave
her job to work full-time handling his schedule.

We have come a long way since that fateful day
of7 December 1975. A quarter of a century has passed;
the world has changed beyond recognition; myths have
exploded and empires have come tumbling down;
freedom and democracy have expanded; and East
Timor is free and now resurrecting itself from the ashes
of war.

It has been a little over a year since East Timor
was liberated and UNTAET was established. To
illustrate the progress we have made so far, allow me to
share some thoughts. I arrived back in East Timor on 1
December 1999, for the first time after 24 years in
exile. Landing in East Timor in December 1999 was an
extraordinarily mixed emotional experience ofjoy and
pain: joy in celebrating the greatest gifts of all, peace
and freedom; and pain at so much senseless
destruction.

The scenes of the destroyed cities and towns
reminded me of the black-and-white pictures of
Hiroshima, London or Dresden after the Second World
War. I visited Bosnia in 1997. The destruction of
Bosnia was horrific in scale, and yet the destruction of
East Timor was even worse. Not much was left intact.
What had not been looted and taken away was
vandalised and destroyed. Government services and
infrastructures were wiped out; civil servants,
schoolteachers, medics, semi-skilled and unskilled
workers had fled, taken refuge in the mountains or
been made hostage, maimed or killed. Not one single
public service was functioning; not one modest eating
place or kiosk was operating. In September 1999, East
Timor was at the year zero.

One year later, as we travel around the country
visiting towns, villages and the poor bairros of Dili and
conversing with many thousands of my brave
compatriots, humble, poor and dignified, we repeat to
ourselves time and again: "What an extraordinary
people. They deserve more. They deserve better". But
we keep telling them: "God has given us the greatest
gift of all. He delivered us a miracle. He gave us our
freedom. We triumphed against all odds, but He will
not make any more miracles. We must be patient; it has
been only one year since we gained our freedom. We
cannot do more". And our brave people have been
understanding, patient.

While many international staff members have
lived up to our expectations and illusions, displaying
genuine commitment, integrity and professionalism,
the recruitment of civilian personnel could have been
more careful and the assignments better planned. Much
waste could have been avoided, but we understand that
time constraints and pressure did not leave enough
room for those in charge of recruitment to be more
selective. This situation has been rectified and the
recruitment process has now been moved to Dili.

Much progress has been made on many fronts.
Schools have reopened. Hundreds of thousands of
brand new books provided by Portugal are in the hands
of children. Hospitals and clinics are functioning.
Thousands of children have been immunized.
Tuberculosis, a scourge that eats away at so many in
East Timor, is being confronted. In 2000, the economy
registered a real growth of 15 per cent, though we are
conscious of its fragility. More than 1,800 businesses
have been registered and about 80 per cent are East
Timorese-owned. The negotiations on the Timor Sea
have been conducted in a very friendly atmosphere and
have progressed. We are optimistic about reaching an
agreement in the near future. We hope that oil and gas
revenue will soon flow into East Timor.

UNTAET has accelerated the participation of East
Timorese in the executive, quasi-legislative and
judicial branches of the transitional government with
the establishment of the East Timor Transitional
Administration. Our compatriots are gradually
shouldering the responsibilities that come with self-
determination. There are nearly 7,000 East Timorese
working as civil servants throughout the country in a
wide range of areas, including police, education,
health, border and customs services and in varying
degrees of responsibility.

But it is not sufficient to delegate the
responsibility; it is essential to provide our people with
the necessary tools to accomplish their task. As my
colleague Ana Pessoa Pinto, Cabinet member in charge
of internal administration, noted at the donors'
conference in Brussels in December, the tasks of
preparing administrative cadres, strengthening local
capacity and developing human resources remain
priorities and require special attention. Our View is that
emphasis must be placed on recruiting as many East
Timorese as possible, but it is equally important to
empower them in key positions.

Timorization, as we understand it, will not be
achieved by continuing to have four to six
internationals doing the job. We acknowledge the
valuable work performed by some dedicated
international staff, but we ask that the recruitment
process for East Timor be immediately reinforced and
given all the necessary tools to accomplish this crucial
task.

Overall, power-sharing between UNTAET and
the East Timorese has worked fairly well, though there
have been some growing pains along the way. The
structural and administrative ambiguity between the
East Timor Transitional Administration and UNTAET
must be resolved. We are working on these issues, and
I believe we must stay the course. We do not believe
that it would be in anyone's interest to suddenly
disengage and not take advantage of the gains made by
UNTAET.

This type of peacekeeping operation is new for
the United Nations and it is new for the Timorese. The
East Timor Transitional Administration must be given
the means and real authority to ensure that the
institutional structures created can continue to function
properly and effectively after independence.

I will now turn to the security situation.

Overall, East Timor is enjoying a period of
increased stability, with the militia threat largely
dormant. But we cannot become complacent. The
Portuguese, Australian and New Zealand battalions
stationed in the two most critical operational sectors
have performed extremely well and thus are instilling
confidence and tranquillity among the population. The
Jordanian battalion based in the sensitive Oecussi
enclave has also performed efficiently through a
combination of wise diplomacy and conventional
military posture.

Sadly, as members know, last year Timorese
grieved alongside our international friends over the
senseless deaths of peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers in East and West Timor. We will always
remember these brave soldiers and the humanitarian
workers who paid the ultimate price for helping our
people. We are deeply grateful to the peackeeping force
for its work to ensure peace and stability in East Timor.

The peacekeeping force has been the most
successful pillar of UNTAET, and all units deserve
much credit, including those from Bangladesh, which
perform a vital role in keeping the roads and bridges
usable during our merciless rainy season.

Even though the East Timorese remain one of the
most destitute people in the world, the rate of
criminality among them remains one of the lowest.
Political violence among emerging political groups has
not erupted in the way that many people feared. This
relative peace is partly credited to the maturity and
sense of responsibility of the political parties.

In the area of law and order, there is room for
improvement in the performance of the civilian police
component (CIVPOL). It could be reorganized along
the lines of nationality, in the same manner as the
peacekeeping force. We believe that CIVPOL could be
more effective if the elements of a given nationality
were to be assigned designated tasks and/or areas
instead of mixing different cultures, forms of
professional training and security doctrines. For
instance, the Portuguese Rapid Reaction Unit has
earned the respect of all East Timorese for its
exceptional professionalism. It is a model to be
expanded and followed in other peacekeeping
missions.

We are cognizant of the fact that there will be a
reduction in the current strength of the peacekeeping
force after independence. But we are also encouraged
by the assurances offered by several peacekeeping
troop-contributing countries that they are prepared to
remain actively engaged in East Timor for as long as
necessary.

A premature withdrawal of United Nations forces
from East Timor would destabilize and derail the
process. But we are conscious that the international
community cannot shoulder indefinitely the
responsibility for East Timor's external security; hence,
we have decided to create the East Timor Defence
Force. We are grateful to the Security Council for
authorizing UNTAET to undertake this additional task.
Because our de facto President of East Timor has
already addressed this issue, I will not elaborate
further. I would only like to add that a defence force is
only one way to guarantee our national security. We
must continue to reach out to our neighbours and forge
regional partnerships.

Among our own people there are still a few
elements that continue to refuse to accept the results of
the popular consultation. I am speaking about the
militias that remain active along our border and
continue to terrorize the refugees in the camps in West
Timor. However, in keeping with what the President of
the General Assembly said, we will spare no effort in
engaging the so-called pro-autonomy faction in
dialogue. However, those involved in, and who are
accused of, serious crimes must face justice. After all,
there cannot be sustainable peace without justice.

In this regard, we commend Indonesia's
Attorney-General, Mr. Marzuki Darusman, for his
courage and integrity in attempting to bring to justice
in Indonesia those involved in fomenting, instigating,
planning and carrying out violence in East Timor.

For the sake of justice for the victims, for the
good name of the Republic of Indonesia and for the
sake of the universal struggle against impunity, we
must see to it that justice is served, regardless of the
power and wealth ofthe culprits.

We are committed to continuing the process of
healing and normalization of relations with our
neighbour. My cabinet colleague Mr. Mari Alkatiri and
I have just visited Jakarta prior to my arrival in New
York. This was our first official trip to Indonesia as
cabinet members of the East Timor Transitional
Administration. We were warmly received by our
hosts.

We had cordial talks with President Abdurrahman
Wahid, Foreign Minister Alwi Shihab, Minister for
Political, Social and Security Coordination Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono, the Minister of Settlements and
Regional Infrastucture, Attorney-General Marzuki
Darusman, Speaker of Parliament The Honourable
Akbar Tandjung and other prominent members of
Parliament.

President Wahid briefed us on his recent
discussions with President Fernando Henrique Cardoso
on a joint Brazil-Indonesia partnership to assist East
Timor in some specific areas, such as health. We
warmly welcome such an offer, as it comes from a
close neighbour and a distant one, both of them major
regional powers with which we share a common
history.

We are aware of the situation in many parts of
Indonesia, the painful transition from a recent past of
abuse and repression to democracy and the rule of law.
It is only to be expected that conflicting interests and
deeply entrenched classes and groups, including
centrifugal forces, would collide in a country as
ethnically, culturally and geographically diverse as
Indonesia, particularly as it emerges from decades of a
military-dominated regime.

We can only express our sympathy and solidarity
to that proud nation. The Indonesian people are
fortunate in having an outstanding, moral man as their
President. In times of crisis and transition, nations need
moral and compassionate leaders. This is what
happened in India with Mahatma Ghandi, South Africa
with Mandela and South Korea with Kim Dae-jung, to
mentionjust a few cases.

Friends of Indonesia must redouble their efforts
in assisting Indonesia and its leader President
Abdurrahman Wahid in continuing the progress made
so far in advancing reforms and democracy.

At the conclusion of my Visit to Jakarta, at the
press conference, as someone who was very much
behind the sanctions movement, I also called on those
countries that still maintain sanctions against Indonesia
to lift them, whatever they may be, particularly in
respect of non-lethal equipment, as a concrete way of
sending a goodwill message to the Government of
President Wahid.
I should like also to refer to our particular
relationship with the Indonesian province of Nusa
Tengara Timur. Our relations with the central
Government in Jakarta will determine our special
relationship with our neighbour to the West-Nusa
Tengara Timur. We shall endeavour to normalize
relations with that Indonesian province, with which we
share a common and porous border.

A relationship of trust between Dili and Jakarta
will enable the realization of our dream of ridding the
two sides of weapons and of opening the border,
allowing for the free movement of people and trade,
sports and cultural exchange.

We are already inviting sports and cultural groups
from West Timor to visit us in East Timor. The next
Arafura Games, in which East Timor will participate
this year for the first time ever-as we did in the
Sydney Olympics, though, I must admit, without much
success - will be an opportunity for us to pursue this
process of fostering peace on the whole island.

There is resentment against the East Timorese
refugees in West Timor because of the international
assistance targeted to the East Timorese. We must
follow up on the idea, discussed by President Wahid,
Prime Minister Antonio Guterres of Portugal and
Foreign Minister Alexander Downer of Australia
during the Millennium Summit, of a consortium of
countries to help West Timor develop its economy.
Such an initiative, if realized, would go a long way
towards creating the conditions for a lasting peace and
stability on the island.

We are conscious that this is going to be a long
process, and those who share in this dream are aware
that formidable obstacles are in the way. However, our
friends in Indonesia know that we must dare to dream,
for even the most impossible dreams can be realized.

The plight of our people, many of whom are
being held in squalid camps in West Timor against their
will, remains an obstacle to the betterment of relations
between Indonesia and East Timor. However, in all
fairness, we must commend the Indonesian authorities
for the efforts they have made in recent months to
curtail the activities ofthe armed gangs.

The security situation in West Timor has
improved, even though we are still concerned at the
pervasive presence of armed gangs in the refugee
camps. The Indonesian authorities must continue their
efforts to dismantle those gangs completely.

We urge the United Nations to dispatch to
Indonesia, as soon as possible, a team of security
experts to assess the security conditions in West Timor.
The continuing presence of tens of thousands of
displaced persons in West Timor and of armed gangs in
the refugee camps are detrimental to Indonesia's own
interests. Hence we believe the Indonesian authorities
are serious in wanting to resolve this remaining
problem.

We are grateful to Indonesia for supporting East
Timor's eventual membership in the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). Our gratitude is
extended to all the leaders in ASEAN who have
expressed their support to us in different ways.

In the course of the past year, President Xanana
Gusmao and I visited almost all ASEAN member
countries. We attended the ASEAN ministerial meeting
with the Special Representative. We visited Japan,
China, the Republic of Korea, Australia and New
Zealand. In March, I will be leading another mission to
Japan.

Beyond our immediate region, we hope that in the
course of this year we will start developing relations
with other countries of Asia. We also have a visit
planned to some Arab and Muslim countries.

Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello has already elaborated
in detail the political calendar. However, I will share
with the Council some thoughts that reflect the
discussions held in the National Council and my own
discussions with many of my colleagues in the East
Timorese leadership.

A broad cross-section of society- political
parties, church officials and non-governmental
organizations - all have attended, and participated in,
the hearings held by the National Council. Throughout
these discussions, a common theme persisted: everyone
was committed to non-violence and to adherence to
democratic ideals and the rule oflaw.

There are a number of decisions that must be
taken to reach the goal of independence, such as, what
type of democratic bodies should there be? What
electoral system should we adopt? Answers to these
preliminary questions will lead to the first elections in
East Timor and will soon be provided by the Cabinet
and the National Council after the current political
debates.

However, some important elements have already
converged into a consensus, as Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello has articulated. We hope that by next month a
national pact will have been signed by all parties. Let
me elaborate a bit on the contents of the national pact
as we have discussed them among ourselves.

The national pact will comprise not only
important elements such as our commitment to non-
violence and to the acceptance of majority rule, but
also a strong commitment to human rights and to
signing, upon independence, some of the most
important human rights instruments. It will also contain
some important constitutional elements. This is
important in order to send a message to the East
Timorese society at large and to the international
community that no matter which party wins the
elections in the course of this year, there are
fundamental principles to which every party is
committed, and there will be no change. These
commitments are in regard to our foreign relations and
to foreign investments that are already in the country or
that will be coming into the country in the next few
months before independence. Whatever the outcome of
the elections, the national pact is important in that it
permits everyone to participate in the political process
through a number of solemn commitments with respect
to human rights, democratic principles, foreign
relations, reconciliation and foreign investments.

The national pact will be signed by all and will be
followed by a constitutional conference that will debate
and prepare the first draft of a constitution. Elections
for a Constituent Assembly could take place at the end
of August. Initially we had thought they would be in
June, but we were advised by many of our friends -
experts from the United Nations - that June would be
too soon. Preliminary discussions have made us
conscious of time constraints, and we are beginning to
consider deferring the elections until the end of
August, maybe to coincide with the second anniversary
ofthe popular ballot.

The Assembly, which will have plenary powers,
would have two to three months to prepare, debate and
vote on the Constitution. We are also conscious - and
that is the consensus in the leadership - that the
Constituent Assembly should not repeat the mistakes
made by some countries, dragging on for months and
sometimes a year or two, or three. Therefore we all -
those participating in the political process in East
Timor-have reached a preliminary agreement that
the Constituent Assembly should have two to three
months maximum to deal with the draft constitution,
which it will have before it as it begins its work.

We also believe-and this is a majority
opinion-that the Constituent Assembly, once it has
completed its main task of drafting and adopting a
constitution - will convert itself into the first national
Legislative Assembly. There have been precedents in
many countries wherein the constituent assembly
becomes the first legislative assembly, thus saving the
country and the people from having to hold two or
three elections in one year. We should leave the
decision on a date for follow-up elections, including
presidential elections and a declaration of
independence, to this electoral body. We hope that a
new Government, a provisional Government, reflecting
the election results for the Constituent Assembly, will
be established.

We are aware that peace, although a reality in
East Timor, is still fragile. We are all equally
responsible for its consolidation; it is not only the
responsibility of the peacekeeping force or of the
international community. We, the East Timorese, are
aware that we are all equally responsible for
consolidating peace in order to ensure a smooth
transition to independence.

I would like to conclude by saying that we are
moving forward towards establishing the basic
framework of government and civic institutions in a
transition period. As these institutions are the
underpinnings of all strong democratic nations, we
need to strengthen them in East Timor through targeted
capacity-building. We have heard the offers of the IMF
and our friends from UNDP and other agencies, and of
the World Bank, with whom we have had excellent
cooperation and a personal relationship over the past
few months in a really unique partnership that has been
very beneficial to East Timor. Once again, I want to
extend thanks to all - to Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, to
Mr. James Wolfensohn and to Mr. Luis Valdivieso, our
friend. As you know, the IMF is not terribly popular in
many countries, but in spite of what Mr. Valdivieso
represents, he has managed to charm everybody in East
Timor - and this despite some of the austerity advice
he is constantly giving us. We love him in spite of what
he represents. Thank you to all the agencies, those who
spoke and those who are not present today.

We are deeply grateful to the international
community - to all of you sitting around this table and
throughout the United Nations community - for your
support for the reconstruction and development
activities in East Timor. We have had to rebuild our
country from its ashes. While we have made advances
under UNTAET, we have further to go. Therefore, we
once again ask the United Nations to sustain its
partnership with the people of East Timor, so that our
nation can pursue the development of its full economic,
political and civic capacity. But in order to do this, we
need your continued support, so that we can operate in
a secure and stable environment. This can be provided
only through maintaining a peacekeeping presence
after the transition period. It will enable our forces to
ready themselves to take on our nation's security. With
the continued support and active engagement of the
United Nations, we will pass these tests and reach the
light at the end ofthe tunnel.

Mr. President and members of the Council, we
hope that you all will honour us in Dili on our
Independence Day.

