Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to respond to
the statement just made by the representative of Rwanda,
a Security Council member. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a sovereign country that does not take
orders from the representative of Rwanda, even if his
country is a member of the Security Council. He has
no business forbidding us to come to this international
body to present our problems, as other States do.

What we said earlier is not something we have
invented; the information was provided by the experts
whom the Security Council has mandated to go into
the field. It is those experts who gathered the facts and
recorded them. If Rwanda wishes to object to what
the experts say, it must address itself to the experts
appointed and mandated by the Council, including
Rwanda itself. But the representative of Rwanda cannot
tell the Democratic Republic of the Congo to shut up
and to never bring its problems before the Council
again. We are a sovereign country. He must respect us
as such and end such arrogance.

With regard to the FDLR, as that is the important
issue which he keeps coming back to, the Council has
heard what I said. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains open. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo chooses a constructive solution because it wants
peace. As I said, the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo
wants peace not only throughout its territory but also
with its neighbours, because it is by living in peace that
we can bring about integration projects and develop
our region. Ambassador Gasana said that Rwanda was
helping the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
wanted to help it. We want to have a dialogue with
people who are sincere, who are not hypocrites and who
say clearly what they want, but not to people who say
"yes" when they really mean "no".

The Council well knows that the United Nations
initiated an instrument that should restore peace in
the region - the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. That agreement is not observed by
Rwanda or Uganda. It is not us who are saying that. On
13 January here before the Council, you, Mr. President,
heard the briefing by Mrs. Robinson (see S/PV.7094). In
her intervention, she clearly said that. Let Rwanda tell
Mrs, Robinson that she, not the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, is telling lies because we want peace. When
we point out those facts, are we supposed to come here
to be lectured to by Ambassador Gasana. He should
respect our country. He should stop that arrogant
attitude. We are a sovereign State. We can come here
and speak about our country because we know that we
should bring all such problems here in order for peace
to be restored in our country.

As I said with regard to the FDLR - the Council
followed my statement - we are open. We do not reject
things, as they do. Members are here in the Council
with them all the time and follow the discussions. But
we know how that country behaves here in the Council.
It has never accepted anything, but systematically
denies all the evidence, even what is clear to everyone.
It fails to see it.

On the FDLR, agains we say that we are open.
We want the experts to help us and give us specific
information and avenues that we can follow to carry out
investigations. That desire of ours is clearly reflected
in the report before the Council (S/2014/42, annex).
Members themselves can see that in the report, and
see the efforts that my country has made to combat the
FDLR and hunt them down.

Rwanda is present in our Congo - I do not know
how long it has been - and Ambassador Gasana could
tell us how many F DLR members his country's army
has arrested. On the other hand, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) can also provide
evidence. Our army has handed over FDLR members to
MONUSCO, who were sent to Rwanda and then were
recycled and sent back to the Congo in order to continue
to perpetuate this ongoing situation, of which we are all
aware. The evidence is there, so Rwanda cannot come
here and tell us that it wants to help us. The Congo has
helped Rwanda. You yourself, Ambassador Gasana,
were trained by the Congo. You know that. I will not
dwell on that.

I say once again that we desire to peace. We want
peace and to enter into dialogue with people who are
sincere and who want to be constructive and forget the
past, as you, Mr. President, said here in yesterday's
debate (see S/PV.7105), so that the Great Lakes region
can move forward. But we do not want to talk to people
who have other ideas in mind and want to stop the
Great Lakes region from making progress, who want
to continue to stir up difficulties and war for others
because that makes them happy. We do not want that.

That is what I wanted to say in answer to
Ambassador Gasana. I thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing me to come and talk about such things,
although this is not really the sort of discussion that we
should really be having here.

