Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the Russian presidency for its initiative in
convening today's meeting. I wish to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon; the Secretary-General of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
Mr. Alimov; the Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), Mr. Bordyuzha;
and the Vice-Chair of the Executive Committee of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
Mr. Ivanov, for their respective briefings.

At present, the international situation is complex
and undergoing profound changes. Regional hotspot
issues have surfaced one after the other. Traditional
and non-traditional security threats are interwoven.
As the core of the international collective security
mechanism, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
security. Cooperation in the areas of peace and
security carried out between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, is
conducive to further strengthening the international
collective security mechanism and better maintaining
international peace and security. Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should abide by the following principles.

First, it is necessary to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is necessary to encourage and support regional and
subregional organizations in peacefully resolving their
regional hotspot issues through dialogue, consultation,
good offices and mediation. It is necessary to respect
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of the countries concerned.

Secondly, it is necessary to adopt a collective,
holistic, collaborative and sustainable concept of
security. It is necessary to take into account the
historical background and current circumstances of the
issues concerned, adopt a moderate approach and take
holistic measures to seek and promote security through
cooperation and the realization of mutual benefits and
common security, which represent a win-win situation.

Thirdly, it is necessary to take into account the
focuses and priorities of regional and subregional
organizations and to clarify the orientation of
cooperation, strengthen coordination and form synergy.

Fourthly, it is necessary to fully exploit the unique
advantages of regional and subregional organizations
with respect to geography, history and culture.
Furthermore, it is necessary to establish means of
cooperation so as to build a relationship of global
partnership based on dialogue instead of confrontation
and partnership instead of alliance. In recent years,
SCO, CSTO and CIS have achieved positive results in
fighting terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, and promoting economic trade
cooperation and people-to-people exchanges. They
have thereby played an able part in maintaining regional
peace, stability and development. China expresses its
appreciation in that connection.

The year 2016 marks the fifteenth anniversary of
SCO. Since its founding in 2001, SCO has kept abreast
with the trends of the time and has advocated the practice
of the Shanghai Spirit, which is embodied by mutual
trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for
diverse civilizations and seeking common progress. It
has achieved remarkable results. Members of SCO have
signed the long-term Treaty of Good Neighbourship,
which has provided mutual support to the paths of
development chosen by each member and has chosen to
seek mutual trust and common development.

SCO has adopted a policy of openness and expanded
relations beyond its purview. It has established a
relationship of cooperation with the United Nations,
CIS and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
It has thereby set a good example for regional and
international cooperation, which should be efficient,
open and mutually beneficial. The Shanghai spirit
has vitality and values that transcend geography and
time. It has provided a useful lesson to all those who
seek to establish good-neighbourly relationships
and common prosperity. It has also injected Vitality
into the establishment of a new international order
of relationships based on cooperation and achieving
win-win solutions.

As an important member of SCO, China
consistently supports SCO efforts to play a positive
role in maintaining regional peace and security and
seeking common development. China has actively
implemented SCO development strategies until 2025
and adopted measures to make sure that the One Belt,
One Road initiative became SCO development strategy.
China has carried out measures to comprehensively
promote cooperation in all areas. In June, Chinese
President Xi Jinping attended the sixteenth meeting of
the Council of Heads of State, where he proposed that
SCO make security and the maintenance of regional
peace and security its first priority. China has called
for accelerated negotiations on the SCO anti-extremism
convention, and announced a series of practical
measures in support of deepening cooperation within
the SCO. Together with other leaders of SCO, China
published the Tashkent Declaration, which coincided
with the fifteenth anniversary of SCO and made a great
contribution in that connection.

China, together with other countries, is ready
to carry the Shanghai spirit forward and move ahead
with the continued cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations and work together
to establish a new order of international relations built
on cooperation and mutual benefit. China hopes to
forge a community with a shared future so as to work
together to achieve durable peace and security and
prosperity f a world we all aspire to.

