Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Director Rajasingham for their briefings. Estonia fully supports Mr. Griffiths in his efforts to find a peaceful solution in Yemen. We also commend United Nations agencies for their efforts aimed at improving the humanitarian situation in Yemen and welcome the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) (resolution 2505 (2020)). I was glad to hear that there have been positive developments and a reduction in violence. However, in the context of rising regional tensions, it is important that all stakeholders remain committed to de-escalation. Fighting will not bring about a solution; that can only be achieved through inclusive dialogue among all relevant groups and civil society in the region, including women and youth. I call on the parties to resume discussions on a comprehensive political solution without delay or preconditions. We welcome all efforts tode-escalate tensions, including the implementation of such confidence-building measures as the recent prisoner exchange in Taiz governorate. However, it is unacceptable that the civilian population continues to be harmed by the attacks across the country. We are also concerned about reports of gender-based violence, the repression of women, the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict, and arbitrary detentions. We call on all parties to fulfil their obligations under human rights law and international humanitarian law and to hold all perpetrators of violations accountable. Even though we heard that there was considerable improvement in 2019, the scale of the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, as set forth by the briefers, remains extremely critical, and the human cost of the war is immense. Some 24 million people still depend on humanitarian assistance. It is therefore crucial that unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance be guaranteed throughout the country. We commend the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council for the steps already taken towards implementing the Riyadh agreement. The next phase, involving military and security steps, is undoubtedly challenging, but we urge the parties to make efforts to fulfil their agreed obligations. Implementation of the agreement is crucial in order to move towards a comprehensive political settlement in Yemen. The recent renewal of the mandate of the UNMHA shows that the Security Council is united in its efforts to help solve the conflict (see S/PV.8701). We call on the authorities in Al-Hudaydah to ensure the freedom of movement of the Mission. I would also like to reiterate the importance of full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement in building confidence between the parties. Finally, with regard to the decaying FSO SAFER oil tanker, we call on the authorities in Al-Hudaydah to allow the United Nations assessment team to have access to the ship in order to prevent an environmental disaster in the Red Sea.
