Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for presenting the Secretary-
General's report on the situation in Somalia
(S/2010/447). We are pleased to welcome Augustine
Mahiga in his new post and wish him success and
pledge him our support. We listened carefully and with
interest to the statements of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya and the representative of Somalia.

On the whole, we share the assessments presented
in the report of the Secretary-General. We are troubled
by recent outbreaks of violence in Mogadishu, which
have aggravated an already unstable situation in the
country. The extremists have not abandoned attempts
to attack the positions of the forces of the Government
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which genuinely hinder the actions of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) to establish effective
leadership in the country. As a result, the civilian
population and the personnel of the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations remain under threat, which
gives rise to grave concern and deepens the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia. In these conditions, it
is very important to end external support for the
extremist forces in Somalia, in particular through strict
compliance with Security Council resolutions.

We join in the Secretary-General's appeal to the
international community's to step up its efforts to assist
the TFG, especially in the area of security. There can be
no doubt that in these conditions it is of special
importance to ensure the unity and solidarity of
transitional federal structures capable of winning the
trust of Somalis. The Government needs to pursue its
work to broaden its social base.

The only credible stabilizing factor in the country
today is AMISOM. It is important to ensure its full
staffing and its required logistical support as soon as
possible. We note the relevant proposals of the
Secretariat, which require some development. We
believe that the phased approach to broadening the
United Nations presence in the country is justified and
should continue to be implemented depending on the
momentum of the military and political situation. We
support the desire to maintain closer contacts between
United Nations agencies and the TFG and other major
Somali parties. It is important to strengthen the

10-5364]
coordination action of United Nations agencies,
including in putting together joint programmes and
operations.

The problem of piracy remains pressing, and any
long-term solution will depend on the prospects for
advancing the political process and rebuilding Somalia.
It is obvious that one of the important causes of the
inadequate effectiveness of international anti-piracy
efforts resides in the current imperfect mechanism for
holding the pirates accountable. We must create the
necessary judicial bodies, especially at the regional
level. However, the search for additional opportunities
to combat piracy should be conducted along other
lines. In particular, we believe that effective
prosecution of the leaders of the piracy industry would
be assisted by placing them on Council sanctions lists.

Russia will continue to support the efforts of the
President of Somalia and the TFG to achieve
sustainable peace and national reconciliation in the
country on the basis of the Djibouti Agreement in the
interest of strengthening security and stability in the
region.

