Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica thanks Azerbaijan for having organized today's
debate. My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the 22 members of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. We wish to offer additional
observations in our national capacity.

The premise established in Article 24 of the Charter
of the United Nations, pursuant to which Member
States acknowledge that the Security Council acts on
their behalf, should function as a two-way street. States
Members of the Organization must recognize in effect
that the Council acts on our behalf, but the Council
must also demonstrate that it acts on our behalf. That
responsibility is particularly important to its five
permanent members.

We live in an era in which the transparency of
decision-making processes and the accountability of
representatives to the represented have been established
as ever-more solid principles in all organizations,
independent of their nature. Presidential note
S/2006/507 and its update note S/2010/507, as well as
note S/2013/515 adopted in August, mark an important
milestone in the history of the Security Council, above
all in the area of transparency. I take this opportunity
to recognize the work of Argentina as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and to welcome note S/2013/630,
adopted yesterday.

Note 507 encompassed many of the concerns of the
membership of the Organization and resolved several,
at least conceptually. Important progress has been made
in transparency and accountability after its adoption.

Nevertheless, an analysis of the Council's practices
reveals that the challenge of implementing adopted
agreements in a consistent manner remains. Costa Rica
believes, for example, that the Council should take
even greater interest in the input of those who have a
legitimate concern or who would be directly affected
by its decisions. Despite the agreements achieved to
that end, significant shortcomings persist in practice.
In addition, more transparent, direct and clear
communication should take place between the Council,
its subsidiary bodies and the rest of the Organization.

Another subject that deserves greater attention is
the public aspect of the Council's actions. Although it
is true that there has an increase in the number of public
meetings in comparison to other years, we are far from
the spirit of the norm, which establishes the rule that
every meeting of the Council should be public, unless
expressly decided otherwise. Without doubt, there are
situations that demand the utmost discretion, but we
disagree with a practice that has inverted the language
of the norm.

It is the Secretariat's duty to facilitate transparency
and accountability by offering open formats for all
meetings as a first option in the proposed programmes
of work prepared by each Council presidency. It is then
up to the members of the Council to convince others
of the need for a private format, when necessary, as an
exception to the rule. In voicing these considerations, I
am pleased to say that Costa Rica and Estonia are leading
and coordinating a subgroup in the ACT framework to
promote transparency within the Security Council.

I would like to highlight several recommendations
in that regard. First, we should develop an action
plan to implement note 507 in the context of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

Secondly, we should continue to improve
transparency in the preparation of the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly
by engaging members in an informal, interactive
discussion, both as the report is being drafted and when
it is brought before the General Assembly.

Thirdly, briefings by United Nations officials to the
Council should, as far as possible, be made accessible
to all Members, while subsequent consultations may be
held in a private setting when necessary.

Fourthly, Costa Rica stresses the importance of
the draft resolution on special political missions being
considered by the Fourth Committee, one objective of
which is to improve transparency. We believe that, in
the context of special political missions, transparency
cannot and should not be limited to exchanges between
the Secretariat and the membership; it should should
include the Security Council, whose importance
is reflected in the simple fact that it decides the
overwhelming majority of mandates of special political
missions. We encourage the Security Council to
continue improving the provision of information to
Member States on special political missions.

I close by affirming that the implementation of note
507 requires the ongoing commitment of all members
of the Council and the active participation of the
General Assembly. Today's important meeting, held at
the behest of Azerbaijan, represents a significant step
in the right direction.

