Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes your presidency of
today's meeting, Sir. We are also grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh and to the representative
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) for their briefings.

We appreciate the work done by the
multidisciplinary assessment mission. In its report, the
mission makes many useful recommendations on the
search for solutions to the problems of Central Africa.
We believe that these recommendations must be
implemented as soon as possible and we hope that the
Security Council will give them serious consideration.

As the mission's report points out, Central Africa
is rich in natural resources, yet one of the world's least
developed regions. In 7 of the 11 countries visited, over
50 per cent of the population lives below the poverty
line. A major cause of this situation are the armed
conflicts that have long plagued the region. Over the
past decade, many countries of Central Africa have
undergone armed conflicts of varied intensity. Some
continue to suffer such conflicts or face the heavy
burden of post-conflict peace-building.

Putting an end to conflict, achieving national
reconciliation and advancing on the path of sustainable
development represent major challenges to the Central
African countries and the international community. We
believe that we must make efforts in the following
three areas to address the issues of Central Africa.

First, the efforts of the countries and people
concerned are key. We are pleased to note that the
peace process in Angola is being consolidated. The
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
developing positively. The peace and reconciliation
process in Burundi has made progress, and the situation
in the Central African Republic is also improving
steadily. All these achievements are inseparable from
the unremitting efforts made by the Governments and
peoples concerned. Events have proven that there can
be no lasting peace without the political will of the
countries concerned; no outside force can replace their
role.

Secondly, regional organizations must do more to
help. Many countries in Central Africa have similar
cultures and historical backgrounds. Conflict in one
country can easily spread to neighbouring countries,
impacting on the entire region. Therefore, addressing
the issues of Central Africa must begin with a regional
perspective, using a comprehensive strategy. That is
precisely what the region and subregion concerned can
do best. In recent years, organizations such as the
African Union, ECCAS and the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (CAEMC) have
taken positive measures to resolve armed conflicts in
various countries, stabilize the political situation and
promote integration. All those efforts have had
excellent results. We hope that those organizations will
take into consideration the specific characteristics of
their region and continue to play an important role in
promoting long-term peace and stability in the region.

Thirdly, the international community must
provide broad support. Over the years, the United
Nations, through peacekeeping operations in the
Central African region, peace-building support offices
and special envoys, has actively helped the countries of
the region in their peacekeeping and rehabilitation
efforts. We support a greater role of the United Nations
in order to achieve peace and development in Central
Africa and to help the various countries and regional
organizations in their efforts for capacity-building and
conflict prevention. We also support the proposal of the
Secretary-General to appoint a special envoy for
Central Africa. From the report of the mission, we can
see that, as a result of inadequate financial and
technical support, it is hard for some Central African
countries to maintain their hard-won peace.

We call upon the international community,
especially Africa's development partners, to increase
their political support to this region, especially
economic and financial support, so as to help the
countries concerned to eradicate poverty and to prevent
and treat AIDS.

As a friend of Africa, China closely follows the
situation in Central Africa. China has duly made efforts
to help the countries concerned to end their armed
conflict and achieve economic development. China has
taken part in the peace operations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and has provided logistical
support to the peace force of the African Union
deployed in Burundi. Through bilateral channels, China
has also provided economic support to some Central
African countries. We expect to strengthen cooperation
with Central African countries in all aspects in order to
make our due contribution to achieving lasting peace,
stability and development in the region.

