Mr. Santos (Mozambique): I have in front of me
not a speech, but some notes. We want to start by
registering our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
your initiative to hold this meeting. We believe that it is
timely, and we want to congratulate you on what your
country has done so far for Africa, especially in terms of
poverty eradication. We believe that resolving the issue of
poverty would help us solve many problems in Africa,
including conflicts. We are facing complex situations, and
we need innovative approaches to address them. I believe
that this interactive debate will help us find them.

I would like to raise several points. First, I should
like to say that Africans have the primary responsibility
for conflict prevention, management and resolution in
Africa. This has been emphasized by African leaders, who
have committed themselves to taking action in this regard.
But the Security Council has primary responsibility for
maintaining peace and security in the world, and that
includes Africa. What Africa is seeking is equal and fair
treatment.

 

We regard coordination and cooperation as essential,
and in that respect we agree with your delegation,
Mr. President. We believe that such cooperation and
coordination should start within the Security Council itself.
We have witnessed cases in which a lack of such
cooperation and coordination in the Council, when
decisions were not taken in time to avert problems. We are
still facing that problem in relation to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other situations.

It may be very difficult to recover from one missed
opportunity. We believe that once a timely decision is taken
by the Council, resources should be made available to
match the magnitude of the problem. That principle has
been emphasized throughout the debate this morning and
this afternoon. We believe that once agreement has been
reached within the Council on a particular issue, the actors
within the country and within the region should be
identified. It should be easy to contact them through the
Permanent Representatives here in New York of the
countries of the region affected.

Contacts should also be made with the leaders of the
region, with the Secretary-General of the OAU and with the
current Chairman of the OAU. The Chairman of the
African Group for that month is also available for such
contacts. I believe that both the current Chairman of the
OAU and the Secretary-General of the OAU are available
to come to the Security Council whenever necessary.
Another approach which we think should be pursued in
relation to Africa is the dispatch of Security Council
missions to those areas affected by conflict. We believe that
that practice would be helpful for ensuring that the
decisions taken by the Council are informed.
We also believe that the opinions of the OAU and of
African leaders should form the basis of decisions taken by
the Council. The suggestions and recommendations that the
Council will definitely have should not become
conditionalities for action.

This morning Ambassador Holbrooke mentioned the
issue of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
referred to the conditions that it is important to meet if a
peacekeeping mission is to go the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We agree with him, except to say that the
sending of a peacekeeping mission should not be held
hostage to one condition - that of choosing a facilitator.
We believe that choosing a facilitator is important, but we
do not believe that it should hold up the process.
Fortunately, both parties are cooperating in order to find a
facilitator. We believe that that is important. But we are
saying that we should not impose conditions, or the
process will not be able to move forward.

We agree that all instruments available to the
Security Council within its mandate should be used.
Innovative ways to resolve conflicts, devised in order to
meet specific conditions, should also be considered. We
agree with the representative of Canada, who said that
existing instruments should be made more effective. I
think that is the most important part. Then we can create
other innovative means.

We should learn an important lesson from the
sanctions imposed on UNITA; in fact, they constitute an
experience that, I think, will teach us many lessons. What
is being done now seems to be effective, and we thank
Ambassador Fowler for the work he is doing. We should
learn from it and see how effective it is. We also consider
the introduction of elements of post-conflict peace-
building to be important, to allow a smooth transition and
bridge from a peacekeeping operation to peace-building.
Here, the difficulty is that the Security Council ends the
mandate, but the problem actually remains. But if we
have a smooth transition, other organs of the United
Nations and other agencies will be working - such as
the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). And we have the
United Nations Development Group, which can ensure
inter-agency coordination. We therefore think that there
should be cooperation and collaboration also between the
Security Council and all those other organs. I think that
would create conditions for nationals to address the root
causes of a conflict and generate solutions from within
the country.

The Southern African Development Community
(SADC) is one subregional organization within Africa
which has had good and bad experiences. It can lend its
support to the work of the Security Council in resolving
conflicts within the region. In the past few weeks a group
of diplomats from SADC countries have been working
with members of the Security Council and with other
delegations on the issue of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. All those we have met so far have indicated
to us that this is an important and worthwhile exercise.
We believe this to be an important instrument in terms of
seeking solutions to conflicts and other problems.

As the current Chairman of the SADC group, I
would like to say that we will continue to work with
members of the Council to follow up the conclusions of
today's debate; we believe that the success of the debate

 

will be judged by the degree of follow-up and concrete
action that we are able to effect afterwards.

