The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 9 February 1999 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of the Central African
Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council, document S/ 1999/ 132.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, noting the letter of 9
February 1999 from the President of the Central
African Republic to the President of the Council
(S/l999/l32), takes note with satisfaction of the
commitment expressed by the President of the Central
African Republic to maintain peace in the Central

African Republic through dialogue and consultation.
In this context, it strongly reaffirms that the
complete implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(S/ 1997/561, appendices III-VI) and of the National
Reconciliation Pact (S/l998/219) is essential to
peace and national reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of the Central African Republic to
continue to take concrete steps to implement
political, economic, social and security reforms as
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General of
23 February 1998 (S/l998/l48) and to fulfil the
commitments expressed in the letters of 8 January
1998 (S/l998/6l, annex) and of 23 January 1999
(S/ 1999/98, annex) to the Secretary-General by the
President of the Central African Republic. It recalls
that the success, the future mandate and the ongoing
presence of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic are closely linked to the
fulfilment of these commitments, in particular the
immediate resumption of a constructive political
dialogue.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the consequences that the current political
tensions have for the stability and the functioning of
the institutions of the Central African Republic. It
reaffirms that the Government, the political leaders
and the people of the Central African Republic bear
the primary responsibility for national reconciliation,
the maintenance of a stable and secure environment
and the reconstruction of their country. It
emphasizes the importance of continuing efforts in
the Central African Republic to settle outstanding
contentious issues peacefully and democratically in
accordance with the Bangui Agreements. It stresses
the need for both the "mouvance presidentielle" and
the opposition parties to cooperate closely and work
actively with the aim of achieving the political
consensus indispensable to stability in the Central
African Republic.

"The Security Council considers that a smooth
preparation of free and fair presidential elections, for
which proper steps should be taken as soon as
possible, requires a certain level of political
consensus and the opening of a genuine dialogue
between all the constituent parties of the National
Assembly. It also considers that consensual
preparation for the presidential elections can only
 

reinforce the legitimacy of the next President of the
Republic and also secure a sustainable civil peace. lt
fully supports the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in his call to the Central African
political leaders and authorities to resolve the political
impasse so the country can move forward. and
welcomes the current efforts undertaken to this end.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.
