Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We should like
to express our thanks for the convening of this meeting,
and we welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Poland, Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz. We
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Polish presidency on its work during this month.
We should also like to express our gratitude for the
briefings of Mr. Ertugrul Apakan and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, and of Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, who we believe
will successfully fulfil her new duties at the head of the
Department of Political Affairs.

We also welcome the participation of Mr. Stephanus
Blok, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, and of Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine. We reiterate our commitment to
defending the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.

Peru has been following with concern the complex
and unstable situation in eastern Ukraine, as well as
its serious implications for the country's governance
and development and for regional stability. The civilian
population has endured deplorable suffering. In four
years of conflict, more than 2,500 civilians have lost
their lives, and 9,000 civilians have been injured.
More than 4.4 million people are in dire need of
humanitarian aid, of which more than 1.6 million are
internally displaced.

We must condemn the use of anti-personnel mines,
which are banned under the Ottawa Convention, as well
as the downing of the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
for which we must ensure proper accountability.

Peru stresses that the Minsk agreements constitute
the legal basis for the political solution required to end
the conflict experienced in eastern Ukraine. In that

regard, we support the package of measures for the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, which the
Council endorsed in February 2015.
We reiterate the need to comply with the ceasefire
agreed by the parties and supported by the Council,
as well as the withdrawal of heavy artillery, often
located near populated areas. It is alarming that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine has recorded
more than 80,000 violations of the ceasefire, many with
weapons that should have been withdrawn, in just the
past three and a half months.

We highlight the work of the Special Mission and
the need to facilitate its safe access on the ground.
In line with the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, we would also like to welcome efforts to
facilitate dialogue between the parties, in particular
within the framework of the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group.

I should like to conclude by welcoming the
assistance that the international community, in
particular the United Nations, lends in support of the
efforts of the Ukrainian authorities to alleviate the
suffering of the conflict-affected civilian population
and to build sustainable peace.

