Mr. Guterres (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
and the representatives of member States for their
extremely useful and profound contributions to this
debate. Many of them mentioned their interest in our
meeting more often. I am entirely at the Council's
disposal. I am convinced that there is no humanitarian
solution to humanitarian tragedies; the solution is
always a political one. Dialogue with the Security
Council is, for us, an absolute priority in the
framework of our inter-institutional cooperation. As I
said, I am always available to the Council.

(spoke in Spanish)

To the Ambassador of Costa Rica, I should like
first to express my admiration for his country and Latin
America in general as traditional hosts to refugees.
Mexico, with its borders of solidarity, cities of
solidarity and solidarity-based resettlement
programme, has one of the world's best action plans
for the protection of refugees. I believe that the
example set by Costa Rica is of great importance to the
world today, where tolerance is critical to ensuring the
protection of refugees.

The Ambassador of Costa Rica spoke of the need
for stronger international solidarity. It is true that most
refugees are in countries of the South, and that most
wish to return to their homes. They do not want to
emigrate to wealthier countries; they want to go home.
If that is to be possible and they are to be protected
upon their return, institutional solidarity, especially
between the developed and developing worlds, is
absolutely essential.

He also discussed the range of problems in
protecting civilians and the absolute need to guarantee
the humanitarian and civilian nature of refugee camps.
That issue has been raised in many statements. It is
tragic to note all the victims of massive human rights
violations and violence, the terrible suffering of
women and the forcible recruitment of children that
take place in refugee camps, and that we are powerless
to stop it. The intervention of peacekeeping forces is
often absolutely critical in that regard.

(spoke in English)

I would like to express my gratitude to the
representative of Turkey and to underline one aspect in
which Turkey is at the very centre of our action.
Turkey is not only an asylum country; it is also a
country of transit. We are in a situation today in which
we are witnessing increasingly mixed flows of
population, the majority being economic migrants, but
also including refugees, asylum seekers and women
and child victims of trafficking, who are in need of
international protection.

With the role of smugglers and traffickers and the
way such movements of populations take place, it is
sometimes very difficult to detect those people and to
grant them physical access to the territory to present
their claims and receive fair treatment for those claims.
The experience of our cooperation in Turkey in this
regard is extremely important to us. I should also like
to express my gratitude for the appeal made by the
representative of Turkey for financial support for the
activities of my Office.

This is indeed a difficult moment for
humanitarian organizations. On the one hand, we have
needs that are increasing everywhere; on the other, we,
too, are the victims of the global financial crisis. I have
been in Government myself; I am sure it is impossible
for a Government not to do everything that is required
to make sure that there is no meltdown of its financial
system, so I fully understand the need to use hundreds
of billions of dollars and other currencies in support of
the financial systems, but I strongly hope that the same
commitment will exist in support of human life and
humanitarian action.

I should also like to express my deep gratitude to
the Ambassador of Japan for his reference to the root
causes of displacement and the needs of prevention. I
think it is very important to underline that prevention is
no longer only a political and diplomatic endeavour. To
prevent conflict, it is necessary in many circumstances,
for instance, to be much more effective in relation to
support for adaptation to climate change, support for
rural communities and the need to be able to allow
people to live in their rural environments if they so
wish. Migration should be an option; it should not be
an obligation or a necessity.

Thus, to a certain extent, prevention has become
a complex issue requiring a combined group of actions
in which, of course, the political and the diplomatic
will always be paramount but in which effective
cooperation among the economic, social and
environmental dimensions is also extremely important.
Again, I would like to underline the importance of the
concept of human security as a unifying concept for
protection, assistance and solutions for refugees and
other displaced persons.

The Ambassador made a meaningful number of
references to the interrelated questions of safety and
security in humanitarian action and the protection and
preservation of the humanitarian space. I would like
once again to emphasize that these are key questions
for the success of humanitarian action in today's world.

Finally, I would like to congratulate Japan on the
establishment of its pilot project on resettlement, which
I hope will be successful and lead to a meaningful
resettlement programme in the near future.

I would also like to express my gratitude for the
statement made by the representative of the United
Kingdom. First of all, I wish to say that we are deeply
committed to fully supporting the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in its activities. We appeal for
UNRWA to be effectively supported, financially and by
other means, by the international community, and we
hope that developments will move towards the
achievement of full respect for humanitarian law in
relation to the Gaza conflict.

The United Kingdom representative mentioned
internal displacement and the commitment of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. I want to be very clear in saying that we are
totally committed to playing our role.
As underlined by the United States delegation
and the Russian delegation, our role is different in
relation to refugees and in relation to internally
displaced persons. In relation to refugees, we have a
mandate, which is a very strong mandate, by the way,
enshrined in international law. In relation to internal
displacement, we are a member of a team, working
together with other members of the team - never
forgetting that the primary responsibility is the State's,
but that, of course, the international community has a
contribution to make.

We are totally committed to the cluster approach
and to the development of its potential. Partnership is
important not only in relation to internal displacement;
as members said, it is important in peacebuilding and
in early recovery. We are also fully committed to
peacebuilding; from the very outset, we provided a
member of our Office to the Peacebuilding Support
Office. And, ifI can be absolutely frank on this, we are
extremely anxious to see early recovery work. I know
that the United Kingdom Government is also very
committed to this.

I would say that we might not need new
international laws in relation to forced displacement
when it does not relate to typical refugee situations as
foreseen in the 1951 Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees. But obviously, there are protection gaps,
and we need to make sure that, through adequate forms
of partnership and cooperation, those protection gaps
are filled. States have a key role to play on that. But it
would also be interesting to discuss whether some
improvement in international law could be useful, for
instance in relation to temporary protection, just to
give one example. There, I believe, there are some
areas in which some clarification might be useful with
respect to international legislation.

I thank the representative of Viet Nam. First of
all, he made a reference to statelessness. Statelessness
is a forgotten plight. It is dramatic for many people not
to have nationality, not to have citizenship. They tend
to be forgotten people, and their rights tend to be
forgotten. My Office is doing its best to improve our
capacity and our action in that regard. But I would like
to draw the attention of the Council, and the
international community as a whole, to the need to be
much more effective - especially at country level -
in addressing the problem of statelessness and in
providing solutions for it. And I can only agree fully
with what the representative of Viet Nam said in

relation to the need to strengthen cooperation within
the United Nations system and to ensure full respect
for humanitarian principles: the very principles I
underlined in my briefing.

(spoke in French)

I would like to thank the representative of
Burkina Faso for his statement and to say that his
region is one where, fortunately, we are seeing greater
progress in addressing refugee problems. There have
been massive returns to Liberia and to Sierra Leone,
and there is hope for a solution bringing lasting peace
to Cote d'Ivoire. There is reason for optimism
regarding his region. I believe that the regional
cooperation mechanisms that have been put in place
are to a great extent responsible for success, with
respect not only to conflict but also to humanitarian
protection programmes and to the resolution of refugee
issues.

I fully agree with what the representative of
Burkina Faso said about the need to train personnel of
peacekeeping operations. I think there is much to be
done and much room for improvement in that regard.
As I said with respect to the statement made by the
representative of Costa Rica, there is a need to support
host countries and communities that often share their
meagre resources with refugees. I would also stress the
need for rehabilitation * including environmental
rehabilitation - in regions affected by refugee issues,
once displacement has come to an end.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to express my deep appreciation
for the statement made by the representative of the
United States. First, he commented on protection
challenges for refugees, for displaced persons and for
the security of humanitarian staff, and he expressed
concerns about internal displacement and the need to
make sure that our work on internal displacement does
not undermine our mandate regarding refugees. I must
say that I do not see any contradiction between what
we do with refugees and what we do on internal
displacement. There has been no crowding-out effect;
there has been no movement of resources from refugee
programmes into internal displacement programmes. I
think there has been a great deal of positive synergy: in
many circumstances, we address problems that are
similar within groups of population that stay together,
even if their displacements are of differing natures.

I would also like to underline the importance of
his comments on sexual and gender-based violence. In
UNHCR's internal reform, one of our main concerns
was to make sure that we would shrink our
headquarters and spend less and less money on the
organization and more and more money on our
beneficiaries. We had 1,050 people in Geneva; we are
now about 750, and in 2009 we will be reducing that to
less than 700. What we are trying to do is to use the
savings we make through our internal reform to
address gaps in our action for beneficiaries. One of the
gaps we tried to address with these savings was exactly
the question related to sexual and gender-based
violence in many of our programmes where, let us be
honest, we are far from being successful, mainly
because we do not have the capacity to deliver in such
complex environments. There, the key security
questions require the action of other actors, namely
those with respect to which the Security Council has
the authority to take decisions.

I would also like to thank the representative of
the United States for his comments on how to maintain
the humanitarian space. I think that the distinction
made between the strategic dimension and the
operational dimension can probably be a very
important one. Clearly, there must be strategic
coherence within the United Nations when it acts
together in a given setting. But in some circumstances
it is absolutely essential to preserve operational
autonomy to make sure that the humanitarian space and
humanitarian principles are fully preserved.

I would also like to thank the representative of
Austria and to tell him how much I appreciated the
clear linkage he established between peace, security
and forced displacement, and the importance that he
gave to climate change as a key factor in its influence
on all global trends for the near future, in particular on
trends related to displacement. Climate change
generates displacement, and climate change is a factor
that exacerbates conflict, which in turn generates
displacement. Because of that, when we look at peace
and security and when we look at displacement, I do
not think we can forget the present and future impact
of climate change on the mega-trends we will be
witnessing in the twenty-first century. I am very happy
that, as was noted, the Council will be debating energy
security and climate change in April.

I am also very hopeful with respect to the work of
the Council in guaranteeing a smooth transition
between the European Union military operation in the
Republic of Chad and in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad in relation to the protection
requirements we have in eastern Chad and the northern
Central African Republic.

With respect to the lessons learned about
sustainability, I think that it is important to underline
that we are far from happy with the present
sustainability of returns. In many circumstances,
people return from a refugee situation to become
irregular migrants in the next few months or in the next
few years. The reason for that is not always linked to
security. I would say that it is predominantly linked to
the fact that economic development, job opportunities
and access to education and health care are far from
being guaranteed in post-conflict situations. Even
though there has been enormous progress in the United
Nations mechanisms to address these situations - with
peacebuilding, with very important concepts such as
that of human security - I think that we still see a
combination of poor local government and dysfunction
in the actions of the international community, which
undermines the sustainability of returns and of
solutions in general.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would like to thank the representative of
Mexico for his comments. It is true that there is a
global crisis, whose elements include conflict, the
environment, the economy, energy and food. In that
context, the response too must be global. In that global
response, the whole issue of people in movement must,
in my opinion, be at the centre of the concerns of the
international community. I am in complete agreement
on that matter. It is not just a matter of the problems of
refugees or of forcibly displaced persons; what about
the rights of economic migrants? That also requires
attention.

I am speaking of a matter completely outside my
mandate, but as a citizen of the world. I would say that
in the near future the mobility of labour will make a
greater contribution to world development, to the
reduction of poverty than will other types of mobility. I
think the international community should have a
rational attitude toward migration in general.
Unfortunately, many leaders have irrational attitudes
that do not allow them to consider the positive aspects
of migration. To deal with the positive aspects of
migration, to guarantee movement of regular
migrations - much more important today in the
context of irregular migration - is a very important

contribution to the protection of refugees, who, in
mixed movements of people, are often victims of
situations in which human rights in general are difficult

to apply.

We have discussed mandates. I think the issue of
mandates is very clear, very important, the robustness
of mandates, their clarity. But I would say that just as
important as mandates are the practical material
conditions in which mandates can be effectively
carried out. Many times, it must be said, we are still far
from having the full capacity to implement the
mandates established by this Council in many of the
operations.

(spoke in English)

I am extremely sorry I cannot speak in Russian,
but I will try to address the intervention of the
representative of the Russian Federation in English.

I wish to say how much we cherish our
cooperation with the Government in relation to refugee
protection. Indeed, the responsibility attributed by the
1951 Convention is attributed to the Governments
themselves, and UNHCR has just a monitoring and
supplementary role when Governments have not the
capacity - namely, the economic capacity, in many
parts of the world - to provide protection and
assistance to the refugees. So indeed, cooperation with
Governments is very high on our agenda.

I would also underline what the representative
said about the need to support countries in the
developing world that have been receiving huge
numbers of refugees. He mentioned Syria; I would add
Jordan in the same context, and Iran and Pakistan. We
could go on - Uganda, Tanzania; many others around
the world share their meagre resources. Many of them
are not even signatories of the Convention but show a
meaningful solidarity in relation to refugees.

The need to cooperate with UNRWA was
mentioned. I can assure the representative that we are
actively cooperating now, supporting UNRWA's
activities in full respect for UNRWA's mandate. I think
it is also very important from the point of View of
UNHCR not to create confusion, which would not help
solve the problem. With full respect for UNRWA's
mandate, I strongly appeal to the international

community to give UNRWA all it requires in the
extremely difficult circumstances in which it currently
operates, with enormous courage on the part of its
staff.

Again, I wish to underline what I said about the
clear distinction we make in relation to our refugee
mandate and our actions with regard to internal
displacement and the civilian character of asylum, and
the need to preserve the integrity of asylum by
preserving its civilian nature.

I would also like to thank the ambassador of
Croatia. In this year's edition of our protection
challenges dialogues, we had an extremely constructive
contribution by the high-level Croatian delegation -
two Vice Prime Ministers and the Minister of Justice,
very strongly committed to engage in dialogue in order
to find a durable solution to end situations that, we
believe, no longer have a justification. Sometimes
history goes ahead and some people are left behind,
and it is time to bring the people back into history. I
can only underline the importance of Croatia's
contributions for that purpose.

I wish to express my deep gratitude also to the
representative of China - and apologize also for not
being able to speak in Mandarin - and to say how
much we noticed his two comments, first on solutions
and the importance of different groups of solutions in
our action - I thank him for the recognition of our
role on that - and then on the very strong linkage
between conflict mediation and peacekeeping and
refugee protection and humanitarian action, and the
importance of dialogue between the Security Council
and humanitarian agencies in order for that to be fully
effective.

Once again I express my deep appreciation to the
ambassador of Uganda for his country's decision to
host the African Union summit on forced displacement.
That summit will, hopefully, approve 4 I think all the
conditions are now met for that - an AU convention
on internal displacement. I think that will be an
extremely important step. As I said in my intervention,
it will be the first legally binding international
instrument on internal displacement. As a matter of
fact, as the ambassador said, it represents an effective
translation of the responsibility to protect, at the
African level.

I believe that the debate on the responsibility to
protect has been a victim of the lack of trust in the
international community. There are different
understandings about how the responsibility to protect
can be implemented. One thing is clear. In the African
Union there is now an agenda, a clear commitment to a
strongly human-rights-minded approach to internal
displacement. I really hope that that will be an example
that will bear fruit in the international community and
will allow for a more effective approach by the
international community as a whole to the questions of
internal displacement. I also wish to underline the very
important comments on prevention.

Again, apologizing for not speaking Arabic, I
thank the ambassador of Libya for his intervention. We
have established very important cooperation with the
League of Arab States. In the very near future -
hopefully next month - the result will be the
publication of a common book on the roots of modern
refugee law in Arab tradition and Islamic law. As a
matter of fact, when one looks at the 1951 Convention
and its various aspects - non-refoulement, the civilian
character of asylum, the need to protect not only
refugees but families and to respect property -
everything can be found in the Holy Koran and the
Sunna and the Hadith of the Prophet. I think that
publication will be a very important instrument, not
only to strengthen refugee protection but also to pay
tribute to what is a very important tradition in regard to
recognition of refugee rights.

The ambassador mentioned the need to support
local populations and to avoid tension between local
and refugee populations. I think that is a key question.
The majority of refugees are in the South, in the
developing world, and local populations in many cases
share very scarce resources. Just look at eastern Chad.
Water resources are being shared by the Chadian
population with a number of refugees from Darfur,
who in many areas outnumber the Chadians
themselves. So very strong solidarity with local
populations is a key instrument to preserve asylum
space.

The ambassador also mentioned the need to
guarantee the sustainability of voluntary repatriation. I
can only repeat what I said in that regard. I would like
to mention again his appeal for full support for
UNRWA. I also want to say that when one looks at the
Gaza situation from the point of view of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees - there are
many other perspectives that are beyond my mandate,
but, from my perspective, what is more shocking is that

that population does not even have the right to flee. We
give protection and support to refugees who have fled
conflict in many areas, and we try to help them endure
their plight, and, one day, find a solution to their plight.
But in this conflict people do not even have the right to
flee, which, of course, makes the humanitarian
dimension of the situation even more tragic.

(spoke in French)

I would like once again to thank the President for
the invitation and also say that we have extensive
cooperation with France as a country of asylum. Last
year, France received the highest number of requests
for asylum in Europe, and France also provides great
supports to us in many of our activities throughout the
world in various areas.

The President mentioned the issue of long-term
refugees. In 2008, UNHCR's priority policy was
precisely the situation of long-term refugees, and we
hope that the next session of the Executive Committee
will be able to adopt the outcomes of the thinking and
dialogue that we had with the Member States,
non-governmental organizations and other actors in
December. But, certainly, the key issue is to find both
political and humanitarian solutions. Last year, we
helped 735,000 refugees return home - 735,000
helped by UNHCR worldwide. That is quite an
impressive number. We presented 100,000 requests for
resettlement prepared by UNHCR.

We note that in some States, and sometimes
States that have huge development challenges, local
integration is becoming acceptable. The most
remarkable example is Tanzania, which accepted the
naturalization of 170,000 Burundians from groups that
had fled Burundi in 1972. Of course, this means the
naturalization of their children and grandchildren, but
it shows that there is generosity from host countries,
which the international community must support,
because integrating such a high number of refugees
poses extremely complex development challenges.

I would also underscore what the President said
about the responsibility to protect. I hope that the
African example can be very significant in establishing
a climate of trust that will facilitate a useful debate on
that subject. I would like to underscore, too, all that the
President said about humanitarian access, the
humanitarian space, security for humanitarian action
and the protection of civilians in general.
I would also like to say sincerely that when I look
at the Security Council, I am a little envious of it.
Recently, I had a minor infection and tried to solve the
problem with aspirin, but aspirin did not clear it up. I
needed an antibiotic. The tragedy is that at UNHCR we
have only aspirin. The Council has the antibiotic.

