Mr. Amirbayov (Azerbaijan): I would like to
congratulate Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, on his assumption of his important tasks
and wish him every success in that responsible
position. I would also like to join previous speakers in
expressing our gratitude to the Bulgarian presidency of
the Security Council for convening this meeting on an
agenda item that is of particular interest to all Member
States.

Previous discussions of the problem, which
resulted in the adoption of the aide-memoire and the
consequent review of its implementation, have
underlined the importance of developing a
comprehensive approach to the protection of civilians.
One has to recognize that this set of principles has
made it easier for us to further explore the United
Nations capacity to safeguard civilians, who are the
primary victims of violence during armed conflict.

We agree with the observations made earlier by
several speakers that the primary concerns in situations
of armed conflict arise from our limited capacity to
ensure timely and immediate access and delivery of
humanitarian assistance to civilian populations; address
the emergency needs of refugees and internally
displaced persons, including women and children;
provide security for humanitarian personnel acting in
the field; and in general guarantee that parties to a
conflict comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. Regrettably, those
fundamental principles are not always respected in
situations of armed conflict. We are still witnessing the
fact that combatants in armed conflict often inflict
irreparable damage on civilians.

We concur with the comments made earlier that
we cannot wait for the resolution of armed conflicts in
order to protect civilians and that we must act rapidly
to prevent further violence. However, one also should
not forget that the settlement of an armed conflict is the
best option for ensuring that those who were targeted
with systematic violence will not be physically abused
again. Therefore, in our View, the issue of the
protection of civilians is multidimensional in nature
and must be considered in combination with all
possible interlinkages to the processes of prevention
and resolution of armed conflicts.

We believe that civilian populations in armed
conflicts would be much better protected if the Security
Council and its member States, displaying
determination and consistency, were to ensure the
appropriate reaction of the international community to
civilian emergencies created as the result of hostilities
and armed conflicts. It is with a certain degree of
disappointment that we sometimes witness a lack of
will on the part of the Council to ensure the
implementation of the resolutions it has adopted on the
settlement of some armed conflicts, as well as to deal
on a case-by-case basis with the reality of those
hostilities and their impact on civilian populations.

However, we are still optimistic and firmly
believe that the Security Council has a key role to play
in ensuring that civilians are duly protected and that the
implementation of its resolutions on the settlement of
certain armed conflicts, even if active combat activities
have not been registered in recent years, is undertaken
in a more vigorous and discernible manner. Here, I
cannot but fully endorse the view expressed earlier by
the Norwegian representative, who said that the notion
of forgotten conflicts is an insult to those who are
exposed to international neglect.

Another major preoccupation is linked to the
magnitude and forms of Violence committed against
civilian populations in situations of armed conflict. We
are concerned that such violent manifestations have
drastically increased in recent years, whereas women
and children constitute the most deliberately targeted
victims.

While fully understanding the fact that the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
rests with the Governments concerned, we have to
admit that, on territories which are outside the control
of legitimate authorities, the States concerned are not
the only ones that should be blamed for the impunity of
and failure to prosecute those responsible for crimes
against civilians committed on those territories.
Despite the fact that some armed conflicts have been
regionalized and even internationalized, we have to
admit that some contemporary armed conflicts involve
Member States that are keen to support illegally
functioning non-State actors on the territory of other
sovereign States, fuelling violence and hostilities on
ethnic, religious and national grounds.

In this regard, the anxiety and apprehension of
the affected country should be heard and duly
considered by the Council's members. The input of
those States that have been affected by armed conflicts,
but that, at the same time, are not members of the
Council, could contribute to identifying the elements
that are peculiar to that very country and might not be
noticed by the Council itself. Such an exchange of
experience would serve the interests of all sides
involved in shaping a better United Nations response
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

As a country subjected to the aggression of a
neighbouring State and concerned with the non-
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions related to that situation, Azerbaijan believes
that the revised version of the aide-memoire, which is
aimed at bringing the culture of protection into reality,
can prevail only if it takes due note of the lessons
learned from all the armed conflicts of which the
Security Council has been seized in its work.

