Mr. Mulet: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the status of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) between the National Congress Party
(NCP) and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM). In addition to introducing the report of the
2
Secretary-General of 20 October (S/2008/662), I will
provide an update on the most recent developments in
the peace process.

As the report speaks for itself, I will limit myself
to highlighting the key points. The first, and rather
significant, point is that no major ceasefire Violations
have occurred during the reporting period, and the
overall security situation remains relatively calm in
Southern Sudan and the transitional areas, including
Abyei. Overall, however, the status of CPA
implementation remains a mixed picture of slow but
continuing progress and a number of major outstanding
challenges.

The parties have a common interest in keeping
the CPA on track, as neither can afford to return to
armed conflict. They cooperate on a host of issues and
interact on a daily basis in government institutions and
security mechanisms. Nevertheless, they continue to
postpone and delay the implementation of the more
difficult aspects of the CPA.

In regard to making unity attractive as called for
under the CPA, the Council of States and the Southern
Sudan Legislative Assembly held their first-ever joint
session, in Juba, at which they affirmed the necessity
of supporting the CPA and achieving comprehensive
economic development for the entire country by
making use of the vast resources of the Sudan. They
also restated the significance of the popular
consultations that will precede the 2011 referendum as
well as of adhering to its final result.

The official launch of the Sudan People's
Initiative, in an effort to seek a political settlement for
Darfur, is a significant development that, if inclusive,
could go a long way in addressing the concerns of
Darfurians and could signal a new era in Sudanese
politics. The Initiative, which has now been renamed
the Sudan People's Forum (SPF), has formed seven
committees dealing with various issues, including
development and reconstruction, security and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), refugees and
voluntary returns, and is tasked with proposing means
and mechanisms for handling the conflict in Darfur and
other national issues. The SPF has received the final
reports of all seven committees, and the Forum's
Presidential Board should meet this week to discuss the
reports and prepare final recommendations by the
second week of November.
08-58804
Preparations for and the holding of free and fair
elections will be a major challenge. Despite the July
passage of the electoral law, other preparations have
made little progress. The nine-member National
Elections Commission (NEC) has still not been
formed; nor has the Political Parties Affairs Council,
which is required for the registration of political
parties.

However, there have been some positive
developments. The Joint SPLM/NCP High-Level
Political Committee has recently discussed the
submission of six laws in the National Assembly for
adoption at its current session, including the press and
media law, the referendum act and the national security
act, three long-awaited pieces of legislation that are
Vital for the holding of elections. It is hoped that the
subcommittee will meet again on 15 November to
review comments before submitting the draft laws to
the High-level Committee for final endorsement.

During his visit to the Sudan in October, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations Alain
Le Roy met in Juba with officials of the Government of
Southern Sudan, who acknowledged that they would
need to agree with the National Congress Party on a
date for elections. For its part, the NCP has made clear
that it expects the elections to take place on time, that
is, before the July 2009 deadline. However, that target
date falls in the middle of the rainy season, during
which the preparation and holding of elections would
be nearly impossible. In addition to significant
logistical challenges that need to be addressed, massive
voter education is required, particularly in the south,
where illiteracy is high and where voters will be
casting up to 12 ballots.

The situation in Abyei has improved considerably
in recent months. Although implementation of the
Road Map for the Return of Internally Displaced
Persons and Implementation of the Abyei Protocol is
behind schedule, important progress has been made, in
particular on the security front. Troops from both sides
have essentially withdrawn from the mutually agreed
Road Map area, except from small pockets in the north
and south. The newly formed Joint Integrated Unit
(JIU) battalion has taken charge of security, with more
deployments to follow. In addition, a joint integrated
police unit is now patrolling and manning checkpoints
in Abyei town. However, in order to sustain progress,
the Government and the donor community must
support the development of the rule of law in Abyei,
08-58804
particularly the judicial system, and address security
and reconstruction needs.

Although the Abyei civilian administration has
been appointed, it has not yet been deployed.
Nevertheless, the relatively stable security situation in
the Road Map area has encouraged displaced civilians
to start returning to their homes. The United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) now enjoys full
freedom of movement within the Road Map area,
enabling it to monitor the situation and providing it
with the means to better predict and prevent conflict.

In another welcome development, on 28 October,
the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague
announced the appointment of Pierre-Marie Dupuy as
the Presiding Arbitrator of the Abyei Arbitration Panel,
which will decide on the boundaries of the area, as
called for by the Abyei Road Map Agreement. The
parties now have six weeks to present oral arguments
before the Panel and to submit written documentation
by 12 December. The Panel is expected to issue its
final decision by June 2009.

Demarcation of the 1 January 1956 border is a
key element of CPA implementation and a determining
factor for the division of oil wealth, the northern
boundary of Abyei and final redeployment. Following
a number of delays, it is still unclear when the Border
Commission report will be issued. In any event, it
would be important for the parties to start discussing
possible future arrangements on border-related
questions, regardless of the outcome of the referendum
in 2011.

Recently, there have been a number of reports by
external think tanks on the potential for conflict in
Southern Kordofan, another of the three transitional
areas straddling the border between the North and the
South. While agreeing that the situation remains
volatile, UNMIS also points to certain positive
developments, including the recent opening of areas
controlled by the Sudan People's Liberation Army that
were previously closed. Given the continued
precariousness of Southern Kordofan, the Mission is
monitoring the situation closely and developing a
conflict management strategy for all the transitional
areas, which are likely to be the most volatile during
the rest of the CPA interim period.

The request by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court for an arrest warrant against President
Omer Al-Bashir has become a focus of political life in
3
the Sudan. It could have serious security and other
implications for both UNMIS and the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and could
potentially derail the CPA process. Nevertheless,
UNMIS has continued to carry out its mandated tasks
and will ensure that security measures are in place in
the event of an indictment.

However, we are concerned about suggestions of
an uncontrolled reaction to an indictment by the
population against UNMIS. We are also concerned by
statements of Government officials of an intention to
expel United Nations staff members or Mission
components that are thought to have cooperated with
the International Criminal Court, even though they are
performing their authorized functions, as directed by
the Security Council. In that regard, we expect the
Government to abide by the status-of-forces agreement
and to ensure the safety, security and protection of
United Nations premises and staff. We will be counting
on the full support of the Council in that regard.

Since the previous report to the Council
(S/2008/485), there has been significant progress in
implementing the CPA, which has contributed to a
normalization of the situation in many areas of the
Sudan. As outlined in the current report, the general
humanitarian situation in Southern Sudan and the
transitional areas has seen very significant numbers of
IDPs returning to their homes, and the focus is shifting
to recovery and development. At the same time,
however, there is an urgent need to focus on the issues
that will enable the parties to achieve the referendum
and ensure stability post-2011. That will require the
parties to cooperate and compromise. While they will
have to bear the brunt of the work, international
assistance will remain vital in numerous areas,
including in disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating
parties and assisting in confidence-building, mediation,
human rights and capacity-building.

