Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I
would like to welcome both Foreign Minister Hoxhaj
and Foreign Minister Jeremie back to the Council, and
thank them for sharing their perspectives with us.

I would like to make four main points today.
First, the United States welcomes the peaceful
participation by dual nationals in Serbian presidential
and parliamentary elections in Kosovo on 6 May. We
look forward to an equally incident-free second round
on 20 May. Kosovo's and Serbia's coordination with
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), which allowed dual nationals to
exercise their right to vote without infringing on
Kosovo's sovereignty, demonstrated how both
countries can effectively work with the international
community to overcome political differences.

Going forward, this successful cooperation
should serve as a model for future peaceful elections
and promote the development of democratic
institutions in the greater region. We are hopeful that
both Governments will use this practical approach to
discuss ongoing problems in northern Kosovo over the
coming months. We also welcome the fact that Serbian
authorities dismissed as illegitimate local elections in
northern Kosovo.

Secondly, we echo the Secretary-General's hope
for a "normalization of relations" between Pristina and
Belgrade. It is time for this long-standing problem to
end. The United States continues to reject any action
that would undermine Kosovo's independence,
sovereignty or territorial integrity. The Government of
Serbia's ongoing support for illegal parallel structures
and Serbian security forces in northern Kosovo
remains a barrier to progress. We call on Belgrade to
remove its security forces from Kosovo immediately,
and we call for the implementation of all agreements
that the parties have reached thus far in the course of
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU).

We express concern over the difficulties
encountered in implementing the EU regional
representation and cooperation agreement, and hope
that both Governments will use this opportunity to
participate fully in regional forums. We congratulate
Serbia on its selection as an EU candidate nation, and
Kosovo on the feasibility study under way for an EU
stabilization and association agreement. Both nations
are making good progress on the road to European
integration.

Thirdly, we note that, unfortunately, freedom of
movement within Kosovo remains hampered. While we
welcome the news that gates l and 31 reopened during
the reporting period, we also note that the EU Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) must continue to
transport Kosovo Police and customs officers by air to
those gates, only because northern Kosovo Serbs
continue to deny EULEX full and unconditional
freedom of movement. The Kosovo Force (KFOR) has
also been denied full freedom of movement. We look to
Serbia to cooperate with KFOR and EULEX to restore
complete freedom of movement for all people and to
support KFOR efforts to restore and maintain a safe
and secure environment. All parties looking to promote
law and order along the border must provide full,
unhindered support.

Finally, the United States takes seriously all
allegations of serious crimes committed in the region,
including in connection with the 1999 conflict. We
welcome Albania's cooperation with the ongoing
EULEX investigation into these allegations, as
underscored by the Albanian Parliament's adoption of
legislation in this regard last week. We again underline
our full support for the work of EULEX and the
progress made by the Special Investigative Task Force,
under the leadership of Mr. Clint Williamson. Let me
also say that any attempts to politicize the investigation
or duplicate its efforts do a disservice to the alleged
victims and their families, and risk calling into
question the impartiality of any decisions reached.

The United States stands with the international
community in our commitment to long-term peace and
stability for Kosovo and for the entire Balkan region.
Kosovo's progress towards developing a plan to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security is but one example of how seriously
Kosovo is taking its obligations as a sovereign State
and responsible member of the international
community.

The OSCE facilitation of voting in the 6 May
Serbian presidential and parliamentary elections and
the upcoming second round of presidential elections in
Kosovo on 20 May is yet another example of how
international multilateral institutions are effectively
promoting peace, stability and reconciliation in the
region. We look forward to seeing both Serbia and
Kosovo continue on their paths towards full
cooperation and European and Euro-Atlantic
integration.

