Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Recently, the overall situation in the Horn of Africa
has remained stable. Meanwhile, Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist organizations are still rampant, bringing
challenges to peace and development in the region.
China has been closely following the situation in
the Horn of Africa. We appreciate the contributions by
the African Union and the countries in the region in
combating Al-Shabaab. We call upon the international
community to continue to assist Somalia in its
nation-building efforts and support the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Somali National Security
Forces in their efforts so as to achieve peace and
stability in the Horn of Africa as early as possible.

The countries of the Horn of Africa live in close
proximity to each other and form a community with a
shared future, interconnected interests and a common
destiny. Therefore, maintaining regional peace and
stability is in the fundamental interest of all the
countries of the region. China sincerely hopes that the
countries of the region will move forward towards the
overall peace and stability in Horn of Africa in the
fundamental interests of the peoples in the region,
reinforce good-neighbourly relationships, strengthen
solidarity and cooperation, and settle their differences
through dialogue and consultation, all of which is in
the fundamental interest of the countries in the region.

It has been the consistent View of China that
sanctions are a means rather than an end in and
of themselves. Sanctions should be conducive to
cooperation among the countries in settling their
differences and should be adjusted in the light of
the situation on the ground. Council members have
differing views on resolution 2385 (2017), which we
just adopted, and the text still has room for further
improvement. In View of the foregoing, and on the
basis of China's consistent position on sanctions, China
abstained in the voting.

China hopes that the countries concerned will
continue to follow the principles of being friendly to
their neighbours, paying attention to the legitimate
concerns of neighbouring countries, and taking
effective measures to improve their relationships
with neighbouring countries so as to achieve common
security, mutual benefit and win-win cooperation,
China will continue to play a constructive role in
achieving regional peace, stability and development in
the Horn of Africa.

