Ms. Sapag Munoz de la Pena (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We are always proud to see a woman presiding
over the Security Council.

We are grateful to Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, and the
delegation of France for convening today's open debate
in the framework of the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles, which Chile supports. We appreciates the
statements delivered by the briefers, as well as Sweden's
work as Chair of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which has guided its effectiveness and
direction on the ground.

Chile aligns itself with statements delivered
respectively by the representative of Canada, on
behalf of Group of Friends on Children and Armed
Conflict, and the representative of Panama, on behalf
of the Human Security Network. Today, we will
therefore refer to three priority areas: prevention and
its instruments, reporting, and capacities on the ground
and their resources.

We express our sorrow over the plight of Victims
and condemn violations committed against boys
and girls in situations of armed conflict. We call on
all parties, the Security Council and States to adopt
measures to prevent such violations, while respecting
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, which are at the core of the preventive efforts
driven by the Secretary-General. In that regard, we urge
States to ratify the Option Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of
Children in Armed Conflict. We also urge States to
support the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
and the Safe Schools Declaration, which has been
mentioned by many speakers. Similarly, Chile supports
the Vancouver Principles on peacekeeping and the
prevention of the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and urges others to join that legally non-binding
political commitment, which will complement the Paris
Principles through practical measures that contribute
to the implementation on the ground of resolution 1612
(2005) and subsequent resolutions.

Yesterday, along with Canada and Uganda, we
attended a sideline event on the Principles, organized
by the Rome'o Dallaire Foundation, and were honoured
by the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba. We reiterate the importance of
combatting impunity and of prosecuting and punishing
the perpetrators of heinous crimes carried out against
children. Where there is no such capacity or availablity,
the International Criminal Court must provide justice
for those crimes, in line with the Rome Statute.

We particularly underscore the recommendations
outlined in the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821). We welcome the signing of new action
plans, which are the most effective mechanisms of
consensus to ensure the cessation of severe Violations
and prevent their recurrence, over any other practical
measures implemented by parties to armed conflict.

With regard to the modification of the report that
divides the list into two sections - one with parties
to armed conflicts that have implemented measures to
improve the protection of children and another with
parties that have not done so - the results of their
implementation should be assessed in the next report
of the Secretary-General. Action plans should remain
the primary measure for removing parties from the
list. That will ensure transparency and equal treatment
with respect to all perpetrators. We stress the value of
action plans.

In terms of timeliness, we support the publication
of reports in May of each year in a way that effectively
contributes to action. It is essential that the relevant
Office has the necessary personnel to do so. In that
context, we reiterate our support for Ms. Gamba's
Office, and call for the necessary human resources
to be made available in order to complete that task
of documentation.

Another matter of concern is capacity on the
ground. We urge the Council to guarantee the
deployment of staff specifically dedicated to child
protection in peacekeeping operations and political
missions and to ensure that associated budgets serving
the best interests of the child are at the centre of
decision-making when it comes to establishing or
renewing mission mandates, without subjecting them
to short-term financial parameters.

Finally, Chile recognizes the irreplaceable role
of the Special Representative. We stress the need to
preserve its independence in pursuing its thematic
objectives in accordance with the resolutions of the
Security Council and the particular needs of children in
situations of conflict. We extend our recognition to the
staff of the United Nations and to civil society for the
determined work they do to protect children affected by
conflicts pursuant to the Council's agenda.

