Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): First I
wish to commend you, Mr. President, for holding this
open session today. Quite often when crises fall from the
front pages of the newspapers, the Council's attention can
get swayed to other crises, and I think, particularly with
respect to East Timor, that it is crucial that the
international community remain engaged. I also appreciate
the update from Assistant Secretary-General Annabi.

I think that overall one would have to say that great
progress has been made over the last year, starting with
the United Nations leadership in organizing the
consultation, the international community's mobilization
to ameliorate the circumstances following the disturbances
that occurred in the wake of the consultation, and the
swift move of both the multinational Force, led by the
Australians, and the United Nations leadership.

I think that overall the United Nations operations
and the multinational Force are going well and are
working quite well in a unique arrangement. I think one
must give due credit to the very stellar leadership of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello. He has displayed command and
control and laudatory leadership in what is a very difficult
situation on the ground, and I think he deserves the
applause and credit of this body.

There has been substantial progress on the ground,
due in large part to the leaders on the ground in East

 

Timor but also to the very direct engagement of the
international community. I would like to welcome in
particular Mr. Gusmao's meeting with the former pro-
integrationists as well as the militia's subsequent decision
to lay down its weapons. I think that these are both
significant developments that will help to stabilize the
situation on the ground.

The transition to the Blue Helmets will occur early
next year, as Mr. Annabi told us in his briefing, and I think
all indications are that that will go quite well. We are also
quite pleased with the results of the Tokyo pledging
conference. To date the United States has provided $34.9
million to the international humanitarian effort, and we
have also provided $30 million to the United Nations
appeal to assist refugees and displaced persons. The United
States also hopes to provide additional assistance in
development and capacity-building for the people of East
Timor, as well as assistance to small farmers.

It is important, I think, that the United States remain
an active partner with East T imor and with the international
community and other donors, and that it remain engaged in
the ongoing reconstruction efforts. That said, there are
concerns that we continue to have about the situation on the
ground. Certainly we are deeply troubled by the information
provided by Mr. Annabi about the failure to achieve an
increase in the return of the inhabitants of East Timor. We
certainly had hoped that that would move forward in a
more timely fashion, and this is something that the United
Nations and the international community must keep as a
priority. We also believe that it is time for the Government
of Indonesia to resettle from the camps those East Timorese
who opt to remain primarily in Indonesia.

We certainly look forward to reading the report of the
international commission of inquiry. I think it is important
to support that Commission as well as the Indonesian
commission of inquiry, and that their investigations bring
out the facts of what happened in the violence that took
place in East Timor.

The need for accurate information about conditions in
East Timor is crucial, as is complete and safe access by
international workers. I believe that it is important that the
facts come out in this case, not just on the conditions but
also with respect to any additional evidence of the killings
that have occurred in East Timor. I think that certainly we
would all want those responsible to be held accountable for
this.

Lastly, I think the international community has made
an enormous investment in East Timor, and with
continued leadership and international engagement, the
people of East Timor will be assured of a secure, peaceful
and prosperous future.

