Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

At the outset, allow me to congratulate the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on its presidency of
the Security Council this month, as well as for preparing
the concept note (see S/2016/103, annex) for today's
deliberations on the theme "Respect for the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as a
key element for the maintenance of international peace
and security".

I speak today as Chair of the second-largest
intergovernmental organization after the United
Nations. The member States of the OIC are bound
by its Charter, the Preamble of which reaffirms the
commitment of its member States to the Charter of
the United Nations and stresses their determination
to contribute to international peace and security,
understanding and dialogue among civilizations,
cultures and religions and to promote and encourage
friendly relations and good neighbourliness, mutual
respect and cooperation. All of those principles are
in harmony with those enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Today's topic of discussion is
therefore of significance to the member States of the
OIC, as it forms a core pillar of the obligations of their
membership and work within our organization.

The Charter of the United Nations lays a framework
for modern international relations that, if applied and
adhered to, will no doubt lead to the ultimate goal ofthe
United Nations and of the Security Council, namely,
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Sovereignty, the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means, refraining from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State and non-interference in the domestic affairs of
other States are all lofty principles enshrined in the
Charters of both the United Nations and the OIC.

However, we have witnessed over the years - and
even now as we speak - failures to respect and adhere
to those purposes and principles, which have led to
the conflicts and human suffering that the world is
witnessing today. We can point to the Council's recent

record in addressing the many issues facing us, such as
the question of Palestine, as evidence of the paralysis
in the Council. I cannot but mention the continuing
plight of the Palestinian people and condemn the
illegal policies and practices of Israel, the occupying
Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. The member States of the OIC call for
urgent measures, particularly by the Security Council,
aimed at bringing an end, without delay, to the Israeli
occupation, and at achieving a peaceful settlement that
will guarantee the enjoyment by the Palestinian people
of their inalienable rights.

The most notable evidence of the Council's paralysis
is the continuing crisis in Syrian. In that regard, we
are appalled by the humanitarian situation in Syria
and the great suffering there. We call on all parties to
implement the relevant United Nations resolutions, in
particular resolution 2254 (2015), which call for safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to those in need.
We stress the need for a political solution to the crisis.

That leads me to turn to a matter of importance to
the OIC: the encouragement of regional and subregional
organizations to take an active role in the settlement of
conflicts, which was, rightly, mentioned in the concept
note prepared by the presidency, in line with what is
stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations. The
security challenges that we face today are far more
complex, multifaceted and unconventional than ever
before. No longer are security challenges restricted
within borders; rather, they have become transnational.
No longer can we say that a security threat or challenge
on the other side of the world will not reach us or that
we are immune to it. No longer can we say that we are
protected from such threats by geography, topography,
oceans and distance. Those days are all but gone.

As our world has become more interconnected and
interdependent, so too have the challenges we face,
thus requiring us to enhance our collective efforts
to tackle global threats. However, it is not enough to
tackle security challenges on a country-to-country
level, they must also be tackled at the level of regional
and subregional organizations. Such organizations
can coordinate and cooperate in a concerted effort to
ensure the collective peace and security of our peoples.
The OIC would like to underline a fundamental aspect
of the Charter of the United Nations that ought to be
utilized in a more effective manner, namely, the resort
to regional agencies or arrangements in order to settle
disputes, as stipulated in Chapter VIII, on regional
arrangements, and Article 33 of the Charter.

The OIC is an important partner of the United
Nations in peace, security and the fostering of a culture
of peace at the global level. The OIC stands ready to
make meaningful contributions, and reiterates its
wish to cooperate with the United Nations in conflict
prevention and resolution, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, the promotion of good governance
at the national and international levels, combating
international terrorism, fighting extremism, countering
religious intolerance, including Islamophobia, the
promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, humanitarian assistance
and capacity-building.

Regional organizations, as stipulated in the
Charter, have a significant role to play in the
prevention, management and resolution of crises and
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is imperative and incumbent upon us - States and
regional organizations - to work more closely and more
collectively in order to contribute to the promotion of
the purposes and principles ofthe Charter of the United
Nations.

