Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing
my appreciation to Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation on the
ground and the work conducted by UNSMIL to address
the crisis. We admire his commitment to the complex
work of implementing the United Nations action plan
and encourage him to pursue his efforts. We wish him
every success in that endeavour and assure him that he
has my delegation's full support.

We also thank Ambassador Schulz, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his
briefing today.

Before I begin my statement proper, let me offer
our warm and full support to the people and the
Government of Libya in their current situation. As a
brotherly country, we hope that, with the help of the
African Union, the United Nations and the entire
international community, we will soon be able to find a
solution that restores peace to the Libyan people.

ThecrisisinLibyacontinuestoraiseserious concerns
in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea and throughout
the continent, as reiterated at the thirty-second summit
of the African Union, held in February. We appreciate
the fact that the situation in Libya remains unchanged
with respect to political instability and uncertainty, a
protracted fragile security and humanitarian situation,
cases of oil and weapons smuggling, along with the
movement of foreign fighters across porous borders.
The crisis has had serious consequences not only at
the national level but throughout the region. It has an
impact on other conflicts in Africa, which underscores
the urgent need for a stable and lasting political solution
in Libya that puts an end to the long transition process,
on the basis ofa political agreement that guarantees the
rule of law and unified State institutions.

After eight years of a conflict that will end only
through political solutions - various measures have
already been taken to resolve the situation although
the majority have been unsuccessful - perhaps it is
time to reflect and adopt a different approach. That is
why we welcome the initiative taken by African Union
Heads of State at the aforementioned thirty-second
summit, held in February. It is the African continent's
duty to take the lead and join forces with the United
Nations to reach a definitive solution to the crisis in
Libya through negotiations that will allow presidential
and legislative elections to be held at the end of this
year and an inclusive national conference for peace and
reconciliation to be held during the first half of July
this year.

In addition, we welcome the visit of Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ambassador Sma'i'l
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, whose outcome is expected to be significant
in achieving a firm agreement aimed at improving the
political situation in Libya. We also eagerly await the
holding of the national conference, under the auspices
of UNSMIL, which we hope will allow us to begin a
process that will end with reconciliation as the basis for
progress towards a free, peaceful, unified, stable and
prosperous Libya.

In conclusion, we remain concerned about
humanitarian and human rights issues. We hope that,
sooner rather than later, a solution can be found for the
current situation.

