My delegation warmly congratulates Estonia on its assumption of the presidency for the month of May and believes that it will be a successful tenure. We appreciate Estonia for organizing this discussion on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, as it is civilians who face the brunt of the ruthless actions of terrorist groups that have little respect for human life and human rights in the pursuit of their destructive agendas. As this organ is aware, the people of Sri Lanka experienced nearly three decades of brutal separatist terrorism. During that time, the ruthless terrorist organization in Sri Lanka, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), used civilians over and over again as pawns to pursue their bloody and destructive agenda of creating a separate State in the country. Civilians were used as human shields, were forcibly recruited as cadres and suicide bombers and as workers to construct defences for the LTTE and to perform a variety of other tasks during that treacherous period, and children were recruited as child soldiers. Food and medicine provided to civilians living in the terrorist-held areas were forcibly taken by the terrorists for their own survival. Civilians were forced to pay taxes from their hard-earned income into the coffers of that terrorist organization; even Sri Lankan Tamils living outside of Sri Lanka were subject to extortion. If they did not comply, their lives and those of their family members were at risk. No one was safe from their clutches, and religious clergy, innocent men, women and children and political leaders from all the ethnic communities in Sri Lanka - Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim and Burghers - were brutally massacred. That was the reality in Sri Lanka before 2009. Normal civilian life did not exist in the north or east of Sri Lanka, and people were not free to exercise their democratic franchise or have access to their basic rights. Civilian life was affected to a great extent in the other provinces of the country as well. With the noble aim of liberating those civilians from the grasps of the most ruthless terrorist outfit in the world - as designated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation - the Sri Lankan armed forces launched the country's largest hostage rescue operation. The massive humanitarian operations that were conducted during the final stages of eradicating terrorism from the country focused on ensuring the safety and security of all civilians and on their rescue from the bondage of terrorism. Sri Lanka, with the assistance of bilateral partners, multilateral agencies and international and local non-governmental organizations, began delivering on its responsibility of freeing its civilian population from that terrorist organization. During the humanitarian operation, the Sri Lankan armed forces adopted a number of measures to ensure the safety of civilians and to distinguish between military targets and civilian occupied areas. It is pertinent to reiterate that action by the Sri Lankan security forces during the conflict was against the LTTE, a group designated as a terrorist organization by 32 countries and whose designation has been continuously and consistently retained, and not aimed at any community in the country. With the end of the conflict, Sri Lanka faced new challenges that included the rehabilitation of former combatants, among which were child soldiers. Reuniting those children with their families after rehabilitation and addressing their educational needs were the utmost priority in the immediate post-conflict phase. The programme launched under the Commissioner of Probation and Child Care Services resulted in the rehabilitation and reintegration of all 594 former child soldiers, providing Sri Lanka with a success story in that respect to share with the world. All former child soldiers who did not possess a national identity card were issued with one and were supported in their education through the facilitation of school enrolment and the provision of school supplies and financial assistance, including scholarships. It is noteworthy that special attention was paid to those whose education had been disrupted owing to conscription by the terrorist organization and who wished to complete their formal education. As a result, the rehabilitation programme enabled a number of former child soldiers to participate in the national examinations. Eleven former child soldiers took up the university entrance examination, with four being successful, either during or after their rehabilitation programme. Three were able to receive a university education. Many others have taken part in vocational training programmes. Thus, many of the former child soldiers are now employed as account clerks, computer instructors, mechanics, carpenters, farmers, fishermen and employees in the garment manufacturing industry. In the above context, when every effort was being made by the Sri Lankan Government to protect its civilians from the terrorist organization and the consequences of its brutal activities, it is indeed tragic that certain segments of the international community, including former United Nations officials, sympathized with the ideologies and actions of that organization. It is evident that even today, some of them continue to regret the downfall of the ruthless terrorist organization and fail to acknowledge the torment and suffering of the helpless civilians both in Sri Lanka and abroad. That was reflected recently when a former high-level United Nations official was seen speaking at an event organized by the rump of the LTTE - an internationally banned outfit. Such circumstances should compel the United Nations to thoroughly screen the credentials of those working for it. It is now clear that the former high- level official was propagating the views of a ruthless terrorist organization, while carrying out her functions at the United Nations main human rights body. She has let down all the civilians who were held hostage by the terrorist group and has only sought to use this organ to pursue personal agendas, thereby calling into question the work carried out during her term of office. Such actions should not be allowed to continue within this organ, where the personal agendas of a few allow for sovereign States and their sovereign decisions to be vilified and discredited. Sri Lanka remains committed to finding innovative and pragmatic solutions driven by the domestic context to protect the country's national interest, guided by the provisions of the Constitution and the will of the citizens expressed through democratic means.
