Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Mr. President, the
Pakistan delegation warmly felicitates the delegation of
Nigeria, for ably steering the work of the Security
Council this month and for convening this important
debate. We are happy to see the Foreign Minister of
Nigeria presiding today. Your participation, Sir, in
today's debate is propitious for realigning our
collective focus on this important subject. The
presidential statement adopted today (S/PRST/2011/ 19)
has flagged relevant issues.

Before proceeding, I would like to align Pakistan
with the statement made on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the representative of Egypt.

Security sector reform (SSR) is critical in laying
the foundation for durable peace and preventing
relapse into conflict. As a leading troop contributor,
Pakistan is cognizant of the criticality of establishing
an effective security sector for the successful and
timely withdrawal of all peacekeeping missions. A
viable security sector, enjoying the confidence of the
local population, is key to a sustainable transition from
peacekeeping to long-term peacebuilding, economic
recovery and development.

In this brief intervention, we will highlight four
points pertinent to further streamlining our collective
approach to SSR.

First, we acknowledge the important work done
in the United Nations since the Secretary-General's
report on the subject (S/2008/39) to evolve a rich
discourse on SSR and to build the requisite support
structures in Headquarters as well as in the field. In
this context, the United Nations Inter-Agency SSR
Support Unit, established in 2009, and the Secretary-
General's inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force have made positive contributions.

The role of SSR practitioners in Headquarters,
however, needs to be recalibrated to increase their
responsiveness to the field missions. For this, capacity-
building in the SSR Unit is as essential as utilizing
other structures in the United Nations and regional
organizations, with a view to building cohesion and
avoiding duplication.

Secondly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
are essential for implementing SSR, which forms part
of many current mandates.

Pakistani contingents in various United Nations
peacekeeping missions have supported activities
relating to security sector reform with distinction. An
ongoing example is our contingent in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia. Our troops will continue to
support security sector reform programmes. However,
it is important to underscore that security sector reform
cannot be left to military and police components alone.
Diverse fields, such as judicial reform, border
management, Customs and civil emergencies, warrant a
steady civilian contribution to security sector reform.
Those are areas where the Peacebuilding Commission,
and its various configurations, can play a role through
the financial resources catalysed by the Peacebuilding
Fund.

Most important, a regional organization plays a
central role in articulating a framework for multilateral
security sector reform efforts. I will take this
opportunity to highlight the very commendable role
played by the African Union in developing a security
sector reform policy framework for implementation.
The African Union's engagement with security sector
reform augurs well for the maintenance of peace and
security on the continent. For that, the efforts
undertaken by the African leadership must be
supported wholeheartedly by the United Nations. For
our part, Pakistan supports Africa in that very
important initiative.

Finally, our collective approach to security sector
reform must resonate with established international
principles, consistent with the United Nations Charter.
Security sector reform can be neither imposed nor seen
to be imposed on a reluctant host Government.
Successful and sustainable security sector reform rests
on the principle of national ownership. The inclusive
participation of the host authorities and capacity-
building on professional grounds are vital ingredients
for national ownership. The engagement of civil
society and key stakeholders, however nascent those
may be in a post-conflict zone, will help consolidate
the gains made in security sector reform programmes.

I will conclude by referring to the latest report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/65/ 19). I remind the Secretariat to continue its
briefings to Member States on developments relating to
security sector reform, particularly regarding the
support provided to field missions. We can all stand to
benefit from such briefings.

