The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

I thank the three briefers for their reports on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I, too, would
like to commend the work of Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi as Facilitator of the 2231 format.

Japan welcomes the fourth report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/1030), which provides concrete and
vital information concerning the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). The Secretariat is responding
ably to the Security Council's request to undertake
extensive data collection, analysis and reporting.
Members of the Council should continue to support
the work of the Secretariat so that it can continue to
do its work to a high standard, while maintaining
independence, impartiality and expertise.

We agree with paragraphs 4 and 5 of the report
of the Secretary-General, which, respectively, call
on participants in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and on all Member States to support
the implementation of the resolution. In that regard,
we positively note the recent statement by Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), that the nuclear-related
commitments undertaken by Iran under the JCPOA are
being implemented, and underline that Iran is subject
to the world's most robust nuclear verification regime
to ensure that that continues. Japan is committed to
working closely with the IAEA, the Council and the
signatories to the JCPOA to enable the most effective
implementation possible of resolution 2231 (2015).

Japan is concerned about some alleged violations
of the arms embargo and the travel ban provisions,
referred to in more depth in the report of the Secretary-
General. Ballistic missile-related transfers or activities
are subject to further analysis by the Secretariat, and
Japan awaits those results. Nevertheless, we can say
that the positive outcome of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) will be shared by the Middle East and the
international community as a whole only when they are
fully and robustly implemented. Japan strongly calls on
all Member States, including Iran, to fully implement
resolution 2231 (2015).

Japan has repeatedly underscored the importance
of the close coordination between the 2231 format and
other subsidiary organs of the Security Council, such
as the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), concerning Yemen, and the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009),
concerning Somalia and Eritrea. The most recent report
of the Secretary-General calls for a joint meeting of
2140 Committee and the Council in the 2231 format so
that Council members can receive respective findings
simultaneously. As Chair of the 2140 Committee, Japan
fully supports that idea.

Japan hopes that the incoming Facilitator and
the Secretariat will continue outreach activities
such as those that Italy has undertaken this year. For
non-members of the Council, the information and
updates provided by the Facilitator and the Secretariat
through outreach meetings are extremely useful. This
issue goes beyond the interests of only the signatories
to the JCPOA and the Council. It is an issue that all
Member States should strive to see fully implemented.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

