Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Ithank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We commend the United Nations
and all other actors for their efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

Today, out of the nearly 20 million people living
in Syria, up to 12 million still require humanitarian
assistance. The north-west and north-east of the country
remain fragile. The conditions in the refugee camps in
Rukban are worrisome. The humanitarian situation,
particularly grave now that it is winter, faces a risk of
further deterioration. As large numbers of displaced
persons have returned home to Syria, repairing and
rebuilding housing, the water supply, the electricity
system and other infrastructure, as well as removing
land mines and other explosive remnants of war, have
become a pressing priority.

At the same time, as the overall situation in Syria,
particularly the security situation, continues to stabilize,
a more favourable environment exists for improving
the humanitarian situation on the ground. United
Nations agencies and other actors will require security
guarantees to continue assessing the humanitarian
situation on the ground, deliver humanitarian supplies
and carry out other activities.

The Syrian parties should proceed by taking into
account the future of the country and the well-being of
their people, continue to abide by Council resolutions,
implement the previously reached agreements,
safeguard the increasingly improving security situation
and create conditions for further alleviating the
humanitarian situation. The international community
should further increase funding and material assistance
to the Syrian people. In the light ofchanges in the severity
of humanitarian needs, humanitarian aid operations
should be dynamically adapted and improved.

It is imperative to observe the United Nations
guiding principles on humanitarian relief and the
relevant provisions of international law, as well as to
ensure that the people in need of humanitarian relief
across all areas in Syria have timely access to it.
Operations in that respect should be placed under the
oversight of the United Nations throughout the process,
with greater transparency and due attention accorded
to stronger coordination with the Syrian Government.
Support for Syrian refugees and their host countries
should be scaled up to facilitate the return of refugees
and the reconstruction of infrastructure.

It has been China's consistent position that political
negotiations are the only way to resolve the Syrian
issue. The fundamental easing of the humanitarian
situation on the ground will require further progress
in the establishment of a serious political process.
The international community should take advantage
of the current window of opportunity, firmly support
the role of the United Nations as the primary mediator,
lend its support for the work of the newly appointed
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, respect Syria's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
push the Syrian parties to uphold the Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led principle, abide by resolution 2254 (2015)
and seek a solution through negotiations i one that
enjoys the consensus of all parties. Council members
should engage in thorough consultations and create
conditions conducive to a political settlement of the
Syrian issue.

