Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Madam President, I thank
you for organizing this important briefing as one of
the events for the twentieth commemoration of the
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.

Our briefers today have undoubtedly an extensive
array of experience on the topic of the prevention of and
fight against genocide. I welcome Ambassador Colin
Keating of New Zealand, a man who, as a President
of the Security Council in April 1994, witnessed a
lurid moment of weakness of this organ 20 years ago,
when he was calling for help for our people. I also
acknowledge the presence of Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, a man who has rallied the United Nations
system to learn from its failure in Rwanda in 1994 and
who has played an important role in the liberation and
promotion of our responsibility to protect. I thank both
gentlemen, or let me say dear friends, for their briefings
today.

I take the opportunity to thank all members of
the Council for adopting unanimously resolution 2150
(2014) on the prevention and fight against genocide on
the occasion of the commemoration of the twentieth
anniversary of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, during which Hutus and others were also
killed. I also particularly thank all States Members of
the United Nations that sponsored the resolution. It is
our hope that the resolution will serve as a wake-up
call and make a contribution, small as it may be, to
preventing and fighting against future genocides.
In April 1994, more than a million people were
slaughtered in Rwanda during the 100 days between
April and July 1994. That is 10,000 people every day for
the sole crime ofbeing born Tutsi. Others - Hutus, Twas
and foreign citizens - were also killed for opposing
the genocide and for carrying out their obligation to
protect their fellow humans. The systemic slaughter of
men, women and children was perpetrated in full view
of the international community. The genocide against
the Tutsi highlighted the extent to which methods of
prevention at the United Nations failed utterly. In
that regard, my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Louise
Mushikiwabo, at the launch of the commemoration of
the twentieth anniversary in Rwanda back in January,
raised a pertinent question that I believe the Security
Council should endeavour to respond to in the years
ahead. Her question was that today, if the international
community had at its disposal the information and
capacity to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe, as it did
in 1994, would it act differently?

In 1994, the issue was not a lack of information
about the true picture of what was happening in
Rwanda. It was not a lack of a legal characterization
of the crimes that were committed. It was not a lack of
budgets or funding. As Ambassador Keating wrote, it
was simply a lack of political will. A lack of political
will on the part of permanent members of the Council,
who held veto power; a lack of political will on the part
of the United Nations Secretariat, which deliberately
gave erroneous information in the Secretary-General's
reports that contradicted the true information coming
from the United Nations Force Commander; a lack
of political will on the part of the troop-contributing
countries that pulled out their troops, leaving those
who had run to them for protection at the mercy of
Interhamwe militias. As President Paul Kagame said
on 7 April, "genocide prevention demands historical
clarity of all of us".
It is therefore our duty to recall that genocide was
carried out in Rwanda owing to complete systemic
indifference between and during the tragedy. Twenty
years later, we should ask if the broader international
community, and the United Nations in particular, is
capable of being any better at preventing a repeat of
Rwanda in 1994 from happening elsewhere. On this
issue, President Kagame clearly stated, in the same
speech on 7 April, that

"[n]o country, in Africa or anywhere else, ever
needs to become another Rwanda. But if a people's
choices are not informed by historical clarity, the
danger is ever present".

The horrific scenes coming from the Central
African Republic, Syria and South Sudan will in
some cases convince many that the United Nations
is still struggling to match its normative principles
with realities on the ground, and that the prevention
of mass atrocities still has a long way to go. This was
evident in the fact that the genocide against the Tutsi
in Rwanda materialized in spite of the adoption four
decades earlier of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and despite the
inherent responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Since the tragedy that occurred in Rwanda, the
Organization has deployed efforts to prevent genocide
and mass atrocities by improving the capacity of the
United Nations system, mobilizing the political will
of key Member States and trying to learn lessons from
the failures of the recent past - without, however,
reaching their full potential. Those efforts range from
endorsement in 2005 at the World Summit of the concept
of the responsibility to protect; the enhancement of the
agenda on the protection of civilians through normative
frameworks; the creation of the Office of the Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide; and, in relation
to the responsibility to protect, the implementation
of the Rights Up Front action plan as a tool for the
United Nations to improve prevention by instituting a
due-diligence policy on human rights to help enforce
United Nations purposes and principles as set out in
the Charter.

With the work and jurisprudence of the United
Nations criminal tribunals, including the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and the special
mixed tribunal in Sierra Leone and other international
criminal mechanisms, the importance of accountability
for perpetrators has been highlighted. It was our hope
that the combination of all those efforts would result
in a robust and effective architecture. As the concept
note (S/2014/265, annex) puts it, the key question today
is whether such capacity is adequate, or if there are
areas that need sustained improvement. Without going
into detail, anyone in this Chamber would agree that
sustained improvement is required.

It is regrettable that some of the initiatives adopted
in good faith in the United Nations by Member States
and aimed at preventing and fighting genocide have
encountered various challenges in their implementation
and created controversies among States. Today, some
of the viable initiatives, such as the International
Criminal Court, are prone to political manipulation and
abuses, which in turn contradict the original intentions
in creating such mechanisms. Other initiatives are
still ill equipped and without sufficient capacity to
discharge their functions, which in the long run hinders
the translation of normative frameworks into practical
preventive tools that match the realities on the ground.
As a result, some of those efforts may not amount to
much, and the pledges of "never again" will sound just
as hollow today as they were after the genocide against
the Tutsi in Rwanda.

It is true that the severity of the challenges that
must be overcome for preventive action to be timely
and effective are immense. On any given day, not just at
the level of the United Nations but also within Member
States, policymakers are grappling with many pressing
tasks relating to crises unfolding somewhere in the
world. Focusing on a problem that has not yet surfaced
is clearly very difficult, but we believe that this is the
task that this Organization should have mastered by
now, over the nearly seven decades of its existence. It
requires immense effort and willpower to overcome the
many political, financial and operational obstacles.

We believe that more emphasis should be placed
on reducing the risk of genocide and mass atrocities in
order to reduce the need for crisis response. Investing
in the areas that address the root causes of conflicts,
such as improving the quality of democratic governance
and human rights, establishing strong institutions,
promoting economic performance, reducing poverty
and inequality, and ensuring national reconciliation
will, over time, lower that risk. We also believe that
more effort should be put into United Nations crisis
preparedness as opposed to crisis improvisation.
In that context, operational capacities should be
developed well ahead in order to manage commonly
recurring situations and to improve institutional
responsiveness. In other words, the United Nations
should have the capacity to deploy quickly rather than
mobilizing for that deployment when a crisis erupts.
That can be harnessed to regional and subregional
arrangements, most of which are in the process of
creating standby brigades. It is also very important
that the international community invest greatly in
strengthening the capacity of local and regional actors,
given their higher incentive to respond to conflicts and
crises in their proximity.

In that regard, we welcome the statement delivered
by the Secretary-General in Kigali on 7 April during
the twentieth commemmoration of the genocide against
the Tutsi, which we believe is a paradigm shift of the
Organization:

"1 have sent my own signal to United Nations
representatives around the world. My message to
them is simply this: when you see people at risk of
atrocity crimes, do not wait for instructions from
afar; speak up, even ifit may offend. Act. Our first
duty must always be to protect people - to protect
human beings in need and distress."

So let the entire United Nations system put in place the
infrastruture to implement such a shift in policy. It is a
priority.

Before I conclude, let me say that Rwanda is
grateful to the Security Council that resolution 2150
(2014) condemns without reservation any denial of the
genocide in Rwanda. We therefore reiterate our call
on all Member States to support the fight against the
denial of the genocide, which is a denial of the right to
memory, healing and reconciliation, and the obligation
to learn lessons from the past.

In conclusion, I would like to quote Ambassador
Maria Cristina Perceval of Argentina, who stated the
following at a meeting of Security Council members
with President Kagame, held on 7 October 2013 in
Kigali.

"When I hear you, Mr. President, I remember
the history of my country. I came here to see, to
learn and to understand, not to point fingers.
Genocide is not a slogan; it is in our body, and the
shadow of the past is the light of tomorrow."

Let us learn from that bitter past of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi in Rwanda in order to better prevent
and fight against future genocide and mass atrocities.
Again, a special thanks to all my colleagues on the
Security Council, who not only voted for the resolution
but also all of whom, exceptionally, co-sponsored it.

