Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to thank Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, for his
briefing on the Agreement reached in Pretoria on
6 April among the parties to the conflict in Cote
d'Ivoire.

We are gratified by the results of the mediation
carried out by President Mbeki of South Africa on
behalf of the African Union. In that regard, we believe
that the Pretoria Agreement demonstrates the
usefulness of cooperation among the Security Council,
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as the Economic Community of West African States in
addressing collective security problems and developing
effective peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies.

We would also like to thank the representative of
Nigeria for the message that he conveyed to us on
behalf of the African Union.

The Pretoria Agreement not only declares a
cessation of hostilities and an end to war, but also
commits the parties to begin the process of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
militias, to amend article 35 of the Constitution
concerning conditions for eligibility for the presidency,
to guarantee the security of Forces nouvelles members
of the Transitional Government and to carry out the
reforms necessary for the holding of the elections
scheduled for October 2005.

We believe that, once all of that has been
accomplished, the spiral of escalating violence that we
have recently witnessed will come to an end. In the
Pretoria Agreement, the parties reaffirmed their
commitment to comply with all relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement
and the Accra II and Accra III Agreements; that gives
us hope that on this occasion the parties will have the
genuine resolve to fulfil their commitments.

Thus, we believe that it is more urgent than ever
to provide all possible incentives for the parties to
fulfil their commitments under the Pretoria Agreement.
In that context, we believe that implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1572 (2004) continues to be a
relevant tool to that end. We also believe that, as the
representative of South Africa noted, the mandate of
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire should
be modified so that the mission can monitor the
elections and support the disarmament of the militias.
We urge donor countries to make funds available in the
near future to secure the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.

We face a critical juncture for the future of Cote
d'Ivoire and the entire region: the successful mediation
of President Mbeki has created the necessary
momentum for optimism about the peace process in
Cote d'Ivoire. In that context, Argentina once again
welcomes the worthy efforts of the African Union to
relaunch that process.

Finally, we believe that the citizens of Cote
d'Ivoire must now act responsibly to achieve peace and
carry out the process that will return them to the path
of development.

