Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to begin by extending its congratulations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency at a time
when the Council has been convened to consider an
issue of critical importance to the international
community.

This emergency meeting has been called to
address a rapidly deteriorating situation in the occupied
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. My delegation
cannot but express its profound concern at Israel's
aggression against unarmed Palestinian civilians,
resulting in scores of deaths and injuries. Such brutal
tactics justifiably deserve global condemnation, and we
therefore call upon Israel to immediately cease the
incessant violence and bloodshed. Tragically, it is the
women, children and elderly who bear the brunt of
excessive, lethal force. No longer can the international
community sit idly by while a defenceless people are
mercilessly attacked by military forces.

Ever since the peace process began in 1991, the
Palestinian people have been subjected to
procrastination, unkept promises and even outright
intransigence. The stalled peace process had already
heightened tension in the territories, as frustration and
bitterness began to replace hope and optimism,
particularly over the status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Thus
the blatant provocation by Mr. Ariel Sharon in visiting
Al-Haram Al-Sharif constituted a deliberate,
intentional act to incite violence and thereby cause the
loss of innocent life and material devastation.

Undeniably, there are some elements in Israel
intent on disrupting the peace process as they wilfully
disregard the ramifications of their actions. We were
even more appalled that, despite the efforts of the
Palestinian leaders to enter into a ceasefire agreement,
the violence continued unabated as the situation
worsened.

It is therefore incumbent upon the occupying
Power to exercise restraint and abide by its duties and
obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War. Every support should be extended to ensure the
implementation of those measures. The compelling
question here is the protection of civilians under
occupation. Only through the realization of such
protection can the situation return to some form of
normalcy while they await the end of foreign
occupation.

The fact that the Council has dealt with this
conflict for so long makes it incumbent upon it to
shoulder its responsibilities with regard to adopting a
draft resolution, and it should proceed forthwith to
implement the provisions of the resolution. For failure
on the part of the Council to act in light of the
increasing number of casualties would cast doubt on its
credibility, and indeed moral stature, as a body that can
take action, particularly when it has condemned
instances of a lesser magnitude.

The use of military might can never detract from
the historical and indisputable fact that Al-Haram Al-
Sharif is an integral part of the occupied Palestinian
territory, as reiterated in numerous General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. It therefore behoves
Israel to refrain in the future from using force, which
would only further complicate an already volatile
situation on the ground.

Sombre developments over the past few days
show us how fragile peace can be and how essential it
is to achieve a comprehensive peace, which should be
based on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the
principle of land for peace. Provocative acts and the
perpetration of brute force against a nation and its
people make it increasingly difficult to convince them
that Israel is truly committed to take the path towards
peace.

Far more is needed than mere rhetoric of words
without follow-up concrete action to implement peace
agreements already entered into, the lack of which can
have dire consequences for security in the occupied
territories, the region and beyond. At this critical
juncture, as the spectre of violence looms, there can be
no other alternative but for Israel to assume its solemn
obligations and pursue in all earnest the peace
negotiations.
The violent incidents that we have borne witness
to is reminiscent of past strife, and it would serve the
international community well to come to the realization
that the patience of a people will endure only for so
long. This is a time to strike out for real and bold peace
with the valiant Palestinians. It is therefore our fervent
hope that the ongoing talks in Paris and later in Cairo
will result in ending the conflict and lead to the
resumption of peace talks.

In order for this millennium to make a truly
auspicious beginning, we should make every effort for
the Palestinian people to regain their sovereign national
rights in an independent homeland of their own. Only
then can it be said that a just and comprehensive peace
has been attained in the Middle East.

