The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important
and timely debate. I also wish to commend you,
Madam, for inviting prominent and field-experienced
representatives from the world of journalism to the
Security Council today.

Freedom of expression is a fundamental human right
guaranteed in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. It constitutes an essential pillar of
any Vital society. It depends on and is nurtured by
independent and pluralistic media - the lifeblood of
democratic and informed discourse and debate.

In the past decade, more than 600 journalists have
been killed while exercising their critical role in service
to society. Just 10 days ago, Somali televisionjournalist
Liban Abdullah Farah was shot dead on his way home.
His murder drew widespread condemnation. Liban's
assassination is not an isolated case. Today's debate
is devoted to the protection of civilians with a special
focus on the protection ofjournalists in armed conflict.

But let us not forget thatjournalists also are at grave
risk in many non-conflict situations around the world.
In situations of armed conflict, however, these critical
representatives of the fourth estate are particularly
vulnerable. Last year in Syria, 41 journalists, including
those who use social media, were killed. In Iraq and
Afghanistan, 108 journalists have been killed since
2006. The majority of the victims are local journalists
and media staff. In many cases, murdered journalists
are covering corruption and other illegal activities. In
most cases, journalists receive threats prior to being
assassinated.

Attacks on journalists also take the forms of
abduction, hostage-taking, harassment, intimidation
and illegal arrest. Women journalists are increasingly
becoming victims of sexual harassment and rape.

Let us remember that every time a journalist is
killed by extremists, drug cartels or even Government
forces, there is one voice less to speak on behalf of the
victims of conflict, crime and human rights abuses.
Every journalist murdered or intimidated into silence is
one less observer of efforts to uphold rights and ensure
human dignity. The least we can do when a journalist
is murdered is to ensure that the death is investigated
swiftly and thatjustice is served. It is shocking indeed,
and unacceptable, that more than 90 per cent of the
assassinations ofjournalists go unpunished.

The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity was launched
to create a free and safe environment for the media in
conflict and non-conflict situations. It was approved
in April 2012 by the United Nations Chief Executives
Board for Coordination, with UNESCO in the lead.
The basic rationale is that protecting free media is a
prerequisite for freedom of expression and democracy.
It is also relevant to the pursuit ofpeace and security, as
well as development.

It should be noted that ensuring freedom of
expression and access to independent media and
information was highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General's High-Level Panel of Eminent
Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. These
values and principles are essential if we are to ensure the
rule of law and effective institutions. Well-functioning
and honest institutions are fundamental to development
and prosperity.

The first phase of the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists includes implementation in
selected countries, but let me emphasize that the need
is equally great in many other countries. The Plan of
Action is based on a multidimensional, multi-actor
approach. It relies on participation and support from
Governments, particularly through Ministries of
Information, as well as from local media, civil society
and academia. All United Nations entities are also
encouraged in the Plan of Action to submit information
that contributes towards greater safety for journalists
and media staff.

The Security Council, too, can play an important
role by reacting to and standing up against suppression
of media freedom wherever and whenever it occurs.
When j ournalists are killed, information about threats to
international peace and security is often buried. When
addressing situations on its agenda, the Council may
therefore wish to particularly consider the targeting of
journalists and other threats to freedom of expression.

Let me end by quoting the Secretary-General on
this year's World Press Freedom Day in May. He said,
"All journalists, across all media, need to be able to do
their jobs. When it is safe to speak, the whole world
benefits."

