Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month and to wish you every success. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/19) on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
I thank, as well, Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
for his briefing on the activities of UNSMIL and the
most recent developments in my country. I would
also like to congratulate Ambassador Juergen Schulz
on assuming the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, and to thank him for his briefing on
the Committee's activities.

The Libyan people hope that the first half of this
year will bring about positive developments leading to
achieving security in the country and fulfilling their
aspirations to establish a democratic, civil State based on
the rule of law. My country's Government hopes that the
efforts of Mr. Salame' will be successful in establishing
a unified framework based on the consensus of all
Libyans without exception by organizing an inclusive
national conference, which we hope will bring the
crisis in Libya to an end. At the same time, we stress
the need for all parties to respect the outcomes of the
conference, especially the prominent political parties in
Libya. We also stress the need to commit in writing to
implementing any agreement while referring all cases
of non-compliance to the Security Council.

We also hope that the Council will be able to put
an end to any negative foreign interference in Libya,
which has contributed to prolonging the Libyan
crisis, by influencing certain parties in the country,
thereby preventing Libyans from reaching the
necessary solutions.

Terrorist organizations operating in Libya are a
threat to the country and the world. On 25 December
2018, terrorists launched an attack on the Foreign
Ministry in Tripoli that resulted in a number of deaths,
injuries and the destruction of one of the buildings of
the Ministry. Those barbaric and cowardly terrorist
groups wreak havoc everywhere, regardless of
human losses, while flouting all human, religious and
moral values. In order to combat those groups, the
international community must support Libya, including
by providing intelligence support and providing Libyan
security agencies with the needed military equipment
to eliminate that scourge. Libyans have fended off
that scourge on numerous occasions and sacrificed
thousands of martyrs. The battles fought against
those terrorist organizations in the cities of Sirte,
Benghazi and other Libyan cities prove that Libyans,
despite their differences, agree on the need to combat
those organizations, which threaten everyone and are
completely rejected by Libyan society.

Security arrangements in Tripoli and across Libya
are urgently needed to ensure stability in the country.
Without those arrangements, we will not be able to
stabilize the work of State institutions and rid them ofthe
pressures exerted by armed groups. The armed groups
have acted in a way that prevented State institutions
from carrying out their tasks, as they have refused
to follow the orders of officials from the Ministry of
the Interior and other ministries. In that context, we
commend the efforts of UNSMIL and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to ensure the
implementation of the security arrangements, despite
the difficulties.

My country's delegation stresses the need to stand
firmly against any party that might try to block those
arrangements. The Security Council must also take all
the necessary measures to support the security agencies
in my country, including by easing the arms embargo
imposed pursuant to Security Council resolution
1970 (2011). That would allow Libyan security
institutions to acquire the necessary equipment to
address the challenges facing our country, including
the proliferation of crime, armed groups and terrorist
groups. We hope that the Council will stand firmly
against those countries that, illegally and in violation
of Security Council resolutions, are supplying weapons
to internal parties not affiliated with the Government
of National Accord. We warn that such actions will
exacerbate the situation in the country and undermine
the efforts of Libyans and the United Nations to ensure
stability in Libya.

The issue of migration and the reports issued by
certain United Nations bodies are source of concern
for my Government. The reports refer to violations
that migrants are subjected to on their way to Europe
wherein Libya is considered a country of transit and not
a country of destination. Those reports are often unfair
and accuse Libyans of slavery and xenophobia. Some
of those reports even misinterpret colloquial Libyan
terms. We believe that there is a widespread campaign
aimed at tarnishing the reputation of the Libyan people
rather than to protect human rights.

In that context, we do not deny that violations
were committed against migrants who illegally entered
Libyan territory. Such violations were committed by

outlawed armed groups affiliated with transnational
criminal groups that have taken advantage of a divided
Libya and State institutions in order to perpetrate
their crimes. However, we condemn and deny those
crimes. In addition, we reject statements made against
the Government of National Accord and the Libyan
judiciary accusing them of failing to prevent such
violations. The United Nations and the Council are well
aware of the circumstances under which the Libyan
State institutions work, and of Libya's tireless efforts
to ensure the resumption of State institutions in a
consensual manner so as to avoid further conflict and
settle disputes among Libyans.

We are also dismayed about the campaign
launched by certain reports against the Libyan coast
guard, which has greatly contributed to saving many
migrants, as the European Union can attest. We seek
to restructure the Libyan coast guard, while providing
it with the necessary equipment. That is why we have
submitted several requests to the Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1970 (2011) in order to acquire the necessary equipment
for the coast guard so as to allow it fully to assume
its responsibilities towards addressing a phenomenon
that we understand to be rooted in developmental
reasons in the countries of origin. But we must also
take into consideration their negative and destructive
effects on countries like Libya, especially in the current
circumstances that we are living.

We would like to recall that many of those who
entered Libya illegally have been involved in terrorist
and criminal activities on Libyan territory. Regrettably,
some parties in Libya have also used foreign fighters,
who have become mercenaries fighting for money and

committing acts of looting, vandalism and kidnapping,
while threatening stability in southern Libya as well as
throughout the country.

Pertaining to the issue of migration and the
statement made by the representative of Equatorial
Guinea with respect to providing international
protection for migrants, we made our position clear.
We have condemned the migration issue and reiterate
that it requires a completely different approach than
the current one. The issue ofillegal migrants is used as
a political tool and is being exploited by international
gangs in countries of origin, transit and destination.
The issue should therefore be addressed in coordination
with the Libyan Government.

In conclusion, my country's delegation stresses the
importance of Council unity to achieve the fundamental
objective entrusted to it by the Charter of the United
Nations, that is, to maintain international peace and
security. As the Council is aware, the Libyan crisis has
been an important item on its agenda since 2011. We
hope that the Council will step up efforts to reach the
necessary solutions to the crisis in Libya by adopting
practical and decisive initiatives, while taking into
consideration national ownership and State sovereignty
in Libya, as well as putting an end to the actions of
all who stand against stability in Libya and obstruct
the ambitions of its people towards achieving progress
and prosperity.

