The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council's commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

Because of the increasingly troubling situation
on the Korean peninsula, the United States convened
today's meeting of the Security Council. We must
address this issue in a comprehensive manner.

Over the past year and a half, the United States has
sought to engage the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in a sustained negotiating process intended to
bring lasting peace to all people ofthe Korean peninsula,
as well as safety and security to the surrounding region.
The process to achieve this vision, as President Trump
and Chairman Kim agreed to in Singapore, would
advance by replacing decades of acrimony with trust,
working towards genuine and lasting peace, achieving
the complete denuclearization of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and healing the lingering
wounds of war that date back nearly 70 years.

We have said many times before that we remain ready
to engage in this comprehensive process. We remain
ready to take actions in parallel and to simultaneously
take concrete steps toward this agreement. We are
prepared to be flexible in how we approach this manner
and we recognize the need for a balanced agreement
that addresses the concerns of all the parties. But we
cannot do this alone - North Korea must make this
difficult but bold decision to work with us.

However, we have seen deeply troubling
indications that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is headed in a different direction. The reason for
today's meeting, as we have discussed several times,
is that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has launched more than two dozen ballistic missiles
just this year. Those ballistic missile tests, no matter
their range, undermine regional security and stability
and are in clear violation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. These actions also risk closing the door
on this opportunity to find a better way for the future.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
threatened to take a new path in the coming weeks and
has used its public statements to hint at a resumption
of serious provocations. In practical terms, this would
mean that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
could launch space vehicles using long-range ballistic-
missile technology or that it could even test launch
intercontinental ballistic missiles, which are designed
to attack the continental United States with nuclear
weapons.

Let me be clear- the United States and the Security
Council have a goal, not a deadline. We have outlined
this goal in detail in a series of unanimously adopted
Security Council resolutions. We want to use this timely
briefing to make it crystal clear to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea that its continued ballistic-
missile testing is deeply counterproductive to the
shared objectives that President Trump and Chairman
Kim have discussed on two occasions. Missile and
nuclear testing will not bring the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea greater security. It will not bring
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea or the
region greater stability. It will not help the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea achieve the economic
opportunities it seeks; in fact, it will do the opposite,
complicating our ability to negotiated agreement that
would positively address the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea security and economic goals and
improve regional stability.

We hope that we do not find ourselves at an
inflection point in the near future. We trust that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea will turn away
from further hostility and threats and, instead, make a
bold decision to engage with all of us. If events prove
otherwise, we as the Security Council must all be
prepared to act accordingly.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the other Council members
who wish to make statements.

