The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra
Leone to participate in the consideration of the item
Without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Bangura
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I Wish
to extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Michael von der Schulenberg, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Von der Schulenberg to take a seat at
the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. John McNee, Chairperson of the Sierra
2
Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Canada.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. McNee to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/47l, containing the fifth report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Michael von der Schulenberg and His
Excellency Mr. John McNee. I now give the floor to
Mr. Von der Schulenberg.


