Mr. Augusto (Angola): First of all, we thank His
Excellency Mr. Murray McCully, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, for presiding over
this open debate. We welcome and congratulate the
New Zealand presidency of the Security Council for
convening this timely debate on the security challenges
facing small island developing States (SIDS) and for
putting such an important issue at the centre of the
international community's attention. We also thank
the Secretary-General and the high dignitaries from
Samoa, Jamaica and the Seychelles for their insightful
briefings.

Only recently due attention started being paid to the
dangers facing millions of people inhabiting this group
of nations, whose vulnerabilities have become more
dramatic in recent years with the visible consequences
of climate change and the exponential growth of
international criminality affecting them. Small island
developing States are diverse in essence, geographically
dispersed and climatically differentiated, and they
have far-reaching variations in their social, political,
cultural and ethnic matrix. However, they all share
serious environmental threats, aggravated by external
economic impacts, and are affected more frequently
and more intensely by natural disasters. Eventual
sea-level rise is the most alarming prospect. Against
such a bleak background, the international community
and SIDSs are ever more aware of the need to reverse
prevailing policies.

Countering the impact of climate change through
better environmental practices and achieving sustainable
economic and social development are the cornerstone
of policies to address huge challenges threatening the
livelihoods of those islands" populations. Vulnerabilities
endogenous to those States, such as limited territorial
and economic scales, high demographic growth and
the slow pace of economic growth and diversification,
and high levels of unemployment and environmental
degradations are factors conducive to the expansion
of criminal and other illegal activities that undermine
the development of licit economic life, destroy social
cohesion and threaten peace and security.

Transnational criminal networks have increasingly
targeted these small island States. Their geographic
isolation and weak security structures have attracted
organized criminal networks, making them easy prey
for all kinds of trafficking in drugs, weapons and
humans, for piracy and for the illicit exploitation of
natural resources, such as illegal fishing. The proceeds
of those practices are often used to fund terrorism
and are becoming an issue of international peace and
security.

The lack of economic opportunities in many SIDS,
the challenges of climate change and transnational
crime are serious issues to be tackled. Lasting solutions
to the problems afflicting this group of countries are
possible only with international assistance. Highly
dependent on coastal and maritime activities, SIDS face
the risk of total disruption of their economic activity
in the foreseeable future, due to floods affecting more
intensely the coastal areas and cities, the economic
infrastructures such as harbours, ports, fishing sites,
fishery industries, processing plants and the very
important touristic industry.

Overfishing has reached alarming proportions,
putting at risk the very survival of many maritime
species. That has an extreme negative impact on the
maritime ecosystems and the economic basis that
sustain the SIDS.

The loss of territory caused by sea-level rise poses
another significant threat to small island developing
States and to their sustainable development. Some of
them face real existential threats. The urgent need
arises to develop a dual-track strategy in dealing with
those challenges: to provide specific assistance in areas
related to climate change and disaster-risk reduction,
and to develop approaches to sustainable development
best suited to their realities, constraints and challenges.
Since sea and coastal activities are the drivers of SIDS
economic life, in order to maximize their development
potential, the approach should be based on sustained
economic growth that is environmentally concerned
and socially inclusive, and on productive investment in
strong, modern infrastructure, based upon comparative
advantages provided by maritime economic activities.
Human activity is exacerbating problems by
accelerating the pace of climate change and its
consequences. Desertification, loss of biodiversity and
food insecurity, among other problems, have reached
levels that must be urgently reversed. In connection
with the greenhouse effect and its impact on climate
change, the need arises to develop renewable sources
of energy with a view to protecting the environment
and the future of SIDS. Some of them are leading the
way in switching to renewable sources of energy. The
international community is expected to provide much-
needed assistance in technology transfers and financial
resources to help them continue on that path and to
guarantee a safer and more prosperous future.

The international community has begun to show
commitment on the issue. The Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, held in
Samoa in 2014, renewed the political commitment to
address the special needs and vulnerabilities of SIDS by
focusing on practical actions, identifying and addressing
new and emerging challenges and opportunities
for sustainable development of SIDS, particularly
through the strengthening of partnerships. The SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway, adopted
at that Conference, emphasized inclusive economic
growth, poverty eradication and the management of
natural resource as the basis for economic and social
development and the programme of action for further
sustainable development of those States.

It is our hope that the new international climate
change agreement, currently being negotiated for
adoption at the Paris Conference by the end of 2015,
will contribute to relieving some of the economic
burden of the SIDS by reducing global greenhouse gas
emissions and the impact of climate change.

