Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and
Ms. Imam for their briefings.

China has been closely following developments
in the Lake Chad basin and appreciates the firm
commitment shown and the unremitting efforts made by
the countries ofthe region in the fight against terrorism.
China welcomes the formation of the Multinational
Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and its positive progress in
the joint operations against terrorism.

At present, the Lake Chad basin region is plagued
by terrorist and Violent extremist activities and the
threats posed by transnational organized crimes,
including trafficking in arms, drugs and human beings,
and the security situation there remains precarious.
Meanwhile, the countries of the region face the grave
challenges posed by the humanitarian crisis, with
massive displacement of civilians in dire need of
humanitarian assistance, including food and medicine.
The United Nations and the international community
must closely follow developments in the Lake Chad
basin and jointly help the countries of the region to
respond to the current challenges.

First, effective measures must be taken to ease
the humanitarian crisis in the Lake Chad basin. The
countries of the region and subregion and their peoples
have hosted large numbers of internally displaced
persons, and the international community should lend
a helping hand. China has promptly responded to the
crisis through bilateral and multilateral channels,
providing emergency food assistance to the countries
of the region, including Nigeria and Chad. We call on
the international donors to honour their humanitarian
assistance commitments as soon as possible and to
continue to provide the countries of the region with
massive assistance in terms of improving food security
and medical care.

Secondly, support should be given to the countries
of the region in their efforts to fight terrorism. Counter-
terrorism in Africa is an important component of the
international counter-terrorism struggle and has made
a significant contribution thereto. The international
community should support African countries in seeking
African solutions to African problems, on the basis of
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the countries of the region, helping them to
enhance their counter-terrorism capacity and providing
them with assistance in the areas of funding, equipment
and technology training support so as to support the
MNJTF in carrying out effective operations.

Thirdly, we should take a longer-term perspective
on this problem and focus on providing assistance to
the countries of the region in upgrading their capacities
in the area of economic and social development.
The United Nations should scale up its contribution
to post-conflict reconstruction and economic
development and effectively improve living standards,
thereby eliminating the breeding ground for conflict
and terrorism.

We hope that the countries of the region will
strengthen their coordination with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Lake Chad Basin Commission and jointly respond
to the challenges.

The international community should better align
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development with the African Agenda 2063 so as to
achieve lasting peace and development as early as
possible in Africa.

China has maintained close political and economic
relations with the Lake Chad basin countries, actively
providing assistance in their economic and social
development. China will continue to pursue an Africa
policy based on sincerity, practicality, affinity, good
faith, justice and shared interests, fully implementing
all of the outcomes of the Johannesburg Summit of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation.

China stands ready to work with the international
community and the countries of the region to support
Central and West African countries in achieving
lasting peace and common prosperity and to make a
new contribution to peace and development in Africa.

