The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Oman.

It is nearly four years since the war erupted in the
former Yugoslavia and only recently have we witnessed
signs of peace in that region. Today, the Security Council
is meeting in order to reaffirm its commitment to the search
for an overall negotiated settlement of the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia, a settlement that will ensure the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the States there
within their internationally recognized borders, and to stress
the importance it attaches to their mutual recognition.

It is a special honour for Oman today to preside
over the work of the Security Council in order to support
this historic achievement of establishing peace in the
former Yugoslavia. Oman joins others in expressing its
support for the Basic Agreement on the region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium signed on
12 November 1995 in the Republic of Croatia between
the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the local
Serb representatives.

We cannot fail to place on record our appreciation
of the role of facilitators played by the United Nations,
the United States of America, the European Union and
the Russian Federation, which participated in this process
and contributed towards its success. We believe the scope
of this Agreement will not only affect the two parties
concerned - namely the Government of Croatia and the
local Serb population - but it will have a positive impact
on the region as a Whole.

Thus we call on all the parties in the former
Yugoslavia, particularly on those that are still rejecting
peace - a just and comprehensive peace - to do so.
Delay is not in favour of either side. Only through
peaceful dialogue and constructive negotiations can
aspirations be realized. The attacks on innocent civilians
and the policy of ethnic cleansing are an ill-fated policy
that leads nowhere.

With this Agreement, the two sides have proved
their true desire for a genuine peace to prevail in the
territory of Croatia and this desire is based on resolving
their outstanding differences through peaceful means, with
strict respect for the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia. We
look forward to seeing full cooperation from all
concerned in the implementation of this Agreement.

While we recognize this achievement, marked by the
signing of the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, we believe that
the Agreement is not an end in itself. Rather it should be
taken as a first step towards establishing peace and the
normalization of relations in that region and, therefore,
the implementation of this Agreement and the setting out
of confidence-building measures are of profound
importance to the maintenance of peace and prevention of
any resort to hostilities. We believe it is the responsibility
of both sides to work together in this regard towards that
end.

 

The resolution we have just adopted contains some
important provisions, the most important of which, in the
opinion of my country, is the reference to the importance
the Security Council attaches to mutual recognition between
all States in the area of the former Yugoslavia -
recognition that will ensure the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all the States within their internationally
recognized borders. Oman believes very much in the
importance of this step towards establishing confidence
between the States of the region - a confidence that was
shattered by years of hostilities and aggression.

We hope the parties concerned will fully understand
the firm stand of the Security Council on this issue and its
hope to see positive steps taken in this regard in the near
future.

Peace in the former Yugoslavia cannot be selective.
Rather it should be comprehensive in nature and scope.
Thus, in the days to come, our efforts should focus more
on tackling any problem that might arise from failure to
implement this Agreement or any of the other peace
agreements that have been signed in the last few days.

Today, there is a chance for peace, not only in the
Republic of Croatia, but in the whole area of the former
Yugoslavia. We believe the parties should avail
themselves of this opportunity to establish peace and
stability in their area.

I shall now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 9.20 pm.
