Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Today, the Security Council takes a critical step
forward with the adoption of this resolution
implementing the Brahimi Report's core
recommendations relating to the Council's work. This
reflects two months of hard work by the Council's
Working Group, under the extraordinary leadership and
determination of Ambassador Curtis Ward of Jamaica,
and we want to congratulate him and his colleagues.

One cannot overestimate the importance of
today's actions. Since 1948, there have been 53 United
Nations peacekeeping operations in nearly all corners
of the world. Thirty-five of those occurred in the past
decade; 15 are currently under way, including the "big
five and a half": Kosovo, Congo, Sierra Leone, East
Timor, Ethiopia/Eritrea and the doubling of the force in
South Lebanon. These are all major operations that did
not exist just 14 months ago. This year more than ever,
we have reaffirmed our commitment to peace and
security in Africa and have mandated three new
operations there.

There is no doubt that United Nations
peacekeeping remains at the core of this institution's
responsibility. Whether peacekeeping succeeds or fails
will be the ultimate standard by which the world will
judge the United Nations. That is because, for all of the
important things the United Nations system does
around the world - from the work of the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
Development Programme to the World Health
Organization - everyone looks to this Organization to
keep the peace.

Last September, at the Millennium Summit,
leader after leader reiterated the critical importance of
peacekeeping and, at our historical Security Council
Summit, we renewed our commitment to peacekeeping
and re-energized our resolve to making it work
efficiently and effectively. This Council demands a
great deal from its peacekeeping operations. We have
placed demands on the United Nations to conduct
complex, difficult and dangerous operations projected
to cost over $3 billion this year. Our ability to send a
strong political message today will be seen as the test
of whether our professed commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping and to the people who depend on
it is genuine and enduring.

We all know that the United Nations most
challenging and important operations face desperate
shortfalls in terms of troops, equipment and training;
and we all know, as the Brahimi Report so vividly
illustrated, that the capacity of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to plan effectively, to manage
and to backstop peacekeeping is severely inadequate.
Unless we move decisively, those who threaten
peacekeepers across the globe may draw the conclusion
that the United Nations lacks the will, cohesion and
even the capability to perform this basic function.
Unless we move decisively, peacekeeping - the core
function of the United Nations - will fail.

Ambassador Holbrooke has often noted that the
crisis between capacity and demand is a train wreck
waiting to happen. This is still true. There are two
strands to the peacekeeping reform effort that must be
addressed simultaneously: the way the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations works and the way we
finance peacekeeping operations.

On financing, we are pursuing important work in
the Fifth Committee and elsewhere to make the
peacekeeping scale fairer, up-to-date and equitable. We
are making progress, though slowly, but I am confident
that we will find a fair solution this year. The other
question is how to fix peacekeeping operations. The
Secretary-General's Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, led so ably by Ambassador Brahimi,
provides a practical blueprint of how to do that. The
report reminds us that United Nations peacekeeping,
perhaps more than any other United Nations function,
works only when all relevant actors join together with
common purpose. So it is just that simple. We must all
work together and we must all do our fair share.
Unless we all share the political will to make
peacekeeping succeed, no amount of structural changes
will make much difference.

The resolution before us sends a clear message
that the Security Council is ready to do its part. We
have taken many important decisions in this document,
all of which share a common thread - that saving
peacekeeping is a common responsibility, one that
depends on all of us working together. In particular,
today's resolution provides the roadmap for us to fulfil
our responsibility to produce clear, credible and
achievable mandates that reflect both the realities on
the ground and the availability of resources. The
Council is already implementing a pledge to improve
consultations with troop-contributing countries. This is
at the very heart of this roadmap and will be a key to
our success, as will our determination that our
mandates be based on frank, accurate and detailed
advice. Once we have decided to send peacekeepers on
a mission, this resolution underscores the need for
them to be able to act and react when necessary to
ensure that they carry out the mission's goals
successfully.

We have said time and again that rapid
deployment of a peacekeeping operation is essential,
and today we have given concrete meaning to this oft-
cited aspiration by calling upon all relevant parties to
strive to meet specific timelines and by welcoming the
Brahimi proposals on improving the United Nations
rapid deployment capacity, including through the
standby arrangements system.

Still, we must do more. The Secretary-General
realized this when he took the initiative to convene the
Brahimi Panel. Now he has shown real leadership and
determination by presenting a practical implementation
plan and a compelling case for an emergency resource
request to put Brahimi's recommendations into action.
We have an obligation to respond positively. At a
minimum, we should ensure that the resources the
United Nations needs - in particular to plan, support
and manage its vital military, civilian police and
operational functions for peacekeeping - are on-
stream by the end of the year.

There can be no doubt that the task before us is as
difficult as it is important. Progress is possible only if
we do more than make speeches. For people in areas of
conflict, it is often the difference between life and
death. The longer the United Nations fails to live up to
its potential and allows peacekeeping shortcomings to
go unfixed, the longer innocents will suffer and the
greater danger that controllable conflict will become
entrenched crisis, with even higher risks and costs to
the international community.

