Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for having convened this debate and for presiding over it
personally today. We also thank the Secretary-General
for updating us on the recent steps taken to improve the
Secretariat's capacity to deliver the Council's rule-of-
1aw mandates.

Strengthening the rule of law, as the Secretary-
General has reminded us this morning, is a critical pillar,
as we know, of both conflict prevention and effective
post-conflict peacebuilding that makes this, as he has
said, core business for the Council and for Council-
mandated peace operations. Successful rule-of-law
interventions can significantly reduce the likelihood of
conflict occurring or recurring. It is therefore essential
that the Council provide United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions with sufficient authority,
clarity and direction to carry out well-targeted and
achievable rule-of-law mandates. Their implementation
needs to be appropriately prioritized within a mission.
While the first priority must be the immediate
stabilization of a given security situation, planning for
the implementation of rule-of-law tasks needs to start
immediately.

We welcome the Secretary-General's advice
about the institutional changes within the United
Nations to address rule- of-law issues. The conferral
of strengthened responsibility on the senior United
Nations official in country, who will now be
responsible and accountable for guiding the rule-of-
law strategy and supporting its implementation, is an
important advance. We also welcome the designation
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
United Nations Development Programme as the joint
global focal point for the rule of law, which we trust
will result in improved coordination and coherence of
the United Nations rule-of-law efforts.

For all aspects of peacekeeping mandates and
special political missions, including the rule of law,
it is essential, as we know, to learn from both success
and failure. In developing and reviewing rule-of-
law mandates, the Council needs to be informed by
a clear understanding of what works and what does
not work. While we welcome the Secretary-General's
recent report on measuring the effectiveness of the
support provided by the United Nations system in
conflict and post-conflict situations in respect of the
rule of law (S/2013/341), it is clear from the report's
recommendations that there is still some way to go.
Qualitative assessments of the impact of the United
Nations interventions are required. It is not a simple
question of the number of police officers trained or
workshops held. We support the United Nations use of
the rule-of-law indicators in that regard.

At the national level, the rule of law is at the heart
of the social contract between the State and its citizens.
Ensuring that justice permeates society at every level
and that Governments are accountable, it underpins
stability and effective State protection and ensures
human rights are protected.

Supporting the development of police, corrections,
prosecutorial and judicial capacities that enable the
investigation and prosecution of crimes - and here
I am referring to national law and translating that
into international practice and prosecuted - is a
core mandate for many United Nations missions. A
recent positive development was the authorization of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to use all the necessary
means to support the efforts of the transitional
authorities in Mali to bring to justice those responsible
for serious international crimes, taking into account the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Council similarly encouraged the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to use its existing authority to
assist the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to hold accountable those responsible war
crimes and crimes against humanity in the country,
including through its ongoing cooperation with the ICC.

The Council should consider whether similar
mandates should be given to other peacekeeping
operations. Such an approach could be part of the
broader support from the Council to the International
Criminal Court. The Court is an essential partner for
the Council on rule-of-law matters, and the Council
needs to do more to support its work.

Finally, I shall make some comment on policing.
The police components ofUnited Nations peacekeeping
operations need closer attention. United Nations police
strengthen the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
situations, both where they provide interim policing
and through assistance to reform and rebuild national
police and other law enforcement agencies. Given
the breadth and complexity of policing roles, there
is further scope for the Council to provide greater
strategic direction in mandates to effectively guide
police components and mission management. At an
operational level, predeployment training on cultural
issues enables deployed police to better relate to their
host-nation counterparts. The United Nations Police
Division is doing important work on mission-specific
induction training. The recent pilot effort in the United
Nations Mission in Liberia sets a strong example.

I should say, as I approach the end of my statement,
that we hope that we will be able to successfully
finalize our negotiations to adopt a presidential text on
the rule of law. We have done so before, and we must
do so again.

Successfully strengthening the rule of law within a

country requires long-term engagement. It is important,
therefore, that from the very outset of planning the
rule-of-law component of a United Nations mission,
there also needs to be consideration of the transition
of rule-of-law functions from the United Nations peace
operation to the national authorities. Robust institutions
must stand on their own foundations - that will be the
true measure of our success.

