Mr. O'Brien: I would like to start by thanking
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his insightful
monthly briefings, which incorporate the humaninatiran
situation in a coordinated and comprehensive manner.

The humanitarian needs continue to be far too
high. Nearly every resident in the occupied Palestinian
territory is recognized as being affected by the
protection crisis. Poverty and unemployment have
driven more than a quarter of all households to food
insecurity. Half a million school children require
humanitarian assistance to access quality education.
And an estimated 1 million people are in need of
humanitarian, health and nutrition interventions.
Overall, nearly half of all Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territories - some 2.3 million out of a
total population of 4.8 million - are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.

In Gaza, humanitarian needs stem from nearly 10
years of closures and restrictions imposed by Israel
following the military takeover by Hamas, citing
security concerns, and exacerbated by successive
rounds of hostilities between Hamas and Israel,
internal Palestinian political divisions and Egypt's
near-complete closure of its border crossing with Gaza.
These events have left half of Gaza's households food-
insecure - twice the average rate across the occupied
Palestinian territories - with only sporadic access to
clean water and regular, reliable electricity.

Seventy per cent of the Gaza population has
running water - most of which is not drinkable - for
only a few hours every two to four days, while energy
deficits leave households with only six to eight hours
of power daily. This lack of reliable power places lives
at risk in medical facilities already struggling with a
lack of equipment, medicines and skilled staff, reduces
the operation of wastewater facilities and undermines
the key to breaking Gaza's aid dependency: revitalizing
its economy.

In all of this, Gaza's children have suffered the
most. A 10-year-old child today has already experienced
three rounds of conflict in her short life. Nearly 230,000
children continue to be in need of psychosocial support,
and an estimated 250,000 children require mine-risk
awareness owing to the prevalence of explosive
remnants of war. Israeli children along the Gaza border
have been impacted as well and continue to live in fear.

While there has been an increase in the absolute
number of exit permit approvals from Gaza since
2012, the acceptance rate for exit permits for medical
treatment has reached a seven-year low; of the 2,394
applications made in August, only 60 per cent are
approved, compared with some 76 per cent, which was
the monthly average in 2015.

Humanitarian organizations provide food
assistance to some 1 million people in Gaza each year,
while donor-funded emergency fuel, distributed by the
United Nations, is keeping critical water, sanitation and
health facilities going uninterrupted. I welcome Israel's
recent decision to sell an additional 10 million cubic
metres of water to Gaza, but we must work towards a
sustainable, long-term solution. It is critical that this
happen quickly.

The economic reality in Gaza is such that chronic
humanitarian needs persist. Gaza's gross domestic
product stands at approximately half that of the West
Bank, and its unemployment rate is double, at 42 per
cent and nearly 60 per cent for youth, one of the highest
in the world. Movement and access restrictions on
goods and people, albeit variable, not only literally bind
most people to an untenable reality in Gaza, but also
impede economic activity. More than 1,500 traders and
160 businesspeople in Gaza have lost travel permits in
recent months, reversing the trend of increased permit
approvals witnessed post-2014. Without the capacity to
develop the local economy, a sustainable solution to the
humanitarian needs in Gaza will not be possible.

Rebuilding local housing and infrastructure is
essential. International support and some relaxation of
import restrictions by the Israeli authorities, including
through the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism, have
resulted in notable progress in repairing damage to
houses, hospitals, schools and critical infrastructure, as
well as allowing the highest import levels to Gaza since
2007. However, some 60,000 people remain displaced
and have been reliant upon transitional shelter since
2014. Their living conditions raise a range of concerns,
including protection risks and gender-based Violence.
A continued lack of funding to rebuild more than
one third of completely destroyed houses leaves over
4,000 families without the prospect of a home in the
near future.

If humanitarian needs in Gaza are to decrease,
we need development activity and economic recovery.
We need tangible improvements to counter the rising
tide of hopelessness sweeping Gaza's youth. It also
stands to reason from our collective experiences that
left unaddressed, this hopelessness of youth will drive
more local insecurity and contribute to even more
radicalization and exported insecurity. As stated in the
Quartet report, the full lifting of the closures is crucial
to lasting progress in Gaza, in line with international
law and resolution 1860 (2009).

The operating environment for humanitarian action
in Gaza has also deteriorated. Access for humanitarian
staff in Gaza, for example, has become increasingly
problematic. The rate of permits denied to United
Nations national personnel based in Gaza rose from
3 per cent in January to 41 per cent in September.

Low-level hostilities between Israeli security
forces and Palestinian armed groups in Gaza persist,
and concerns remain that insufficient measures have
been taken to minimize civilian casualties; patently
that is the case when rockets are fired from Gaza into
urban settings within range across the border into
southern Israel. Chronic concerns remain over the lack
of accountability for alleged violations of international
law by all parties. The Israeli authorities have opened
31 criminal investigations, but only one indictment has
been issued, for a case of looting, out of more than 500
complaints relating to the conduct of hostilities during
the 2014 escalation. No meaningful investigations
have been announced by Palestinian authorities, and
Hamas still holds two Israeli citizens and two bodies of
soldiers. I call for their swift return.

Turning to the West Bank, the past year has been
the most deadly for Israelis and Palestinians since the
end of the second intifada. I continue to be alarmed
by Palestinian attacks on Israeli civilians and by the
numerous responses to such attacks or alleged attacks
by Israeli forces, many of which have raised allegations
about excessive use of force. Recent months have also
marked an increase in the use of live ammunition by
Israeli security forces, in particular against Palestinian
stone-throwers during confrontations. Prosecutions
in such cases are rare. In addition, the bodies of 18
Palestinians are still being withheld by the Israeli
authorities; I call on the Government of Israel to return
them without delay as well.

In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, this
year, the number of structures demolished was already
958 as of 13 October, 75 per cent higher than in all of
2015, with most demolished due to lack of permits.
Demolition of donor-funded humanitarian assistance
has also spiked, at 271, 150 per cent higher than last
year, and there have been more demolitions in occupied
East Jerusalem - 147 i than in any year since the
United Nations began systematically recording such
demolitions in 2008. Overall, 1,447 Palestinians have
been displaced, including 719 women and 690 children,
with another 5,919 affected, including 1,571 women and
1,763 children, owing to the demolition of livelihood
structures. Such demolitions violate international law
and must cease immediately; the Secretary-General has
called on the Government of Israel to revoke policies
and halt practices that may lead to the forcible transfer
of Bedouin and herder communities.

In February, I stood before the Council with a clear
message: to give this issue the attention it deserves. We
need collectively to reverse the core drivers of these
humanitarian needs. We must move towards decisive
action that will reduce humanitarian needs, secure
respect for international law and bring to Palestinians
and Israelis alike the hope and reality of a stable,
peaceful and prosperous future.

I take this opportunity to briefly update the Council
on the humanitarian situation in Iraq, in the context
of the military operation to recapture Mosul, which
commenced in the early hours of Monday morning. On
the third day of operations, reports indicate that military
activities remain concentrated in less-populated areas,
with no large-scale civilian displacement recorded at
this stage.

As hostilities intensify and progress towards

densely populated areas, I am extremely concerned for
the safety of up to 1.5 million people living in the city.
We believe that families in Mosul will be at great risk
during the operation of getting caught in cross-fire or
being directly targeted by snipers, as they forage for
food. We are concerned that civilians may be used
as human shields or forcibly expelled and become
trapped between front lines. The elderly, the disabled
and pregnant women may be unable to move to safety
without assistance, and, based on past evidence, the
so called Islamic State's practices caused the greatest
concern for protection issues.

Finally, nothing is more important than ensuring that
civilians are protected and have access to the assistance
to which they are entitled during the operation. As the
crisis unfolds, I call on all parties involved to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law. As humanitarians, even though we
wish to see the worst case averted, we are obliged to
plan for the worst. We anticipate a displacement wave
of approximately 200,000 people over the coming
weeks, with up to 1 million people displaced during
the course of the operation in a worse-case scenario.
Ofthese people, we anticipate that 700,000 will require
shelter and emergency assistance.

Thus far, shelter has been prepared for 60,000 people
in camps and emergency sites, and preparation for sites
for an additional 25,000 is accelerating. Emergency
supplies are being prepositioned close to displacement
sites. Mobile clinics and health and protection teams
are prepared. Food trucks are on standby. As the
winterization of displacement sites becomes a priority
and temperatures drop over the coming weeks, needs
are expected to rise. In short, as needs rise, so too must
the international response.

