Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his detailed briefing and to the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
evaluation.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned by
the development of the situation in Somalia,
particularly in the area of security and also in the
humanitarian sphere. Despite the efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ethiopian
troops and the Uganda contingent of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) supporting it, the
situation in the country remains extremely serious. We
welcome the appointment of Nur Hassan Hussein as
Prime Minister of Somalia. This is a very important
step. We now need to enhance the effectiveness of the
work of the Government so as to have effective
solutions to the cumulative complex problems facing
Somalia. Responsibility for overcoming the lengthy
crisis lies with the Somalis themselves. All parties,
including, of course, the Transitional Federal
Government, must take decisive steps for a speedy
normalization of the situation and to assist the
peacebuilding process and to strengthen State
institutions.

Real progress in ensuring a broad political
dialogue and the implementation of a comprehensive
process of national reconciliation will create conditions
for preventing a further slide of the country into a
humanitarian disaster. There is still a threat of the
conflict in Somalia growing into a regional one. Such a
scenario is likely to destabilize an already complex
situation in the Horn of Africa. In these conditions, we
feel it is extremely important to continue to observe
strictly the regime of the arms embargo against
Somalia. Neighbouring countries can and must play a
constructive role in assisting and promoting a
settlement, and above all, as regards normalization of
the situation in the area of security.

In such conditions, of course, maintaining the
status quo in the area of security in Somalia is
unacceptable, and here we agree absolutely with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
support the activities of AMISOM, and we are
convinced that a full deployment of the Mission will
greatly help to create conditions for effective progress
in the process of national reconciliation. We note the
plans for a further strengthening of AMISOM. that are
being worked on at this time, and we hope that they
will be implemented appropriately.

We also agree that it is essential to continue work
on the modalities and the preliminary planning for a
possible United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia. However, it is clear that, in the present
circumstances, the prospect of transforming AMISOM
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation still
depends directly on a substantial improvement in the
area of security and on achieving serious progress in a
political settlement.

We have taken note of the recommendation by the
Secretary-General, confirmed today by his Special
Representative, on sending a multinational force to
Somalia. This idea deserves careful work with the
involvement of all interested sides, including, of
course, Somalia.

