Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): We wish
to express our best wishes at the beginning of a month
that is very important to the Security Council regarding
international peace and security. We have full
confidence in you, Mr. President, and in your team.

France would like to associate itself in advance
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union by the Permanent Representative of
Denmark.

In my national capacity, I would like to begin by
expressing my warmest congratulations and our
gratitude, first, to Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, and
next, to all those who work with him in the British
Mission and to the Vice-Chairmen who support him.
Nor can I fail to mention the Committee's independent
experts. They have all done an absolutely remarkable
job.

A year has passed. Now, together, we assess the
road that we have travelled. Historic in many aspects,
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) remains
central in the determined efforts of the international
community to combat the scourge of terrorism. We owe
that success in large part to the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. Without that organ for regular
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), what would have happened to the effective
implementation of the resolution?

Innovative in many regards - especially because
of the transparency of its work, which is often
mentioned as a model to be emulated - the Committee
has so far completely fulfilled the mission entrusted to
it. We need only mention the unprecedented number of
national initial and follow-up reports submitted to the
Committee, as well as the evaluation letters which the
Committee has provided them in return. We should also
mention the significant number of States that in recent
months have become parties to several international
conventions and protocols suppressing certain terrorist
acts, in particular, the 1999 Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.

This work has made it possible to take a truly
global inventory of the legislative and administrative
measures adopted by States in the multifaceted area of
the fight against international terrorism. Crucial as it
may be, that inventory is, however, only an initial step.
First, all States without exception must send a report to
the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Those that have not
yet done so are urgently requested to do so quickly.

Secondly, the adoption in every country of
legislation and administrative measures designed to
combat international terrorism in all of its aspects, in
particular the major aspect of the fight to suppress its
financing, is an ongoing process that needs to be
supplemented and adapted as needed.

Finally, we must ensure that the provisions
adopted will be effectively implemented in practice.
That requires, among other things, appropriate
administrative measures and structures.

The work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee is
thus far from finished. As indicated by its work
programme for the remainder of the year, the
Committee must simultaneously continue the
evaluation of the reports and follow-up reports that it
receives by carrying out a nuanced review of the
reports according to the priorities that it has
established. In the opinion of my delegation, that
review must also take into greater account the
compatibility of legislation that has been adopted with
the administrative and other structures that have been
put in place, in order to make possible the most
effective implementation possible.

We must enhance the Committee's action in
facilitating the provision of the technical assistance
that is requested or that is considered by the Committee
to be necessary or even a priority. Here, it must be very
clear that it is not the duty of the Committee itself to
provide that assistance. It must simply carry out a
better assessment of the requests for assistance brought
to its attention and must help to put those requesting
assistance in contact with those who have made offers
in the relevant areas. In that respect, the directory of
technical assistance is an important tool; more States
and international and regional organizations that can
provide technical assistance in the areas covered by
resolution 1373 (2001) should participate in the
directory.

Finally, we must continue to maintain close
relations with international and regional organizations
that have capabilities in the area of fighting terrorism.
That cooperation must not only aim at avoiding
needless duplication of activities or means but must
also contribute to better cohesion in the efforts to fight
terrorism in a given region.

In order to successfully carry out all those tasks,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee must be able to
count on full cooperation from all. France, for its part,
will continue to cooperate with the Committee at the
national level and within the European Union. And it
will do so with determination.

