Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, and the European
Free Trade Association country Iceland member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

Civilian populations have, in one way or another,
suffered the consequences of each and every conflict
throughout history. Their deliberate targeting as a
means to further military objectives is, unfortunately,
not new either. But the fact that such practices, which
involve gross violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law against the most
vulnerable groups, have managed to spill over into the
twenty-first century is something that deeply concerns
us. Mr. Egeland has just given us numerous examples,
and I take this opportunity to congratulate him and to
thank him for his courageous and committed work and
for that of the United Nations personnel who are
involved in the protection of civilians.

Today's debate on the protection of civilians is
very timely, not only because we are aware that human
rights violations are occurring even as we are meeting
here, but also because, as Members of the United
Nations, we are currently engaged in reforming our
Organization and in rethinking the way in which it is
handling situations of armed conflict. The European
Union has endorsed the Secretary-General's important
proposal concerning the responsibility to protect. The
protection of civilian populations is a moral imperative
for the international community; it is a collective and
shared responsibility. In its resolution 1296 (2000), the
Security Council has indicated its readiness to consider
threats to peace and security of this nature and, where
necessary, adopt appropriate steps.

While we renew our commitment to those
principles, we cannot forget that the primary
responsibility to protect lies with individual sovereign
States. However, when a State is unable or unwilling to
protect its civilians, or when crimes such as genocide,
ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity, war crimes
or massive and grave human rights violations occur or
threaten to occur, the international community must
respond.
While small arms and light weapons take a large
toll in today's conflicts, especially in Africa, one of the
most brutal weapons used systematically in places such
as Darfur and the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for instance, is rape and the
sexual enslavement of women and children, including
among refugees and internally displaced persons. The
European Union strongly condemns sexual and gender-
based crimes and expects that the recent referral of the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the forthcoming investigation by the ICC
Prosecutor will address these crimes. A persistent
climate of impunity facilitates the commission of such
crimes. The situation in Darfur should therefore serve
as a signal of the determination of the international
community to uphold the rule of law, to end impunity
and to bring the perpetrators to justice, there or
elsewhere.

I wish to take this opportunity to welcome the
presidential statement of 31 May 2005 condemning all
acts of sexual abuse and exploitation committed by
United Nations peacekeeping personnel. In that
context, the European Union urges all its partners
swiftly and fully to implement all recommendations
adopted in the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. It looks forward to the swift
establishment of the group of legal experts and the
conclusion of their work on the legal ramifications of
some of the proposed recommendations.

I mentioned briefly the situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons. As they seek protection
abroad or in their own country, fleeing armed conflict
or specific threats, they sometimes remain in danger
even in their place of refuge. Men are killed, and
women and girls are raped and sometimes killed.
Sometimes camps are targeted; they are often
inadequately protected. There is therefore a clear need
for increased physical protection. Where States will not
or cannot provide such protection, the international
community must do so. In that context, I would like to
repeat our call for improved humanitarian access in all
areas where aid is so desperately needed.

The role of regional organizations must be
highlighted. In that context, the European Union
commends the African Union (AU) for its leadership in
the Darfur region of the Sudan, where the AU
monitoring mission has shown demonstrable results in
reducing occurrences of violent crimes in the areas it
patrols. The European Union actively supports the
expansion of the African Union mission in Darfur and
has recently announced a sizeable aid package.
Occurrences of direct and deliberate targeting are
increasing, but civilians also continue to suffer from
the indirect consequences of armed conflict, for
example, the destruction or deliberate misuse by
parties to the conflict of health or education
infrastructures, such as hospitals and schools.

When I had the honour of addressing the Council
during its recent open debate on peacebuilding, I noted
that the protection of civilians was one of the many
elements of a comprehensive and coherent
peacebuilding strategy. While the protection of
civilians is now included in the mandate of every
peacekeeping operation, it must remain on the agenda
when a given situation transitions to a longer-term
peacebuilding phase. The future Peacebuilding
Commission will clearly play a pivotal role in that
respect.

In conclusion, five years after the adoption of
resolution 1296 (2000), it is clear that the situation
concerning the protection of civilians in armed conflict
has not improved much.

Without prejudging the Secretary-General's
assessment in his next report, which is due at the end
of this year, it would seem that there is a clear need to
strengthen the framework of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, possibly through the adoption of a
new resolution. In any event, I assure the Council that
the European Union will remain fully committed to
international endeavours to enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

