Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
I should like to express our most sincere gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and analytical
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.

This formal meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the situation in Africa reflects the Council's
interest in Africa and affirms its commitment to the future
of the African continent. The many tensions prevailing in

 

Africa today represent the gravest challenge to international
peace and security. The Security Council, the principal
body of the United Nations whose main responsibility is to
maintain international peace and security, faces a difficult
test. In addition, the Council's success in resolving the
problems of Africa would undoubtedly be a distinct signal
of its effectiveness.

It is of particular importance to diagnose the main
problems in Africa and to determine the sources of conflict
and strife in this continent. Undoubtedly the burdensome
legacy of colonialism, inherited by the African States
through their partition and division into sometimes
heterogeneous national units, is one of the principal reasons
for the many areas of conflict existing in Africa today.

Political instability in some of the African countries is
the main problem in Africa. This is because the nature of
authority is changed by the use of force within short
intervals, which exposes African countries to harmful
disturbances. Power becomes an end in itself, instead of the
pursuit of stability and development in these countries.
Furthermore, economic and social problems complete this
Vicious circle of instability. A comprehensive and radical
approach to the resolution of such problems must be found.
Development cannot be obtained without peace and
stability, nor can peace and stability continue without
economic and social development.

On the other hand, the multi-ethnic characteristics of
most African States often lead to strife because of
preferential treatment of some ethnic groups and
discrimination against others, which ultimately constitute
the nucleus of strife between these ethnic groups as an
inevitable outcome. The tendency to monopolize the
sources of wealth is a primary objective towards which
those at the helm of authority in Africa strive. The
monopolization of wealth is one of the principal reasons for
protracted conflicts in the continent.
A vivid recent example of this is what took place in
Sierra Leone. Those who usurped the authority of the
legitimate Government monopolized natural wealth, took
private and public monies and spread fear and violence
throughout the country. Fortunately, the countries of West
Africa and the United Nations contributed towards the
return of the legitimate Government to Sierra Leone.

The international community must undertake
expeditious and urgent measures to face up to the grave
political, economic and social problems confronting Africa.
We reaffirm the importance of the role of the United
Nations in this sphere. Even though the Security Council
has adopted a long series of resolutions and has fashioned
initiatives and plans for maintaining peace in Africa,
while some of these initiatives have succeeded, others
have failed. Those failures are basically due to the
international community's hesitation to intervene rapidly
and effectively to maintain peace. Proof of such failure is
the non-intervention to prevent the genocide in Rwanda,
which was unprecedented in modern history. That
reluctance had grave consequences that are still being felt
today.

In my country's view, the peacekeeping operations
of the Security Council are successful in containing
conflicts, but are not always the ultimate solution for
problems in Africa. In the absence of the will of the
parties to a conflict to solve their problems amicably, it
is very difficult to achieve peace in such circumstances.
In fact, the opposite result may occur. However, if
appropriate conditions are provided, peacekeeping
operations can be the decisive arbiter between strife and
peace. It is therefore extremely important for the United
Nations to support regional peace initiatives because the
capabilities of the United Nations, however great they
may be, are not sufficient. We believe that groupings of
regional States can undertake an important complementary
role in preventing the spread of conflict because of their
understanding of the nature of regional problems and their
great ability to influence local parties.

My delegation believes that the elimination of the
sources of tension in Africa requires continuing efforts
that take into account the complicated reasons for conflict.
In this context, the following should be kept in mind.

First, genuine will is of key importance as a driving
force for achieving stability and development in Africa.
The African continent is rich and fertile and can provide
a sturdy basis for prosperity.

Secondly, international organizations should
contribute to the rebuilding of economic structures
destroyed by conflicts, which would guarantee that
conflicts will not recur. In this regard, humanitarian
assistance is not sufficient for peace-building, without
which Africans will not be able to stand on their own feet
and achieve the development they hope for, and thus
eliminate the spectre of strife from their countries.

Thirdly, coordination between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) must be
promoted. This will enhance cooperation between the

 

Security Council and the OAU Mechanism for finding
effective solutions to problems in Africa.

Fourthly, illegal flows of and trafficking in weapons
must be confronted, and pre-emptive measures to stem them
must be taken.

Fifthly, top priority must be given to the post-conflict
consolidation of peace, because a fragile peace may
collapse at any time.

Sixthly, coordination is needed between Security
Council measures to maintain peace and security and the
efforts of the United Nations development organizations. In
that way, the African continent would benefit from united
efforts and would not be adversely affected by scattered
efforts.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reaffirm
the importance of the major role that the United Nations
and its bodies can undertake through their commitment to
support peace, stability and prosperity in Africa.

