Mr. Negroponte (United States of America) (spoke in Spanish): Madam President, I would like to
welcome you back to New York again, the host city of
the United Nations. We are very pleased that you
yourself, in person, are chairing this extremely
important meeting of the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

We welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General, and we thank you for the thorough and
comprehensive report that you have submitted to the
Council on the subject of Iraq. We, of course, also
welcome your Special Representative, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello and acknowledge his positive
contributions. His work in Iraq and the work of the
United Nations staff exemplify the vital role for the
United Nations envisaged by President Bush and Prime
Minister Blair in their Hillsborough statement.

I would especially like to welcome Mr. Adnan
Pachachi, Mr. Ahmad Chalabi and Ms. Aqeela
al-Hashemi, the three members of the Governing
Council who are here with us today. For the first time
in almost 50 years in Iraq, there is no limit on the
freedom of expression in that country. In Iraq today, all
shades of opinion have full freedom to compete in an
open market of ideas. Their presence here is a powerful
symbol of that freedom.

Two months ago today, the Council adopted
resolution 1483 (2003), which created a forward path
for the Coalition Authority and the United Nations on
the ground in Iraq. Resolution 1483 (2003) affirmed
our collective commitment to the free political
development of an internationally recognized,
representative Government of Iraq. Today, just two
months later, the Iraqi people have made tremendous
progress on the challenging transition to democracy
with the formation of the 25-member Governing
Council on July 13, nine days ago. As the Secretary-
General noted in paragraph 107 of his recent report, the
Governing Council provides a broadly representative
Iraqi partner. For the first time in decades, there is a
national political body that reflects the rich mosaic of
Iraqi society.

The establishment of government by and for the
Iraqi people, as envisaged in Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003), is under way. The Governing
Council deserves the full encouragement and support
of the international community and especially of this
body.

I note also that the Secretary-General's report
emphasizes, in the same paragraph, the importance of
establishing a clear timetable leading to full restoration
of sovereignty. The Governing Council will play a
leading role in determining the process for drawing up
a new constitution and proceeding to democratic
national elections. We anticipate that it will establish a
preparatory commission to recommend a process by
which a new constitution for Iraq will be prepared and
approved. These are key milestones on the road to the
internationally recognized, representative Government
the Security Council envisioned in resolution 1483
(2003).

The role of women in Iraq's political
development should not be overlooked. On 9 July,
more than 70 women participated in a day of
workshops, entitled "Voice of Women in Iraq". That
event was organized by a steering group of Iraqi
women, with assistance and participation by the
Authority and the United Nations, including the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Children's Fund. The same steering group will
publish the workshop recommendations on constitution
and democracy, among a number of other issues.

This unfolding political process is opposed by
some, and the undeniably fragile security situation is a
clear manifestation of the minority of those who
oppose political freedom. They are enemies of freedom
and are threatened by visible signs of progress. But
they will not prevail. President Bush has made clear
that the United States, together with our coalition
partners and others willing to join us in this important
effort, is committed to establishing the conditions for
security which will allow prosperity and democracy to
flourish.

In this connection, I would recall that, in its
paragraph 1, resolution 1483 (2003) appeals to Member
States and concerned organizations to contribute to
conditions of stability and security in Iraq, and we
strongly encourage Member States to contribute
stability forces under that resolution.
The security situation in Iraq is unquestionably
complex. The coalition's approach to establishing
security in Iraq is multifaceted, including enabling the
Iraqis to ultimately provide for their own security. The
coalition has moved quickly to establish Iraqi police
forces, and shortly it will begin recruiting, vetting and
training the first members of the new Iraqi army.
Security forces for ministries and for other purposes -
for example, port security - are being screened, hired
and trained.

In addition to the indispensable elements of
security and political freedom, Iraq must achieve
economic growth and development. Political progress
will be empty of meaning if the people of Iraq cannot
provide for their own livelihood.

Resolution 1483 (2003) appeals to Member States
to assist the people of Iraq in their efforts to reform
their institutions and rebuild their country. The
preparations under way for an international donors'
conference later this year will allow the international
community to meet this challenge and help to rebuild
Iraq. We reaffirm our commitment to the international
community to implement resolution 1483 (2003) in a
transparent manner. Together, we must promote
economic activity on an urgent basis, including the
revitalization of the oil industry, the judicious use of oil
revenues and other foreign exchange and the
development of a free market economy. Iraq is blessed
with vast natural resources and human potential. The
challenge is to create the conditions for Iraq's potential
to be realized, setting the Iraqi economy on the path
towards sustainable growth and establishing a strong
momentum towards an open market economy, while
keeping in place a social safety net.

The coming weeks and months will be full of
challenges as well as - to be sure - difficulties. The
opportunity now exists for the Iraqi people to create the
conditions for a stable, prosperous and democratic Iraq,
and we must help them to meet that challenge.

