Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Lebanon's assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September,
and offer you our best wishes. At the same time, I
would like to thank Ambassador Puri and his team for
their very competent conduct of our work in the month
of August.

I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Colombia, Ambassador Nestor Osorio, for his briefing
on the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). Brazil has closely followed
the work of the Committee under his competent
leadership. We have taken note of the Committee's
revised guidelines for the conduct of its work, which
should help it to fulfil its mandate more efficiently.

As Ambassador Osorio mentioned in his briefing,
the Panel of Experts visited Brazil last week. The
purpose of the visit was to hold consultations with the
Brazilian authorities on issues pertaining to the Panel's
mandate, including implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions and the side effects of
sanctions on legitimate trade. A number of meetings
were held in Brasilia between the experts and relevant
Government officials on areas such as maritime
transportation, inspections of ships, customs, export
controls, trade, finance, bank transactions and
immigration policy controls. The successful visit gave
the Panel the opportunity to be informed about
regulations and procedures in place in Brazil, and will
certainly contribute to further enhancing the
constructive dialogue we have had with the experts on
a regular basis.

Unfortunately, there is no progress reported on
the negotiations dealing with the Iranian nuclear issue.
We regret this situation and reaffirm our understanding
that without mutual trust, progress on this issue will
remain elusive. Brazil has encouraged the Iranian
Government to cooperate fully and promptly with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to clarify
all outstanding issues. While we share the goal of
ensuring that Iran's nuclear programme is entirely
peaceful, we expect Tehran to respond to the
international community's legitimate concerns. At the
same time, we reiterate the sovereign right of Iran, like
any other State, to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
under IAEA safeguards.

