Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
today's discussion and its thematic focus and would
like to see it become a regular item on the agenda of
the Council, with annual reporting by the Secretary-
General. We would like to thank you, Sir, for ably
coordinating the preparation of resolution 2388 (2017),
adopted earlier today, of which we were happy to be
a sponsor.

Human trafficking and modern slavery are
phenomena whose relevance goes well beyond
situations of armed conflict. They need to be tackled
on the basis of the comprehensive agreement reflected
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A
strong law-enforcement response to human trafficking
is imperative. We particularly call on all States to
contribute to ensuring the universal acceptance of the
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air supplementary to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
However, prevention requires a more comprehensive
approach, as reflected in the resolution adopted
this morning.

Irregular migration creates high levels of
vulnerability and poses a particular challenge. We
will need a strong outcome from the forthcoming
negotiations on the global compact for migration.
Some of the situations on the Council's agenda starkly
illustrate the drastic consequences of the lack of
regular migration channels. Libya is one such case, as
the Council has recognized in its pertinent resolutions,
and as has been brought to broader public attention by
recent media reports. The recurrence of the crudest and
most brutal forms of modern slavery both exacerbates
the situation in Libya itself and puts us all to collective
shame. The Convention on the Abolition of Slavery
predates the creation of the United Nations by many
years and has led to a universally binding norm under
international law that prohibits slavery. And yet in
Libya and in other countries and regions - some on
the Council's agenda, some not - this assault on the
most basic sense of human dignity continues, often as
part and parcel of organized crime.

The recognition in today's resolution that
offences associated with trafficking in persons may
constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity is
important. It is a further indication of the potential
role ofinternational criminal justice in tackling human
trafficking and modern slavery when national legal
systems are unable or unwilling to do so. It underscores
the importance of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in situations where it has jurisdiction, such as
in Libya, where the Security Council's own referral
established ICC jurisdiction.

Our national efforts to contribute to the fight
against human trafficking and modern slavery are
focused on the financial side of the crime. This is a
business that generates some $150 billion in revenue
every year. On the basis of resolution 2331 (2016), we
have undertaken, in particular through our partnership
with United Nations University, to design measures
aimed at disrupting financial chains associated with
human trafficking and modern slavery. The tools that
have been developed to combat other forms oforganized
crime can also be effective in the fight against slavery-
related crimes. We have formulated a set of concrete
measures in that regard that we will make available
through our website and on social media, and we are
grateful that the initiative is reflected in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/939).

Our financial intelligence unit has worked with its
counterparts in the framework of the Egmont Group,
Moneyval and the Financial Action Task Force to
discuss and disseminate these measures. In parallel,
we are reaching out to our own financial institutions
to discuss how best to work together to analyse and
address the relevant risks, and we encourage others to
do likewise. We are confident that this is a promising
path and look forward to effective follow-up on it in the
Security Council and elsewhere.

