Mr. Al-Attiyah (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
meeting at such a critical juncture in the history of Iraq
and the region. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his valuable efforts. And I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mladenov for
his briefing.

The State of Qatar welcomes the presidential
statement adopted this afternoon (S/PRST/20l4/20).
I also welcome the election of Mr. Fuad Masum as
President of Iraq and of Mr. Salim Al-Jabouri as
the Speaker of the National Assembly, as well as
Mr. Al-Abadi's assumption of the new Government's
premiership. Such developments are promising and
should reflect positively on the situation in Iraq after
long years of very painful events in the country.

At a time when we are looking forward to the

completion of the formation of the Iraqi Government so
that it can take up the momentuous tasks of addressing
the country's challenges - mainly terrorism - it
is important for all Iraqis to come together and take
part in Iraq's management; it is, in fact, the only way
that the serious challenges facing the country will be
addressed. The Iraqi people should express national
unity by supporting the Government. You might agree
with us, Mr. President, that such unity can be achieved
only through a serious, comprehensive national
dialogue. We in Qatar would support our Iraqi brothers
and sisters in taking any step that would maintain the
territorial integrity of Iraq and defeat terrorism.

The world is following with grave concern and
interest the horrendous and heinous acts of killing and
intimidation perpetrated by terrorist organizations in
Iraq and the region at large. As we discuss options for
facing terrorist groups and addressing the danger to the
region and the world, we think that the international
community can be successful in its response only if
it shows political will, makes concerted international
efforts and tackles the underlying causes that have
led to an environment that incubates terrorism. More
important, terrorist organizations need to be cut off
from their sources of funding.

We should not submit to terrorist blackmail. We
should also not link terrorism to any religion, nationality
or region.

The lesson that we draw from the spread of terrorist
organizations in the region is that such organizations
have benefited from dictatorships' oppressive policies,
which have caused a security gap and frustration
among the public, leading to a growing number of
grievances. Ironically, some of those regimes, after
having been abandoned by the international community
due to their criminal policies and grave violations
of international law and human rights, now market
themselves as partners in the international campaign
against terrorism. However, we think that terrorist
organizations and such regimes are two sides of the
same coin; both work against the interests ofpeople and
against peace, security and stability in the world.

The political and security challenges facing the
international community should not distract us from
tackling the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Iraq. As the number of internally displaced persons and
victims was reaching horrifying levels and in response
to the ordeal of our Iraqi brethren, Qatar established
an air bridge to deliver humanitarian aid to face the
current circumstance. Qatar will continue to work in
the direction of such a response.

