Ms. Lind (Estonia): Estonia, as a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
Group, aligns itself with the statement delivered by
Switzerland and would like to make some additional
remarks on the issue of the appointment of the next
Secretary-General. My statement is endorsed by the
26 States members of ACT.

As Philip Stanhope, Earl of Chesterfield, said
several centuries ago: "Many a man would rather you
heard his story than granted his request". Although the
wider membership would definitely value reflection
on more suggestions coming from outside the Security
Council, the main goal should be increased ownership
of the Council's work by all countries.

Estonia cannot speak from first-hand experience
about the complicated everyday work of the Security
Council, since we have never served as one of
its members. But we truly believe in the positive
impact of open and inclusive processes. We saw very
clearly the importance of effective and substantive
communication between the permanent members of
the Security Council and the wider membership during
negotiations on General Assembly resolution 69/321,
on the revitalization of the work of the Assembly.
ACT, with Costa Rica and Estonia in the forefront in
those negotiations, is pleased with the outcome and
consensual adoption on 11 September of the resolution,
which set up a structured process for the selection of
the next Secretary-General.

Of course, implementation is key. Over the
years, we have seen many resolutions adopted but not
implemented on the issue of the selection of the next
Secretary-General. We must change this. As a first
step, a joint letter from the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Security Council should be sent to all
Member States calling for nominations. We would hope
to receive this letter in the coming weeks so as to set
in motion the whole process before the end of the year.

The President of the General Assembly has
received a very strong mandate from the resolution on
the revitalization of the Assembly; the elements of the
letter are also outlined therein. Now we are looking for
the Council to do its part. In this regard, we were pleased
to hear about the informal discussions that the Security
Council had under the New Zealand presidency in July.

More generally, our main concern should be
ensuring that the best candidates come forward and
are considered based on concrete selection criteria.
In 1945, the United Nations Preparatory Commission
said that, "The Secretary-General, more than anyone
else, will stand for the United Nations as a whole". We
want to ensure that all Member States, as well as the
wider international community, have the possibility of
learning about the Vision of the candidates presented
and interacting with them.

Additionally, and finally, we believe that after
70 years the time has come to be even more innovative.
Therefore we are of the opinion that in making the
final decision, preference should be given to equally
qualified female candidates. We also look forward to
a thorough discussion at this session of the duration of
the term in office of the Secretary-General, including
the option of a single, non-renewable term.

