Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of December. I wish you every
success in your task and assure you of my delegation's
support during your presidency. I also thank you for
this opportunity given me to speak in this debate. I also
thank the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as the Prosecutors of both
Tribunals, for presenting their reports (see S/2010/574 and S/2010/588) and for the efforts that they
continuously make to successfully complete their
work. Allow me also to pay tribute to my colleague and
dear friend Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the
impeccable work done.

Since the establishment of the ICTR, the
Government of the Republic of Rwanda has always
given it the necessary cooperation to enable it to
complete the mission entrusted to it by the Council for
the well-being of the victims of genocide perpetrated
against the Tutsis and for the good of humanity. During
this past year, Rwanda has continued to facilitate
access to witnesses of both the prosecution and the
defence, including by supporting the National Witness
Protection Service established at the Office of the
Prosecutor in Kigali. My Government also continues to
provide all necessary documents for the smooth
conduct of the investigations and the holding of the
trials.

While regretting the pace of the proceedings and
the delay with regard to the time frame initially
established, the Rwandan Government still supports
the Tribunal's completion strategy, as set out in
resolution 1503 (2003), and takes note of the its
commitment to completing the first-instance trials by
the end of 2011 and the appeal trials by the end of
2013. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts made by
the Tribunal to reduce the time for the proceedings
despite its staffing issues, and we encourage the
Tribunal to continue in that direction in order to meet
the aforementioned deadlines.

As the end of the work nears, and given that the
Tribunal clearly will not be able to try all the people
sought, Rwanda reiterates its request, made on many
occasions, for a transfer of the pending cases to our
country's jurisdiction. In that regard, we welcome the
request of the Prosecutor of the ICTR of 4 November
for the transfer of new cases to Rwanda, in addition to
the 25 already handed over on 8 June. Our country
will, of course, continue to cooperate with the Tribunal
in order to remove any obstacle to the transfer of those
files, as it has already done by carrying out many
judicial, penal and prison reforms.

Need we recall that our request to transfer those
files is based simply on the fact that the crimes tried by
this Tribunal were committed on national territory
against Rwandan citizens by their compatriots.
Rwandan justice, which has acquired a certain
experience with genocide trials in over 16 years now, is
thus the best placed to know about those matters, all
the more so as it has the advantage of proximity to the
witnesses and the scene of the crime. Lastly, the
judicial proceedings conducted in Rwanda will also
play a major didactic role in national reconciliation.

Today we welcome the life sentence of
Lieutenant Ildephonse Nizeyimana, which we learned
of some minutes ago. My Government welcomes the
arrest of several genocide fugitives during this year and
thanks the Governments of brotherly countries that
have acted, namely, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. Our gratitude also goes to the
many Governments that have arrested and tried, on the
basis of their national laws, the suspects of genocide
present on their territory. Lastly, we express our
appreciation to Senegal, which has just signed an
agreement with the ICTR to transfer detainees.

Rwanda also welcomes the efforts made by the
ICTR to find and arrest the 10 remaining fugitives,
including one of the main architects of the genocide,
the billionaire Felicien Kabuga. The Interahamwe
militia, which he financed and armed, are still there in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and now, as the
Council knows, make up the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda.

However, it is not up to the ICTR, but it has
proved necessary to draw attention to the fact that that
terrorist movement, which still rages in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and against which this Council
has just renewed sanctions (resolution 1952 (2010)),
has recently acquired new unexpected support, as the
most recent report of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) noted in its paragraph 164
(S/2010/596). That support, which is from senior
officers discharged from the Rwandan army,
unfortunately enjoys the protection of certain countries,
as is currently the case with Felicien Kabuga.

Rwanda therefore requests the Security Council
to use its weight so that history does not repeat itself
and so that individuals who cooperate with terrorist
movements to destabilize the Great Lakes region with
impunity, while enjoying the protection, even the
complicity, of certain States, are arrested, given that
what is behind that terrorist movement is none other
than genocidal ideology.

Moreover, my Government's View on the transfer
of the ICTR archives to Rwanda is well known. Our
Government will not compete with anyone on that
point. We simply recall that the ICTR archives are an
integral part of our history and are therefore crucial to
preservation of the memory of the genocide, the
education of future generations and the prevention of
genocide. My Government of course remains ready to
make its contribution to the discussions under way on
that matter within the United Nations.
Unfortunately, the denial and trivialization of the
genocide are phenomena that tend to grow and be
trivialized even in the community of defence lawyers
in Arusha. Here, I am not talking about their pleadings,
covered by professional immunity, but of their activism
outside the courtrooms, in particular, in the
international media and at public conferences.

The Government of Rwanda is therefore
concerned about that everyday denial, which goes
beyond the simple defence of the accused and which is
not only likely to reopen the wounds of a people on the
way to reconciliation, but especially is a crime
punishable by law, like Holocaust denial in many
countries. I therefore call on the Security Council and
the ICTR to take the necessary measures to put an end
to that situation. For our part, the Government will
remain steadfast in ensuring that perpetrators of such
crimes, be they foreigners or attorneys of the Court,
will be brought to justice pursuant to Rwandan law.

In conclusion, the Government I represent calls
on the ICTR to pursue its mission with determination,
but also urges it to respect as much as possible its
completion strategy. At the end of its mandate, the
transfer to Rwanda of residual cases and archives
would be the most appropriate option for justice, for
the task of remembrance, for history and for the future
of our generations.

