Mr. Giacomelli Da Silva (Brazil): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Permanent Mission of Equatorial
Guinea for organizing this open debate, as well as all
the briefers and delegations for their valuable inputs
reflecting on the ways in which the United Nations
can contribute to the high aspiration of silencing the
guns in Africa. I would like to highlight two positive
innovations in the way that the United Nations is
contributing to the peace process in Africa - the
acknowledgement of the primacy of politics and the
commitment to more continuous engagement aimed at
improving the structural foundations of peace.

Brazil has always been a resolute supporter of the
primacy of politics. We welcome the fact that there
are currently peace agreements serving as platforms
for reconciliation and political dialogue in all the
Unites Nations peacekeeping settings in Africa. As
shown during the negotiations of the peace agreements
in Mali and South Sudan, regional actors and
neighbouring countries often have a unique perspective
of conflict dynamics and can play a decisive role in
facilitating discussions and bridging positions between
conflicting parties.

The fluid collaboration in the Central African
Republic between the United Nations and the
African Union was paramount in the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
Bangui earlier this month. The support given by the
Peacebuilding Support Office to the mediation, led by
the African Initiative, illustrates the commitment of the
United Nations to more flexible engagement in building
and sustaining peace in Africa.

We wish to highlight the indispensable role played
by women in conflict prevention and resolution, as well
as in peacebuilding. In that regard, Brazil welcomes
the appointment of a Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security by the African Union to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We also
hail the fact that 23 African countries have already
developed their own national action plans to implement
that agenda. Heeding the calls of civil society and
young people can also contribute to better-tailored
engagement efforts and more inclusive agreements,
which will surely last longer.

In a growing number of debates at the United
Nations we are finding overwhelming support for
yet another important innovation in our collective
contribution to peace efforts in Africa - a shift from
a crisis-oriented approach towards more continuous
engagement in longer-term efforts to build lasting
peace. For instance, it is essential that, after the signing
of peace agreements, their implementation receive
strong support from the international community.
When peace dividends are concretely experienced by
local communities, the risk of a relapse into conflict
decreases considerably.

From our experience presiding over the Guinea-
Bissau configuration ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
we can attest that communities that have experienced
conflict often have pressing and structural demands
in terms of reconstruction and development. They
therefore benefit greatly from sustained international
support during a sequence of election cycles and
Government administrations.

That is why it is so important that we remain
committed to the strengthening of the peacebuilding
architecture, in particular to achieving a quantum leap
in the Peacebuilding Fund, and in that regard as well
there is room for deepening our collaboration with
African institutions that specialize in peacebuilding,
such as the recently created African Union Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development Centre in Cairo.

The ideal of silencing the guns in Africa indeed
seemed to be an ambitious goal when it was established
back in 2013, during the celebration of the fiftieth
anniversary of pan-Africanism. Brazil is proud of
having participated in that process at the highest level
and having witnessed such an inspiring demonstration
of African solidarity.

It is even more inspiring to know that we have
already come a long way since then and to realize that
the Vision 2020 finally appears to be within our grasp.
Through the innovative cooperation channels between
the United Nations and African institutions, we have
achieved functional tools to meet peace and security
needs across all phases of the peace continuum. Our
best hope is that, by reinforcing our cooperation and
strengthening non-military means to address security
challenges, we might well realize the promise of an
African continent free of conflict. What better legacy
could we leave for generations to come.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm.
