We join other speakers in thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Permanent Representative of the Niger to the United Nations Abdou Abarry for the information that they shared. We agree that the security situation in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is far from having been stabilized. The Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire remains unheeded. We find particularly concerning the upsurge in violence observed recently in Ituri and North Kivu. Despite the ongoing military operations conducted by the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC), the Allied Democratic Forces continue to carry out violent attacks against civilians and to step up the pressure on the Congolese military and peacekeepers. The past months also saw the intensification of raids by other armed groups, which continue to grow in number, together with inter-ethnic violence, in particular in Djugu territory. The complex security and humanitarian situation is further aggravated by the re-emergence of the Ebola virus in Equateur province and the spread of the coronavirus pandemic. The continuing tensions within the governing coalition in Kinshasa represent yet another factor negatively affecting the situation. We fully support the Secretary- General's call on all Congolese stakeholders to abandon narrow partisan behaviour and work together to continue laying the foundations for peace and stability in the country. Interference in the domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is unacceptable. We acknowledge the contribution being made by MONUSCO, including its Force Intervention Brigade, in countering armed groups and protecting civilians in the eastern provinces, fostering reconciliation processes and supporting, through its good offices, the development of a national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration framework and provincial road maps. We welcome the improvements in coordination achieved between the Mission and the FARDC, as well as the expansion of the operational area of the force in Ituri province. Concerning sanctions, we remain convinced that the restrictions imposed on the country should under no circumstance negatively affect the efficiency of the military operations conducted by the FARDC against armed groups. We look forward to the publication this month of a MONUSCO joint strategy for a gradual transition and responsible exit from the country, commissioned by the Council last year. We strongly believe that all decisions in that regard should be made taking into account the situation on the ground and upon careful consideration of the views expressed by Kinshasa, States of the region and troop-contributing countries. Russia, being part of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, will continue assisting the process of peace and stabilization in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At this juncture, we are focusing particular attention on assisting Kinshasa in tackling the challenges posed by the coronavirus pandemic and other infectious diseases, including the Ebola virus. In recent months we have shared with the Democratic Republic of the Congo two mobile microbiological rapid-test laboratories as well as personal protective equipment. We stand ready to further promote epidemiological cooperation with Congolese colleagues, including on vaccine-related issues.
