Ms. Hutchinson: On behalf of NATO, I thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to address
the Security Council on the occasion of today's open
debate on children and armed conflict. I would like
to thank all the briefers this morning for their very
powerful interventions.

This year NATO celebrates its seventieth
anniversary, which provides an opportunity to reflect
on its achievements, but also to look to the future,
because NATO's core values of democracy, individual
liberty and the rule of law underscore our work on
protection of civilians, in particular the protection of
children and armed conflict. We applaud the efforts
taken by the Security Council and by the international
community, especially those who work tirelessly on the
ground to protect children. We also welcome Special
Representative Gamba's ACT to Protect initiative, and
we look forward to engaging on this and other initiatives.

NATO recognizes that protecting children from
the effects of armed conflict is both a moral imperative
and an element essential to breaking cycles of violence.
Since the topic of children and armed conflict was first
addressed at the 2012 NATO Summit in Chicago, we
have made great progress in developing practical, field-
oriented measures to address conflict-related violations
against children. From the North Atlantic Council's
adoption in 2015 of the policy document entitled
"Protection of Children in Armed Conflict - Way
Forward" to the recent reaffirmation of the policy at
the 2018 Brussels Summit, NATO'S commitment
to the protection of children in conflict areas has
become a prominent piece of our overall protection-of-
civilians approach.

However, it is on the ground, at the operational level,
that we get to see our commitments turned into good
practices, and where we have bolstered our protection
mandate, giving specific attention to the protection of
women and children. We are proud of all our efforts
undertaken to elevate the protection of children in
NATO-led missions and operations. Together with the
United Nations, we have these developed practical,
field-oriented measures to address conflict-related
violations, including adopting standard operating
procedures on the six grave violations.

In Afghanistan, NATO's Resolute Support Mission,
a non-combat mission, was established to train,
advise and assist the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces. The Mission continues to be vigilant
in demonstrating its commitment to delivering on the
principles of child protection through training and
capacity-building. And NATO officials continue to use
opportunities to raise the issue of protecting children
in their political and military engagements with senior
Afghan officials.

Predeployment training is critical to articulating
principles and translating them into operational effect.
Such training has therefore become mandatory in
NATO for all personnel deployed to our missions and
operations. Our children and armed conflict policies
are also being systematically incorporated into our
military-exercise scenarios, which means that NATO
commanders receive training to respond to situations
where the six grave violations committed against
children are encountered.

While training alone is not the answer, it does
ensure that personnel recognize that children are among
the different populations affected by conflict, and those
deployed to protect are trained to prevent, recognize
and respond to any and all violations. To support both
training and mainstreaming of the children and armed
conflict agenda, focal points for children and armed
conflict have been appointed throughout the NATO
command structure. NATO focal points work with the
United Nations and other international actors to share
reports and information wherever possible.

While we are proud of what we have achieved,
there is still much more to do. As we look to the future,
we will continue to guarantee that our commitment to
this agenda is steeped in action. This year we aim to
better outline our political commitments and support
extant efforts aimed at monitoring instances of grave
violations committed against children and at enhancing
the training provided to all NATO personnel.

On this tenth anniversary of resolution 1882
(2009), we echo the concerns about rape and other
forms of sexual violence committed against girls
and boys. We will therefore focus on protection from
sexual violence in the new holistic policy approach
that we are currently developing. Of great importance
is the desire to strengthen our coordination with
other international actors to promote children's
rights, enhance accountability and further adhere to
international law and norms. Working together is the
only way we can achieve this agenda. NATO looks
forward to sharing some of our good practices with
our international colleagues and to identifying areas
of mutual collaboration, including with the United
Nations and the European Union, and especially with
civil society.

It is obvious that challenges remain, obstructing the
full implementation of the children and armed conflict
agenda. Details of violations against children are too
often taken for granted in global reporting on armed
conflict, and action seems dwarfed by increasing
numbers of child casualties. The international
community has a responsibility to guarantee that
children 4 all children 4 are protected. It is a
collective responsibility, and one to which NATO is
fully committed. Protecting children today prevents
conflicts in future 4 and it is to that peaceful future to
which NATO looks forward.

