Mr. Santos (Mozambique): We would like to
thank you, Madam President, for the initiative to
convene this meeting to discuss the situation in
Angola. We thank the Secretary-General's Adviser for
Special Assignments in Africa, Ambassador Ibrahim
Gambari, for his eloquent presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General and for his dedication to the
Angolan issue.

The continuing hostilities in Angola constitute a
major setback for the people of that sisterly country,
and indeed for all peace-loving nations. The
resumption of war in Angola is a source of concern not
only for my country but also for the rest of the southern
African region, the African continent and the
international community as a whole.

The refusal of UNITA to comply with the Lusaka
Protocol, in particular its failure to demilitarize its
forces and to allow State administration to be extended
throughout the country, is the primary reason for the
escalation of the conflict in Angola. This situation has
had devastating effects on the population of Angola, in
the social, economic and humanitarian fields.

As discussed in this Chamber yesterday,
generations of children have been exposed throughout
their entire lives to just one reality, that of war. Many
of them are forced to bear arms and to participate in
hostilities, while others have been and continue to be
victimized.

Because of a lack of security in rural areas, a
large number of people have been forced to abandon
their lands, where they used to produce food and cash
crops. As a result of that situation, a population of 2.5
million internally displaced persons, representing 20
per cent of the total population of Angola, is now
concentrated in urban and semi-urban areas. This has
reduced access to piped water, health care, education
and other basic needs, drastically affecting the living
standards of the population and efforts for poverty
reduction.

The refusal by the UNITA of Jonas Savimbi to
comply with the Lusaka Protocol has plunged the
country into a serious humanitarian disaster. More than
1 million persons rely on food distribution to survive,
and a total of 2.5 million are in dire need of
humanitarian assistance. But humanitarian assistance
cannot reach all those in need, owing to UNITA
guerrilla activities in parts of the country.

The recent progress made by Government forces
in recovering areas of the country previously under
UNITA control has increased access to populations at
risk. However, the extension of State administration to
those areas has created an additional burden for the
Government. There is an urgent need to provide the
population currently under State administration, and all
others in need, with basic needs and safe resettlement
areas. We would like to commend the Government of
Angola for taking the lead in preparing an emergency
plan of action to address humanitarian needs in
collaboration with several humanitarian agencies and
the donor community.

In this regard, we welcome the presence here of
Mr. Albino Malungo, Minister for Social Assistance of
the Republic of Angola. We call on all Member States,
United Nations agencies and the donor community to
continue and strengthen their support to the people and
the Government of Angola and to respond generously
to the 2000 United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal for Angola.

In spite of the efforts of the Angolan Government
to address the serious macroeconomic instability and to
reduce poverty, a major obstacle lies in the way of
achieving the fundamental objective of sustainable
human and economic development: the absence of
peace. The continuing fighting and the absence of a
meaningful chance of a political settlement constitute a
serious concern. The people of Angola deserve a better
fate, and we urge the international community not to
desist from assisting the Angolans to find a solution to
the prolonged conflict that has caused untold suffering
among the war-fatigued people of that sisterly country.

We commend the reaffirmation by President Jose
Eduardo dos Santos of Angola of the validity of the
Lusaka Protocol and of his willingness to forgive
Mr. Savimbi and his supporters if they renounce war.
We urge Mr. Savimbi and his supporters to cease
hostilities and to honour their commitments under the
Lusaka Protocol, creating the necessary conditions for
broad-based dialogue for durable peace and national
reconciliation

We also urge all Member States and the
international community as a whole to comply with all
relevant Security Council resolutions on Angola, with a
view in particular to putting an end to the illicit trade in
arms and the illicit exploitation of and trade in
diamonds, which are responsible for fuelling the
conflict in Angola. In this regard, we would like to
commend the work of the Security Council Committee
on sanctions against UNITA under the dynamic
leadership of Ambassador Fowler. We wish him well in
his new posting.

The conflict in Angola impedes the attainment of
sustainable development not only in that country but
also in the whole southern African region. The leaders
of the Southern African Development Community are
fully aware that only the end of conflict in the region
can give rise to a favourable climate to enable more
investment and economic growth, leading ultimately to
the balanced and sustainable development of all the
countries of the region.

The Security Council must continue to discharge
its primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security and help the people of Angola and
the region to find a durable solution to the conflict.

We commend the Secretary-General's initiatives
on Angola and, in particular, the recent visit to Angola
of his Special Adviser on Africa. We encourage him to
persevere in his endeavours as further talks with the
Angolan authorities, members of political parties and
civil society proceed.

It is our fervent hope that, as a result of this
important meeting, adequate humanitarian assistance
will be provided to alleviate the suffering of the
Angolan people.

