Mr. Suarez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the President for having convened
such an important meeting and also for the concept
note (8/2015/846, annex) that he has circulated. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing.

The concept note focuses on two very specific
recommendations, which were formulated in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) and taken up by the
Secretary-General in his implementation report
(S/20lS/682). First, peacekeeping mandates should
be subject to sequenced authorization and be specific
to the context on the ground. Secondly, the Security
Council must use its collective political leverage to
achieve political settlements.

Venezuela welcomes an approach based on the
sequenced authorization of mandates and, in that
respect, we believe that that process must consist of
three stages. First, determine whether conditions on
the ground are suitable for the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. Secondly, if that is
the case, deploy an operation with a mandate limited
to offering protection and security, and thirdly, extend
the mandate of the operation to other multidimensional
areas.

As part of the first stage, the Secretariat must
deploy on the ground and carry out a thorough analysis
of the context of the conflict, as well as the priorities
and intentions of the parties and other relevant
stakeholders. It must also determine the specialized
military and police requirements for the implementation
of the mandate, including options for rapid deployment
and force generation. In issuing its considerations, the
Secretariat must consider whether or not the conditions
on the ground are suitable for the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation. In that respect, we
would like to echo the concerns expressed by the High-
level Panel regarding the deployment of peacekeepers
in situations where there is no peace to keep nor even a
political process under way.

It must also be clear that peacekeeping operations
were not established to begin or revive political
processes, manage conflicts where there is no peace,
participate in military operations against terrorist
groups or assume the residual tasks of counter-
terrorist operations or other types of offensives carried
out by ad hoc coalitions or regional or subregional
forces that have given up ground. In that regard, we
highlight the precedent set out in the joint report of the
African Union/United Nations on benchmarks for the
deployment of a peacekeeping operation of the United
Nations in Somalia. It determined that the security
conditions on the ground were not yet suitable for the
deployment of such an operation. Regrettably, as the
report of the High-level Panel points out, the same
precautions were not taken in other cases in which
operations were deployed without a prior study of the
political or security context on the ground and without
an appropriate assessment of the physical and material
requirements necessary for the success of the mission.

As part of the second stage, and only if the
Secretary-General has determined that the political
and security conditions on the ground are suitable
for the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, then the Security Council could consider
an initial, temporary mandate that emphasizes the
security, political and protection dimensions. With
that provision, the Secretary-General could keep the
Security Council abreast of the progress made on the
ground.

As part of the third stage, once the Secretary-
General has determined that conditions are appropriate
for the establishment of a broader multidimensional
mission, then the Security Council could consider
expanding the mandate to other areas, including
the promotion of human rights and gender equality,
security-sector reform, monitoring the trafficking of
small arms and light weapons and the coordination of
efforts for capacity-building and the development of
local institutions, among others.

With respect to the use of the collective leverage
of the Security Council in favour of achieving political
solutions, Venezuela expresses caution. According to the
concept note prepared by the President and in line with
the contents of the report of the Secretary-General, in
situations in which there are very few possibilities for a
short-term political solution or if commitment from the
host State is weak, it is hoped that the Security Council
will use its political muscle to begin the process on the
ground. In his note, the President proposes the use of
the entire set of instruments and tools available to the
Security Council, from the issuance ofpress statements
to the imposition of sanctions and the deployment of
troops on the ground.

Venezuela is well aware of the importance
of preventing and mitigating conflicts and of the
fundamental role played by the Security Council in that
context. However, we cannot help but reiterate what
was expressed by the report of the Advisory Group of
Experts on the Future of the Peacebuilding Architecture
(see S/2015/490), namely, that the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council, has not yet understood
how to adapt its tools to the international context,
and often prefers military solutions. In other words,
Venezuela would consider the use of non-coercive
elements in the set of instruments available to the
Security Council, such as press statements, presidential
statements, open debates and closed consultations.
But we are deeply concerned about the frequent use
of coercive and military solutions for conflicts - a
tendency that the Security Council has shown over the
years.

The Security Council should opt to use peaceful
dispute settlement mechanisms in its role to strengthen
international peace and security. In that respect, the
Council must use more non-coercive measures more
assertively and effectively, and employ the use of
force and sanctions only as a last resort when all the
other options have been exhausted and when there is a
genuine chance for the latter to have a positive effect
in achieving the objective of finding a solution to the
conflict.

In conclusion, as we have already done during the
negotiations on the presidential statement currently
under way, we would like to highlight the need to
bear in mind that, although the Security Council
plays a fundamental role in developing the mandates
for peacekeeping operations, the Special Committee
for Peacekeeping Operations, which is a subsidiary
organ of the General Assembly, is the body authorized
to design policies and doctrines in that area. An
intergovernmental process is also under way in several
of the Committees of the General Assembly to consider
the recommendations of the report of the High-level
Panel on Peace Operations and the report of the
Secretary-General and to define the path to be followed
for the implementation of the recommendations.

