Mr. Adam (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
has read with the greatest attention the report of the Panel
of Experts before us on today's agenda.

Our Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Louis Michel, is in Luanda today and has had a
lengthy interview with the President of the Republic of
Angola. I can assure the Council that our two
Governments approach the question of sanctions in the
same way.
We are aware of the unspeakable suffering of the
children, men and women of Angola. That is why
Belgium is committed firmly and unreservedly to the
objectives pursued by the authors of the report and
believes, as they do, that the effectiveness of and

 

monitoring mechanisms for Security Council sanctions must
be improved. In this spirit, Belgium regrets the omission of
important information from the report, as well as the
inclusion therein of some unfounded references.

The Government of Belgium has indeed assumed its
responsibilities and has taken United Nations sanctions very
seriously from the moment they have been imposed. Three
important elements with respect to the actions of my
Government seem to be lacking from the report.

After several internal preparatory meetings, an
interdepartmental working group referred to in the report -
the so-called "diamond task force" - was established in
January 2000. This task force has met five times since the
beginning of the year. It includes representatives of all
Belgian ministries and departments concerned. It has
studied and decided upon several measures to improve the
mechanism monitoring the provenance of diamonds. These
measures consist, inter alia, of enhanced monitoring by
customs authorities and the Ministry of Economic Affairs,
as well as the establishment, together with the Luanda
authorities, of a certification mechanism. Other
administrative measures are under consideration by the task
force.

We did not, however, wait for the creation of the task
force to strengthen the existing controls, which had already
led to the seizure of illegal diamonds. Following upon the
actions undertaken since then by the task force, customs
and judicial investigations have been initiated with regard
to various persons suspected of illegal diamond trading.

Moreover, in a discussion which the Minister for
Foreign Affairs had recently with the management of the
Diamond High Council, the latter undertook to revise its
procedures at the request of the Belgian Government. It was
decided, inter alia, to create a second working group, to
include representatives of the Belgian Government and the
Diamond High Council, to draft a programme of action and
determine measures to be taken.

Furthermore, the Belgian Government has fully
cooperated with the Chairman of the Sanctions Committee
from the outset. In February this year, the Chairman of the
Sanctions Committee was informed orally and in writing of
the most recent measures undertaken by the Government,
thus bringing up to date the information available to the
Committee. Finally, these measures were made public on 3
March in a press release issued by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs in Brussels.

Information has been provided to the Panel of
Experts on Belgians or other people operating abroad who
might hold Belgian nationality. Unfortunately, the report
makes no mention of this cooperation or of the drafting
currently under way of an effective Belgian bill on
extraterritoriality for crimes related to the illegal
diamonds trade. Moreover, a protocol agreement exists
between the Diamond High Council and the judicial
authorities in charge of prosecuting diamond-related
crimes.

The Panel claims to have found that

"the extremely lax controls and regulations
governing the Antwerp market facilitate and perhaps
even encourage illegal trading activity". (S/2000/203, para. 87)

However, Belgium is the only - I emphasize only -
country of the European Union with a binding licensing
system for the import and export of diamonds, based on
two laws of 1962 and several royal and ministerial
decrees of 1987, 1993, 1995 and 1997. The entire trade
in diamonds with countries not members of the European
Union is subject to this system. There is also a
monitoring mechanism for all diamond trading within the
European Union.

The Belgian Government is accordingly surprised to
find no, or at best only partial mention in the report of
these various measures, despite the fact that information
on them was conveyed in due time. Thus, the reference
to the

"unwillingness of the responsible authorities in
Belgium effectively to police the smuggling of
illegal Angolan diamonds onto the market" (ibid., para. 108)

would not appear to reflect the true state of affairs.

Another point I wish to make refers to the entirely
erroneous assertion in paragraph 88 of the report that an
estimated 4,000 to 5,000 diamond dealers in Antwerp
operate in a so-called "grey" market outside the
regulatory framework. All importers and exporters of
diamonds are required to enrol with the Department of
Licenses in Antwerp, which is under the direct
responsibility of the Belgian Ministry of Economic
Affairs. This is not the case for jewellers - in Belgium
or anywhere else, for that matter - a distinction that was
apparently lost on the authors of the report.

 

Although reference is made in the report to the
fundamental problem of identifying the origin of
diamonds - particularly in paragraphs 98 and 92 - this
extremely complex issue is insufficiently elaborated and
clearly underestimated in the report.

The Belgian Government welcomes the
recommendation made in paragraph 113 that a conference
of experts convene for the purpose of determining a system
of controls that would allow for increased transparency and
accountability in the control of diamonds from the source
or origin to the bourses. We will participate and ensure that
Belgian expertise contributes to such an endeavour.

In conclusion, I wish generally to emphasize
Belgium's appreciation of the clear and specific language
of the report, which will help to modernize the working
methods of the Security Council. At the same time, we
regret that the report makes no mention of the factual
information - of fundamental importance to us - that was
conveyed by my delegation here in New York and during
the visits of its authors to Brussels and Antwerp.

I thank Ambassador Fowler for the additional points
he made on this matter in his oral briefing, but, frankly, I
should have preferred them to appear in the report. Belgium
accordingly requests that, when the Security Council
resumes its discussion, the report be brought up to date to
take the factors I have indicated into account.

Finally, Belgium reiterates it full readiness to work in
close cooperation with the Sanctions Committee. We share
the idea that armed conflicts must be resolved through a

political approach, without ignoring - as the report
does - the perverse economic mechanisms that feed
conflicts.

