Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): On behalf of the Government of Costa Rica, I am
pleased to welcome the establishment on 11 April 1997 of
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation,
which is a milestone in the recent history of Africa and the
world. The inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation in fulfilment of the Lusaka Protocol
is a very important step in the peace process in that
country, which has put an end to a long-lasting fratricidal
war.

Some years ago, Central America, torn by civil wars
that threatened to become internationalized and to devastate
the region, decided on its own, and with the support of the
international community, to take its destiny into its own
hands and forge a just and lasting peace. We therefore
understand and fully appreciate the magnitude of the
decision taken by the Angolan people to shoulder their own
responsibilities with the support and solidarity of the
international community. In this connection, My delegation
pays tribute to the countries members of the troika and to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Maitre Blondin Beye.

It is true that there are still tasks pending, mainly
with regard to the incorporation of former UNITA
soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces and the Angolan
National Police; desertion by former combatants from
selection and demobilization centres; the dismantling of
illegal checkpoints; information concerning the weaponry
and strength of the security detachment of the UNITA
leader; the handing over of UNITA communication
equipment; and the situation regarding UNITA radio,
among others.

Costa Rica was struck by the statement in the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) that there are

"recent reports of involvement by the Angolan
parties in the Zairian conflict." (S/1997/304, para. 10)

If this information should prove to be accurate, it would
represent a grave risk of instability, not only in Angola
but in other parts of Africa. If that is the case, the parties
should abstain from any intervention in Zaire.

On the humanitarian front, Costa Rica believes that
efforts should be redoubled for the demobilization and
social integration of UNITA soldiers, as this is a very
important factor for future stability and the establishment
of lasting peace in Angola. Moreover, humanitarian
assistance to the people of Angola should be maintained,
for, as paragraph 22 of the report (S/l997/248) of the
Secretary-General indicates, drought has affected the
country and damaged the harvest in the coastal region and
in the northern provinces, and also because many people
displaced by the war have still not been able to return to
their places of origin. We hope that the authority of the
State and normalcy will be re-established throughout the
territory with the advent of the new Government so that
immunization programmes, the programme to seek out
family members, the demobilization of child soldiers and
the continuation of demining programmes, among others,
can be carried out without mishap.

Costa Rica believes that the new Government of
Angola must secure the greatest well-being for its people
through appropriate and prudent economic measures in
order to reduce inflation and slow down the decline in the
people's purchasing power, as the Secretary-General
indicates in paragraph 29 of his report (S/l997/248).

 

These are some of the problems that can most severely
afflict a people and that can erode democracy. This will
certainly require a comprehensive and constructive approach
by the international community and especially by
international financial organizations.

Finally, the Government of Costa Rica urges His
Excellency the President of Angola and Mr. Savimbi to
meet with a view to taking up matters that they consider
relevant to solidifying further the peace process, as a further
contribution within their already fruitful cooperative efforts.

I would like to state Costa Rica's agreement with the
extension of the UNAVEM. III mandate until 30 June 1997,
on the understanding that it will then be replaced by a
mission to consolidate peace, which we hope will have a
major humanitarian component and will also safeguard
respect for human rights.

We hope that the draft resolution that is now being
adopted will be a further contribution to building the
Angolan people's dream of peace.

