Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political and Peacekeeping Affairs, for
her valuable briefing on the most recent developments
in the Republic of Mali. I would also like to thank
and commend Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
for his efforts to reduce political tension among all
relevant parties and to facilitate the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. I
also join my colleague, the representative of France,
in welcoming the presence and participation of Her
Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali. That is the first time that she has come to the
Security Council, which reflects the interest shown
by the Government of Mali in supporting the peace
process in the country.

I would like to address three important aspects of
the subject under discussion today: the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, the
security situation and humanitarian issues.

With regard to the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, we welcome
the most recent positive steps in the implementation of
the peace agreement, in particular the establishment
of interim administrations in the Kidal, Menaka and
Timbuktu regions and the progress made concerning
the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, as well as the holding of the
second high-level meeting on the implementation ofthe
security and defence aspects of the agreement. We also
welcome the decision made by His Excellency President
Keita to establish a dedicated ministry in order to
follow-up on the implementation of the agreement.
We welcome as well the role played by His Excellency
Prime Minister Maiga in ensuring that progress is made
by the Government. In that regard, we urge all parties to
continue their efforts to achieve the desired peace and
security. We hope that there will be no further delay
in implementing the peace process, as we have seen
in the past. We also expect to see the implementation
of the provisions of the agreement, in particular those
in paragraph 4 of resolution 2423 (2018), including
progress on the decentralization process and the full
operationalization of the mixed units of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism.

We would like to recall the road map adopted
by all parties on 22 March 2018, which relates to the
implementation of several aspects of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation. We call on all parties to
comply with the provisions of that agreed document.

We reiterate our position with regard to the fact
that the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation remains the best option for resolving
the ongoing conflict in Mali. We look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General requested in paragraph
6 of resolution 2423 (2018), to be issued six months
after the presidential inauguration. That report would
contain the most recent developments with regard to the
implementation of the agreement and the benchmarks
of the Pact for Peace signed by all parties. It would also
contain the proposals put forward by the Secretary-
General on the reconfiguration of MINUSMA in the
absence of significant progress.

We also call on all parties to cooperate and to
take essential decisions for the benefit of all of them.
Establishing trust is a key element in implementing
the peace agreement. We look forward to the holding
of legislative elections later this year and we hope that
all parties will participate. We are pleased to see that
the preparations for those elections have already begun
and that the Mission is playing a supportive role in
that regard.

With regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about the deterioration in security in a
number of cities in Mali, particularly in the centre of the
country, as Ms. Keita noted in her briefing. The central
part of the country has suffered the majority of the
attacks - 24 out of 64 - during the reporting period.
That region also saw the massacre of 37 civilians on
1 January, in addition to more than 500 civilians who
were killed in the region in 2018. That situation must be
addressed in a comprehensive manner that deals with
the security threats, improves governance and enhances
infrastructure in the region to bring stability to central
Mali and handle the root causes of the situation there.
In that context, we welcome the Government's latest
plan to address the situation in the central part of
the country, as well as the recent visits by President
Keita and Prime Minister Maiga to the region, which
are indicative of their interest in achieving stability in
that region.

We appreciate the role played by all the military
stakeholders in Mali who are working to combat
terrorism and realize stability and security in the
country. We also appreciate the efforts of the national
and regional military forces to address the security
threats in Mali and the region. We support the regional
initiatives to confront the challenges in the region, and
in that regard we urge the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel)to pursue its work in
combating terrorism and to make use of the assistance
provided by MINUSMA, in accordance with Council
resolution 2391 (2017). At the same time, we appreciate
the importance of providing sustainable funding for
the Joint Force. We express our readiness to discuss
the various ways in which funds can be provided to the
Joint Force.

Concerning humanitarian issues, we appreciate
the role played by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to mitigate the suffering of the
people, notwithstanding the continued deteriorating
security situation as well as the increasing floods in the
country. The humanitarian situation remains difficult,
affecting more than 7 million people in Mali. There
are difficulties in delivering basic services such as
health care, water and education services. Moreover,
humanitarian workers face the additional challenge
of being targeted by the armed groups operating in
the region.

In order to resolve the humanitarian crisis,
development activities must be undertaken. We are
pleased to note efforts made at the regional and
international levels to support development in Mali
and the region, in particular the G-5 Sahel priority
investment programme, which raised €2.4 billion in
pledges during Nouakchott conference on 6 December
2018; the African Union's Agenda 2063; and the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

In conclusion, we look forward to the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General in preparation
for the renewal of MINUSMA mandate in June,
making the Mission more efficient in the current
difficult environment.

