Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): On behalf of the
Ukrainian delegation, I would like to welcome you, Sir,
and to thank you for holding this extremely important
meeting, which opens the month of the Bulgarian
presidency of the Security Council. I would also like to
avail myself of this opportunity to wish the whole
Bulgarian team every success in fulfilling its highly
responsible duties. Our thanks also go to Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his comprehensive
update of the situation in Kosovo.

Ukraine reiterates its support for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and for the efforts of Special Representative
Michael Steiner, who at this stage is helping Kosovo,
as he has put it, to look at the road, not at the horizon.
In fact, today the Kosovo horizon is not visible even to
wizards or clairvoyants. Instead of seeing the horizon,
the region faces a curtain of problems.

It is of vital importance that UNMIK continue to
take robust measures aimed at strengthening the rule of
law in the province. Regrettably, the recent criminal
charges and the arrests of several former members of
the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) on suspicion of
committing serious crimes prompted a number of
protests and accusations on the part of Kosovo leaders
who were claiming that those efforts were politically
motivated. In that regard, my delegation endorses the
statement by the presidency of the European Union of
20 August 2002, which recognized that UNMIK
actions were taken in accordance with established
judicial processes and irrespective of any ethnic or
political affiliation of the suspects. We believe that
thorough criminal investigations against the alleged
perpetrators of the crimes, together with efforts to
contain organized crime networks, should reinforce the
understanding that nobody can be above the law.

Another critical issue for Kosovo is the
preparations for municipal elections to be held in
October 2002. We note that, despite the divisions in
opinion regarding the recent arrests, all of Kosovo's
political leaders have called for the elections to be all-
inclusive and to take place in a peaceful and calm
manner. Such an approach testifies to the visible,
positive changes in the province and Ukraine
encourages all the communities to participate in the
balloting, thus ensuring and protecting their rights.

It is a welcome sign that UNMIK's continuing
efforts, in close cooperation with Belgrade, have
resulted in the increase of returnees. However, it seems
to be quite an ironic situation that, at this particular
moment, UNMIK and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees are encountering a
substantial lack of funding. In this regard, we add our
voice to those of other delegations that have called
upon donors to provide the international presence in
Kosovo with the necessary financial resources and to
encourage all the actors involved to promote this
important work. In our View, the returns-related efforts
should be strengthened by a coordinated policy aimed
at facilitating inter-ethnic dialogue in the province.

My delegation fully endorses the
recommendations made by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe mission in
Kosovo. Through training, education and media
campaigns, it should be ensured that measures aimed at
reconciliation and inter-ethnic dialogue are central, and
not marginal features in Kosovo. We believe that this is
the only possible way to guide Kosovo's citizens in
building a multi-ethnic and democratic society.

Establishing the rule of law, a safe and secure
environment, economic development and inter-ethnic
dialogue - all these critical tasks remain on the
Kosovo agenda and require immediate action by its
leaders, close cooperation with Belgrade and consistent
international support. Ukraine is ready to continue its
active participation in the stabilization processes in
Kosovo and expresses its firm commitment to the
ongoing international efforts to bring peace and
stability to the region.

