The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.
At the outset, I would like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President
of the Transitional Federal Government of the Somali
Republic, and to thank him for his statement. We are
also grateful to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Augustine Mahiga for his briefing and for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/283).

I would like to reiterate to the Somali authorities
our strong support for their efforts to overcome
difficulties, to achieve reconciliation and to build a
secure, stable, united, democratic and prosperous nation.
Azerbaijan stresses the importance of a consistent,
strong commitment on the part of the Security Council
and the broader international community to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence
and unity of Somalia.

We welcome the progress in recent months on the
political and security fronts in Somalia, which
confirms the commitment of the Transitional Federal
Government to the implementation of the road map to
end the transition. We are encouraged by the fact that,
despite some difficulties and delays, the implementation
of the road map is proceeding. Considerable tasks have
been accomplished. As the Secretary-General notes in
his report, there is a real opportunity, which must be
seized, to move the country to a new phase in the
political process.

It is obvious that Somalia is responsible for its
own peace, stability, development and prosperity and
that the leadership and all political stakeholders in
Somalia must unite in the commitment to ending the
transition in August and to addressing the challenges
ahead. At the same time, continued international
support to the process remains critical.

Azerbaijan pays tribute to the United Nations, the
African Union, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the troop-contributing countries for
their continuing commitment to bringing peace and
stability to the country. We are encouraged by the
further consolidation of the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. I would also
like to commend the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation for its contribution to achieving peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia and for mobilizing
assistance for the urgent needs of the peoples affected
by the humanitarian crisis in that country.
Both the International Contact Group on Somalia
and the London Conference highlighted the need for
action against spoilers of the peace process. It is
crucial to continue all necessary efforts to effectively
address the threats and challenges to the successful
implementation of the road map, including through
supporting and implementing measures against those
internal and external actors or groups who seek to
undermine or block the peace process in Somalia.

Non-conventional attacks by Al-Shabaab are a
matter of serious concern, as are the reports about its
announced strengthened alliance with Al-Qaida and
other militia groups in the country. As Somali forces
and AMISOM. continue to make territorial gains, it is
critical, among other measures, to continue assisting
them to build their capacity to effectively confront and
prevent asymmetric attacks and to improve civilian
security.

The long-awaited durable peace in Somalia
demands the economic recovery of the country through
integrated national and international efforts. We concur
with the Secretary-General that the end of the transition
should encourage the international community to invest
seriously in the long-term recovery and development of
Somalia. We look forward to the Istanbul conference
and its outcome as a next important milestone in the
international community's collaboration for the sake of
peace and development in Somalia.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia requires
continued attention. We stress the importance of lasting
support to Somalia in that regard, as well as the need to
redouble efforts to find long-term solutions for
internally displaced persons.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 12:40 p.m.
