Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I would like to thank the
Pakistani presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this timely open debate on a very important
topic and for the opening remarks. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2086 (2013) this morning. We
remain confident that the recommendations and remarks
outlined in this debate will contribute to enhancing the
effectiveness of this important tool and in highlighting
the relevance of a multidimensional approach.
My delegation would also like to associate itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

As contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations since 1960, Tunisia attaches great
importance to the United Nations peacekeeping and its
fundamental role in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Tunisian troops and, since recently,
police deployed on United Nations missions have
earned high regards thanks to their performance in
difficult conditions and environments.

As the nature of threats to international peace and
security has changed over decades, so have the challenges
facing peacekeeping missions. Conflicts have changed
in nature and are today mostly linked to the incapacity
of State institutions to deliver and perform effectively.
Once limited to protecting boundaries from potential
threats, peacekeeping troops are nowadays deployed
to protect State institutions and civilians. Intra-State
conflicts and the challenge of providing more effective
and sustainable responses have led to an expansion in
the scope and mandates of peacekeeping.

The new responsibilities, which go beyond the
nature of its political and military roles, highlight the
strong link between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
and their increased complementarity. It is widely
asserted that they are mutually reinforcing.

Alhough not prevalent at the time that the Charter
of the United Nations was drafted, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding reflect the spirit of collective efforts
enshrined in that Charter. In that spirit, we need
to continue to work on our common vision for post-
conflict scenarios. We need to carry on in our task of
grasping the linkages between development, peace and
security, and to suggest solutions. Our objective is to
secure smooth transitions to lasting peace, security and
sustainable development.

The United Nations must play the central role
in securing a common peacebuilding vision and in
bringing together the various actors, including national
authorities and development actors. Peacekeeping
should be conducted within a coherent, precise and
realistic mandate. In that regard, permanent assessment
and coordination should be continuously undertaken
with the Peacebuilding Commission, regional and
subregional organizations and international funds and
programmes to ensure a coherent passage to a post-
conflict situation. In that regard, my delegation would
like to reiterate the outstanding role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in providing policy guidance and strategies
in post-conflict peacebuilding activities.

To date, peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations
are ever better at taking into account realities on the
ground. In that regard, we would like to put emphasis
on the importance of women's participation and of
language skills, among other requirements, to ensure
smooth interactions with populations at the grass roots.

Collective efforts require the full participation of
troop-contributing countries in formulating policies
and decision-making to ensure the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities. Also, countries that generally face economic
and financial constraints should not bear the burden of
providing troops and financing them. It is extremely
important that the issue of the unresolved reimbursement
of troop costs be addressed as soon as possible.

Tunisia strongly supports the role and relevance
of regional organizations in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The African Union in particular
is strengthening its capacities for post-conflict
peacebuilding. That should be strongly supported by
the international community. Peacebuilding actors,
including financial institutions, should play a significant
role in that regard. It is also the responsibility of the
international community as a whole to provide the
required resources. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations last for decades and require the appropriate
level of resources over extended periods.

My delegation would like to stress that Tunisia,
with its vast experience in peacekeeping, spanning
more than 5 0 years, remains fully committed to actively
contributing to peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
and stands ready to contribute further troops and
expertise, guided by the ideals and purposes of the
United Nations.

