Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to start by thanking you, Sir, and your entire
delegation for your efforts to bring this important issue
before the Council during your presidency.

In terms of our discussion, I would like to make
five points.

First, this is an important issue - one that we
have been interested in for some time. Ten years ago,
the Security Council convened a ministerial-level
meeting to discuss the causes of conflict in Africa. In
response to the Council's request, then-Secretary-
General Arman issued a report on the sources of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa that identified the
struggle for control over natural resources -
diamonds, timber and other raw materials - as factors
contributing to conflicts in Liberia, Angola and Sierra
Leone. Since then, the international community has
taken important steps to address the use of natural
resources to finance conflict, particularly in Africa, and
to help ensure that revenues from natural resources are
put to good use. However, we still have a long way to

go.

Secondly, the United States has taken this issue
seriously in multilateral and bilateral venues alike. The
United States has strongly supported efforts by the
Security Council to prevent the use of natural resources
to sustain conflicts in Angola, Sierra Leone, Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo through the
implementation of regulatory mechanisms and, as
necessary, sanctions. We also believe that the
transparent, equitable management of natural resources
is a key aspect of post-conflict reconstruction that
should be addressed by the Peacebuilding Commission.
Those efforts should put a particular focus on the
participation of women, since they are often dependent
on natural resources and most affected by violent
conflicts.

The United States has also been at the forefront
of efforts by the international community -
Governments, non-governmental organizations, the
private sector, the World Bank, the United Nations, the
Global Environment Facility, the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development and the G-8 -
both to prevent the illicit use of resources from fuelling
conflicts and to harness those natural resources for
sustainable development.

In 2000, the United States, the United Kingdom,
Norway and the Netherlands; 16 oil, mining and energy
companies; together with human rights, labour and
corporate responsibility groups developed voluntary
principles on security and human rights. Those
voluntary principles provide practical guidance to
companies to strengthen human rights safeguards in
their security arrangements in the extractive sector. In
2003, the United States signed on to the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme to control and monitor
the world's trade in rough diamonds and to prevent
diamonds from being used to finance rebel movements.

At the G-8 summit in 2003, the United States
joined other G-8 leaders in committing to a broad-
based anti-corruption and transparency action plan that
included one component to pilot, on a voluntary basis,
an intensified approach to transparency in the
extractive industries sector. That G-8 initiative spurred
the negotiation and adoption of the United Nations
Convention Against Corruption, signed by 140
countries to date.

In our bilateral assistance programmes, the
United States has made the sustainable management of
natural resources a component of our development
strategies in countries where extractive industries are a
major or potentially major revenue source. In
particular, we have focused on forests, land, minerals
and water and their linkages to violent conflict and
post-conflict peacebuilding. The transparent,
sustainable management of forests achieves many
goals. It can keep timber revenues from being used to
finance violent conflict; prevent forests from serving as
safe havens for armed groups; ensure equitable access
to and benefits from forest resources to reduce the risk
of conflicts involving indigenous people, local elites
and outsiders; and is essential for sustainable
development and the maintenance of healthy
ecosystems.

Thirdly, if we adopt innovative approaches, we
can make progress. For example, the Liberia Forest
Initiative - which the United States launched in 2003
together with the Government of Liberia, other donors
and non-governmental organizations - is increasingly
viewed as a model for forest reform efforts in Africa
and elsewhere.

The United States co-sponsored the Forest Law
Enforcement and Governance ministerial meetings in
East Asia in 2001, Africa in 2003, and Europe and
North Asian in 2005, which have gone a long way
towards raising political awareness and commitment to
action to address illegal activities in the forest sector
worldwide.

The United States is also working across Asia to
reduce pervasive forest-related conflicts. In the
Philippines, Nepal, Indonesia and Cambodia, we are
assisting efforts to clarify forest use rights and land
tenure, particularly for poor and indigenous
populations. Our work to support the Sava River
Commission has brought formerly hostile parties
together in several former Yugoslav republics to
collaborate in managing a key transboundary resource
represented by the water of the Sava River.

Fourthly, the issue of addressing and properly
managing natural resources is necessarily related to
good governance and transparency. Those are the
essential factors needed to delink natural resources
from violent conflict. Good governance includes
working within the country's financial and judicial
institutions, which are responsible for collecting
Government revenues from the extractive industries
and enforcing contracts and regulatory actions. Good
governance also includes civil society participation in
deciding how resources are managed and in clarifying
resource rights, which is particularly important in post-
conflict settings and peace agreements to prevent
further eruptions of violence over control of resources.

Finally, together we have made progress, but, as I
said before, we still have a long way to go to prevent
the struggle over natural resources from fuelling
conflict.

It was 10 years ago that the United States had the
opportunity to raise this issue during our presidency of
the Council. Yet, revenues from natural resources
continue to fund violent conflicts throughout the world.
For that reason, we welcome the efforts of Foreign
Minister De Gucht - whom we welcome and thank for
his leadership and for presiding over this meeting - to
host this meeting and this opportunity to focus on ways
that national Governments and the international
community can harness natural resources for
productive purposes. We look forward to continuing to
contribute to this effort. We expect that this dialogue
and the surge of interest in this important issue will
continue.

