Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic):
It gives me great pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. Your presence in the Chair has
enhanced today's meeting. We are confident that the
diplomatic skills of Ambassador Momodou Sallah and the
entire Gambian delegation will enable the Council to
achieve success in its work.

I wish also to pay tribute to the Permanent
Representative of Gabon for the manner in which he
presided over the work of the Council in February.

The Security Council has just adopted a resolution that
we in Kuwait view as an outstanding and most important
example of diplomacy supported by force - and by a
firmness that is reflected in this evening's unanimous vote.
The resolution endorses the Memorandum of Understanding
agreed with the Government of Iraq by the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan. That achievement resolved a
problem that came close to imperiling peace and stability
in our region as well as threatening the people of Iraq and
all the other peoples of the region. Through its Council of
Ministers, Kuwait issued a statement immediately upon
the Secretary-General's triumphant return, officially
endorsing the Memorandum of Understanding.

Kuwait has always earnestly followed a policy aimed
at protecting our region from crises resulting from a
failure to implement relevant Security Council resolutions.
For that reason, we hope that the Iraqi Government -
having tested the determination of the Security Council,
the probity of the Secretary-General and the unanimous
nature of the message he carried - will implement the
Memorandum of Understanding in full, both in letter and
in spirit, along with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We in Kuwait and in all the other countries of the
Gulf Cooperation Council believe that there is an organic
relationship between the success of the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and peace and security
in our region. That is why all statements issued by
Kuwait or by any other member of the Gulf Cooperation
Council - most recently the statement adopted at the
Gulf Cooperation Council summit conference - have
called upon Iraq to cooperate with the Special
Commission. We have on earlier occasions stated our full
support for the Special Commission and its efforts to
carry out its mandate.

We fully understand the eagerness of the Security
Council to protect Iraqis as individuals and other
inhabitants of the region from the scourge of weapons of
mass destruction. But we also believe that there are other
scourges sorely afflicting many Kuwaitis whose fate is
unknown - prisoners of war and detainees held in
Iraq - and many nationals of third countries. Here I
thank the representatives of Bahrain and of Slovenia,
along with other representatives, who spoke of the tragedy
of Kuwaiti prisoners of war and detainees. Addressing
this problem is among the basic commitments that Iraq
must meet before there is any question of lifting the
sanctions.

We in Kuwait pinned high hopes on the Secretary-
General's mission and on today's meeting of the Security
Council. Kuwaitis are praying and beseeching the Council
to attach the same importance to Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti
prisoners and detainees as it has attached to others in the

 

region when it sought to save them from the threat of
weapons of mass destruction. We know that neither the
Charter nor international law discriminates among human
beings.

That is why I address the Council not in my official
capacity, but as a Kuwaiti, a Kuwaiti individual who carries
here at the United Nations the responsibility of defending
the destiny of the Kuwaiti detainees and prisoners, who
represent 1 per cent of the total population of Kuwait. I
repeat, 1 per cent of the total population. Even if this
number were much smaller, a human being is
a human being, and respect for his dignity must come
before any other consideration.

That is why I come to the Council to present the
tragedy of these innocent people. They expect from the
Council the same enthusiasm that they felt it expressed
when it dealt with the subject of Kuwaiti detainees,
prisoners of war and citizens of third countries.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Kuwait has
blessed the recent Council resolution 1153 (1998), which
permits an increase in oil sales to $5.256 billion, because
Kuwait suffers exactly as the Iraqi people do. That is
why, when a measure is taken to relieve the Iraqi people,
we in Kuwait bless it without any reservations, and we
expect the Council to take similar measures when it
comes to the Kuwaiti prisoners and detainees.

We would like to conclude by thanking God and
thanking you, Mr. President.

