Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of March. We commend you,
Sir, for having convened this very important debate on
an issue that remains one of the most serious threats to
national, regional and international peace and security.
We deeply appreciate the presence of and briefings
by the eminent persons who have joined us here
today, all of whom have imparted tremendous insight,
which has greatly broadened our understanding of the
subject matter. We wish to acknowledge specifically
the presence earlier today of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of your great country, Sir.

It is deeply regrettable that the world has become
more brutal and Vicious. We are witnessing an
unprecedented pattern of violence among religious
groups, across regions, from Africa to Asia to the Middle
East, where people are turning against each other in the
name of religion and culture. The beheadings by the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria captured on video, as well
as the killings and major displacements of Christians
and Yazidis in Iraq, are just some of the appalling
crimes that have been committed in the Middle East
region. These acts of violence further complicate the
long-standing conflicts in Syria and between Israel and
Palestine.

The efforts of the United Nations, including the
deployment of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency, and the Security Council's adoption of
presidential statements and resolutions on the various
situations, are truly commendable.

While it is difficult to identify the precise cause
of some of those violent conflicts, we have seen that
in most of them large numbers of Christians have been
abducted, sexually and physically abused or killed;
moreover, their churches have been destroyed, and
some have been forced to change religion. We join the
international community in condemning those acts in
the strongest terms. We believe that freedom of religion
is a basic and fundamental human right that should
never be violated.

Societies have different values, beliefs and
religions. They should therefore be allowed to live
without fear and to practice their religions. For that
reason, it goes without saying that Governments have
the responsibility to protect their populations from
mass atrocities and human rights Violations, especially
those linked to religion and ethnicity. The victims of
such attacks deservejustice. The International Criminal
Court remains their only ray of hope. We therefore call
on the Court to continue to conduct investigations and
prosecute the perpetrators of such heinous crimes.

In conclusion, Botswana joins the international
community in strongly condemning acts of terrorism
in all their forms and manifestations. Terrorism cannot
be contained within national borders. Therefore no
country is immune from being either the target or the
victim of terrorism.

