I want to thank the Dominican Republic, President of the Security Council for April, for hosting today's open video-teleconference debate on the topic of youth, peace, and security. This year coincides with the celebration of the fifth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015), which, for the first time, included the consideration of young people in Security Council discussions on international peace and security. The participation of youth is based on the five key pillars of participation, protection, prevention, disengagement and reintegration, and partnerships. This concept was strengthened in 2018 through the presentation of "The missing peace: independent progress study on youth, peace and security" (see S/2018/86), mandated by resolution 2250 (2015), through the Secretary-General's launch of the first United Nations youth strategy, entitled "Youth 2030", and through the adoption of resolution 2419 (2018), which reiterated and called for the increased role of youth in all levels of decision-making related to security, conflict and peace, including in peace agreements. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report issued on 2 March (S/2020/167), and for the recommendations included therein. A sustainable peace and an end to modern conflicts cannot be achieved without the involvement of stakeholders from all segments of society. Recognizing the role and importance of meaningful participation by young men and women in preventing and resolving conflicts and sustaining peace must be a key factor in and principle of peacebuilding efforts and post-peace development. That is especially true in a country with a very young population like Afghanistan, where 63 per cent of our population is below the age of 25 and 46 per cent of those are children under the age of 15. Talking about the future of Afghanistan and its conflict resolution and economic development means talking about the needs of those 27.5 million people yearning for peace, education and opportunities in order to fulfil their dreams and aspirations. With that in mind, promoting the participation of youth in key decision- and policymaking has been a priority in the agenda of the Government of Afghanistan, as reflected in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework, the national priority programmes and the Afghanistan Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). As a result of our commitment to our national framework and SDGs, some of our young people have joined the ranks of high-ranking officials in the civil and security sectors. Afghanistan has worked diligently to equip the new generations with opportunities to become the leaders of our new Afghanistan. As part of those efforts, the Government has instituted legislation to create fair access to education and subsequent employment opportunities for young men and women in our country. We have worked to eliminate child labour while instituting policies for the retention of students, especially girls, through the 2019 girls' education policy. Policies such as the Safe Schools Declaration have sought to improve education infrastructure and mitigate the threat of insecurity that would keep our children out of school. The Government has also continued its work to strengthen the country's tertiary education system and, through the second skills development project, has established and reinforced institutions that impart technical and vocation skills that can help our youth explore a diverse stream of employment opportunities. As part of our peace efforts, we understand the importance of including youth in the intra-Afghan negotiations with the Taliban. In April 2019, the Government of Afghanistan convened the consultative loya jirga on peace that saw the participation of 3,200 representatives from all parts of Afghanistan, including youth. The jirga adopted a road map for peace highlighting the participation of youth and women in peace talks. In line with that principle, the Afghan Government has stressed and reiterated not only that should young women and men be considered as part of the Government's inclusive negotiating team, but also that the constitutional rights and past advances secured for them should be preserved in any peace settlement. We remain steadfast in our dedication to ensuring that the outcome of those negotiations is an inclusive agreement that represents all segments of our society in keeping with the principles of a democratic and representative republic. Ensuring the protection and well-being of our youth has also been an area of priority for the Government of Afghanistan. The Government has passed legislation, including a revised Penal Code in 2018 and the Child Rights Protection Law in 2019, to ensure Afghanistan's proper compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and relevant international obligations. That has been further accompanied by the institutionalization of zero-tolerance policies on such matters as the involvement of children at the level of the Afghan national and local police and the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. However, there is more to be done. Despite our continued efforts, youth remain one of the groups most harshly affected by the ongoing conflict. The rate of child casualties has risen yearly since 2013, and illegal armed groups, including the Taliban, continue to put children in harm's way, using them as human shields and child soldiers. That is an inexcusable and grave violation of international human rights law. The current climate in Afghanistan, resulting from decades of unrelenting conflict, has left generations disenfranchised and our youth vulnerable in ways that the Taliban and other illegal armed groups have exploited. We have consistently asked the Taliban to enter into a ceasefire with the Government so as to prevent further loss of life among our youth and Afghans as a whole, and now, with the arrival of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we reiterate that call even more emphatically. Our country demands peace, and we need to be able to address the effects of the pandemic, including the precarious situation of many of our youth, who are facing the effects of school closures and the loss of economic activities on their well-being. I would like to close by emphasizing that the aspirations of young Afghans to a peaceful and stable Afghanistan are the aspirations of Afghanistan as a whole. At a time when we are facing the challenge of COVID-19 as a common threat, there is a need for all citizens, including youth, to play a key role in addressing that challenge by raising awareness, following Government guidelines and, where possible, helping those most vulnerable to the effects of the threat. The first and most urgent step towards achieving that goal is to reach an immediate ceasefire with a view to ending the suffering in Afghanistan and creating a suitable environment for the delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance. As we start the holy month of Ramadan, we stress our call to the Taliban to see this time of peace and reflection as a time to institute the humanitarian ceasefire our people desperately need. We encourage our international partners and allies to join our calls for the future and well-being of Afghanistan and of the new generations who deserve peace and a future in which their hopes can become realities.
