Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): Unfortunately, my
delegation was not in a position to support the draft
resolution on the situation in the Middle East as it was
put before the Security Council today.

Slovakia is very concerned about the events that
have been taking place recently in the Gaza Strip. We
are especially concerned about the deaths of civilians,
both Palestinians and Israelis, and about the destruction
of basic power-supply infrastructure in the Palestinian
territories. We therefore take this opportunity to once
again appeal to both sides for the release of all
detained and abducted persons. Both parties should
refrain from any action that could cause further
deterioration or escalation of the situation.

We believe that all the decisions of the Security
Council regarding the region of the Middle East are
very important and that they have a direct impact on
the situation and on future developments. In that sense,
any action taken by the Council should be considered
very carefully, with the aim of making a balanced
appeal to all parties and with the final goal of
achieving a just and lasting peace.

We are very sorry to again note with concern -
as we did in the Council just on 21 June - that the
Palestinian Government, which was formed and is
being led by Hamas, has still not committed itself to
the three principles laid out by the Quartet in its
statement of 30 January. We remain convinced about
that and reiterate the need to meet and implement those
three principles: non-violence, recognition of Israel's
right to exist and acceptance of existing agreements
and obligations.

As that crucial element and several other very
important issues - in particular the condemnation of
terrorist acts - were not, in our View, sufficiently
reflected in the draft resolution, we were not in a
position to support it. We would also have welcomed a
reference to the most recent developments between
Lebanon and Israel.

As we have done previously, we once again call
on both parties to exercise the utmost restraint. We
urge them to commit themselves fully to the goal of a
negotiated two-State solution in accordance with the
provisions of the road map.
06-42893

