Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings. The twentieth
anniversary ofthe massacre ofmore than 8,000 Muslim
men and boys in Srebrenica - an atrocious act of
genocide - should be an occasion for reflection. We
need to reflect on the lapses on so many levels that
allowed the massacre to take place and assure ourselves
that such an atrocity will never occur again. We also
need to reflect on the progress that has been made on
reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina since that
unfortunate event. We encourage the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to put the past behind them and forge
ahead within a united and peaceful country.

States have the primary responsibility to protect
their populations against mass atrocities. In that regard,
it is the obligation of every State to implement their
commitments made under the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document. The international community in
general, and the Security Council in particular, must
live up to their responsibilities to ensure that never
again will the world witness the horrors of genocide.

Nigeria supports the formation of a global network
of focal points on the responsibility to protect, as
that responsibility is only as consistent, powerful and
effective as practitioners make it. Therefore, all States
Members of the United Nations have the responsibility
to protect citizens from mass atrocities.

Developing the institutions needed to predict and
prevent genocide is crucial. Early-warning mechanisms,
programmes for conflict prevention, standing forces for
rapid intervention and international courts for effective
punishment should be prioritized. Political will on the
part of Governments and international organizations is
essential in narrowing the gap between the desperation
of people in dire situations and addressing early-
warning signals.

Nigeria believes that formulating an international
contingency plan that can be promptly carried out
in a case of a serious humanitarian crisis may be
one more way to address those challenges. Regional
cooperation and partnerships with non-governmental
organizations in the field of genocide prevention should
be strengthened. A robust campaign against acts of
genocide and other atrocities must be sustained.

Nigeria remains firmly committed to the fight
against impunity. We believe that impunity must be
addressed resolutely wherever it occurs in the world.
The fight against impunity and the prevention of mass
atrocity crimes are national priorities for us. Our belief
in the need for global action against mass atrocity
crimes and security threats to humankind underpins
our ratification of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the Arms Trade Treaty and other
relevant international legal instruments.

The implementation of the Rights Up Front
initiative, launched by the Secretary-General in
December 2013, with a human rights mandate, will
contribute to strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations and the Security Council in responding to
conflicts in a timely manner. This laudable initiative
should be sustained.

We reaffirm our support to the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
to the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
Their briefings to the Security Council are an early-
warning mechanism. We call for more regular briefings
by those officials, especially when civilians are faced
with an imminent threat of mass atrocity crimes. We
would urge the Council to give consideration to holding
an annual open debate on the prevention of genocide,
in the same manner the Council regularly holds debates
on the protection of civilians, on women and peace and
security and on other thematic issues on its agenda.

The protection of civilians is an important aspect
of the mandates of peacekeeping missions today. We
therefore call for the integration of the United Nations
framework of analysis for atrocity crimes into the
planning for peacekeeping operations. That would give
peacekeepers a better understanding of the risk factors
that could trigger mass atrocity crimes and enhance the
protection of civilians.

Finally, the world must not forget the victims of the
massacre at Srebrenica. Out of respect for their loved
ones, Nigeria supports the designation of 11 July as an
international day of remembrance.

