Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): It was my delegation's
expectation that the formal consideration by the Security
Council on 15 April 1996 of the military incursions by
the Israeli armed forces into Lebanon would have a
salutary impact and result in the termination of its attacks.
To our disappointment, however, not only have military
actions continued, but they have in fact intensified, as
evident in the brutal shelling of the United Nations
Interim Forces in Lebanon (UNIFIL) compound earlier
today, which has taken the lives of yet more innocent
civilians. Clearly, in the face of these developments the
Council must shoulder its responsibilities, as enshrined in
the relevant provisions of the Charter, by taking
immediate and effective action.

In the absence of such response, the credibility of
the Council may be called into question. It is against this
backdrop that my delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution and the resolution before us. We regret that no
consensus could be reached on the divergent positions
expressed by members of the Council, thereby precluding
the submission of a consolidated text. This occurred
despite the obvious need for the Council to send a clear
and unambiguous message for the cessation of hostilities.

The Indonesian delegation fully subscribes to the
common elements contained in both the resolution and the

 

draft resolution, these being the call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries. A
cessation of hostilities is an essential first step in stemming
further casualties and preventing the exodus of civilians,
thereby leading to the restoration of normalcy throughout
Lebanon. The call for respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon is a
further reiteration of the international community's
principled position, as reflected in Security Council
resolution 425 (1978).

Also central to both texts is the recognition of the
need for action by Member States and the United Nations
to alleviate the sufferings of the civilian population caused
by the conflict. The images of innocent civilians killed or
maimed cannot but move the conscience of the international
community. We must act now.

My delegation would be remiss in its duty if it failed
to underscore the need to respect the safety, security and
unhindered movement of UNIFIL, as well as of
organizations engaged in humanitarian activities. It is
gratifying to note that that concern is one unanimously
shared by the Members of the Council.

While cognizant of the common threads between the
resolution and the draft resolution, we recognize all too
well the divergent elements which have proved to be
irreconcilable. For the Indonesian delegation, it is quite
clear where the onus of responsibility rests for bringing the
current hostilities to an immediate end. It is equally clear
that unless this is attained, the recent progress in the Middle
East peace process, which we have all recently witnessed,
would be in jeopardy.

Indonesia, for its part, has as a matter of principle
attached importance to dialogue and negotiations as a viable
modality to resolve conflict situations. With regard to the
situation in the Middle East, including the situation in
Lebanon, Indonesia has been consistent in its support of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978). In this context, we would like to reiterate our
conviction that the military action in Lebanon cannot but be
a violation of the aforementioned resolutions and in total
contradiction of the aims and objectives of the Madrid
peace process.

