I, too, thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and presentation. Yesterday's transfer to the Court of Mr. Ali Kushayb is an important development for the victims of the crimes committed in Darfur and for international criminal justice, to which France is proud to have been able to contribute, alongside the Governments of the Central African Republic, Chad and the Netherlands. This step confirms the remarkable work done by the Prosecutor and her teams and the relevance of the Court within the multilateral system. The Court must be able to carry out its missions in complete independence, within the framework of the Rome Statute. The Prosecutor must also be able to exercise her prerogatives without obstruction, threats or attacks. In this context, we are encouraged by recent statements by the Sudanese authorities expressing their determination to fight impunity and their willingness to cooperate fully with the Court. Effective channels of discussion must now be established to enable an operational response to the Court's requests. The execution of the four other arrest warrants is essential. During the period covered by the report, the situation in Darfur remained precarious. France condemns in the strongest possible terms the violence against civilians and violations of international humanitarian law, in particular gender-based and sexual violence, and attacks on the staff of humanitarian organizations. We call on the Sudanese authorities to implement their national plan for the protection of civilians. The protection of human rights and support for the rule of law and accountability are at the heart of the mandate just given by the Security Council to the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan. The Security Council also renewed the mandate of the African Union- United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, which continues to play a major role in protecting civilians in Darfur and reporting on human rights violations. With the opening of several offices of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Sudan, including in Darfur, the United Nations should thus be fully able to support the Sudanese authorities in building a fair, democratic and inclusive system. We once again express the hope that the negotiations between the transitional Government and the armed groups, which are continuing in Juba, will be successful in building a just and lasting peace in the region.
