Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing. I also thank the civil society briefers,
Dr. Hala and Ms. Khoulani, for their statements
this morning.

Since the creation of the United Nations in 1945
from the vestiges of the brutal and devastating Second
World War, the United Nations and its Member States
have had to acknowledge and address the challenges
of missing and detained persons as a result of conflict.
Today, in a world of seemingly endless conflicts, the
question of missing and detained persons prevails in
all parts of the world - in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Libya,
Afghanistan, Palestine, Western Sahara, Colombia and
other trouble spots worldwide.

And since the colonial subjugation of Africans
and the slave trade of centuries past, many Africans
have perished in the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Four
hundred years after we were first forcefully removed
from Africa as slaves, we are still waiting for full
accountability for the persons who went missing during
those years.

The long-term impact of being unable to account
for missing persons in armed conflict extends beyond
the victims themselves and, as we have heard here
today, has lasting and prolonged consequences for
affected families, friends, communities and countries
as a whole. In that regard, all parties to a conflict, be
they an occupying Power, a State or a non-State actor,
must be cognizant of and respect their legal and moral
obligations to ensure that the people within their
borders, areas of control or occupation are protected
and that detailed records are kept of those detained.
We would also like to highlight the importance of
addressing the return of mortal remains to families as a
way to begin the healing process.

From our own history and experience of national
reconciliation, I would like to highlight the importance
of truth, justice and accountability in solidifying
the peace process, bringing closure to families and
beginning the process of reconciliation and integration.
The ultimate goal is long-term peace, stability and
prosperity for all - victims and the State alike. In that
regard, my delegation would like to welcome the efforts
of the Astana group and the United Nations that resulted
in the recent prisoner swap on 31 July between the
Syrian Government and the opposition parties in Abu
Al-Zindeen, in northern Aleppo. South Africa urges all
parties to agree to additional prisoner exchanges and to
move away from one-to-one exchanges in favour of the
release of larger numbers of detainees by both parties
to the conflict.

In order to continue to build on that positive
momentum, South Africa calls on all parties to
make every effort to release civilians - particularly
women, children, the elderly, the sick and those with
disabilities - from detention as a gesture of good
faith and confidence-building among the parties
to the conflict. No child should be kept in detention
indefinitely, under any circumstances.

In the meantime, and in order to enhance
accountability to our own societies and communities,
let us make efforts to welcome and receive our nationals
into our countries from Syrian refugee and detention
centres. That would support Mr. Geir Pedersen's role
in facilitating political dialogue, particularly on the
matter of prisoners and missing persons, among the
various stakeholders in the Syrian conflict

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate South
Africa's position that the only way to achieve long-term
peace and stability in Syria is through an inclusive
Syrian-led and -owned political dialogue, facilitated
by the United Nations, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015). In order to continue to make progress on the
matter of missing persons and detainees, progress must
be made in the political process.

