Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): It is an honour to have His
Excellency Mr. Agustin Rossi, Minister of Defence of
the Argentine Republic, presiding over today's debate
on a matter that is so important to our region and
our countries. I would also like to welcome Special
Representative Sandra Honore and thank her for her
presentation. Brazil would like to reiterate its wishes
for her success in all her endeavours. And I appreciate
the contribution of the Permanent Representative of
Haiti, Ambassador Regis.

Today Haiti has an opportunity to consolidate
stability, to continue to pursue a number of initiatives
aimed at creating jobs, generating income and promoting
investment, and to strengthen its institutions. Its efforts
to establish an enhanced platform for coordinating
international cooperation, to allocate budgetary
resources to cover part ofthe costs ofpending elections,
as well as its social programmes aimed at combating
poverty, are promising indications, among others,
of significant progress. We encourage our Haitian
partners to continue on that path towards development
with social justice.

We also reiterate our call to all friends of Haiti to
commit the resources necessary to help Haiti invest
in key development projects, including infrastructure.
Brazil is doing its part. We continue to cooperate with
the Haitian authorities in searching for partners willing
to complement the $40 million we have provided for
the construction of the Artibonite hydropower plant,
which would truly help to transform the country.
Unfortunately, not enough support from Governments
and international financial organizations has been
secured so far.

Development is not a purely economic concept. It
is also a political one, since development both benefits
from and strengthens democracy. In the case of Haiti
today, it is of paramount importance that all political
actors and parties engage constructively in a genuine
political dialogue in order to uphold democratic
consolidation, institution-building, national ownership,
human rights and the rule of law. Consolidating
democracy in Haiti is as crucial to its future as are
investment and infrastructure, agriculture and industry,
health and education.

The Security Council has called for pending
legislative and local elections to be held this year.
Brazil hopes that elections can be conducted as soon
as possible; otherwise Haiti runs the risk of having its
Parliament reduced to only a third of the current number
of seats, which could severely impair the political
role of the legislative branch, breaking the functional
symmetry of the three branches of Government. We
are confident that concrete steps are being taken in
that direction and urge all Haitian political actors to
promote inclusive dialogue to expedite the preparations.
President Martelly's leadership is key to the process.
Brazil stands ready to support the democratic process
in Haiti and has already delivered on its pledge for
support for the upcoming electoral cycle.

Progress in the security situation continues to be
the main pillar of the consolidation plan of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We welcome the enhanced recruitment to the Haitian
National Police, the ongoing vetting process and the
increased joint operations between the Haitian National
Police and MINUSTAH. It is crucial that the Haitian
National Police absorb best practices and lessons
from MINUSTAH's experience and benefit from the
Mission's ability to provide conditions adequate to
a successful handover of security responsibilities in
critical areas.

We concur with the gradual, carefully planned
reduction of troop levels proposed by the Secretary-
General, attuned to the realities on the ground. The
Secretary-General is also right about the need to
assess, beyond the 2016 horizon, whether MINUSTAH
remains the most suitable configuration for the United
Nations presence in Haiti. Ensuring a balanced and
holistic consolidation strategy for MINUSTAH is
critical to Haiti's long-term stability. As the Mission
reduces its military footprint, development assistance,
from both the United Nations and other actors, should
be scaled up. It is crucial to underline that need at this
juncture in the life of MINUSTAH because very often
as troops depart, development and humanitarian actors
and resources follow suit. We must not repeat that grave
error in Haiti. A future United Nations presence in Haiti
should be able to reverse that trend and should be based
on the broad consensus being developed in the Council
on the relationships between security and development,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and sustainable peace
and sound transitions, as set out in resolution 2086
(2013).

MINUSTAH's experience has demonstrated the
potential of innovative approaches when combined with
the well-established structure of a multidimensional
peacekeeping operation. Tools such as quick-impact
projects and military engineers play a crucial role in
supporting core stabilization objectives. In that regard,
we welcome the broadened scope for community
violence reduction projects in support of initiatives
promoting the rule of law in Haiti. The successful
experience of legal aid offices supported through
community violence reduction projects in Haiti, which
are responsible for freeing hundreds from pre-trial
detention, demonstrates the wide-ranging potential
of such programmes, including from a human rights
perspective. We hope that all of those experiences
and best practices, rather than short-term financial
considerations, will form the basis of our evaluation of
future options next year.

The contribution of the United Nations in Haiti
and that of the international community will be
judged by its legacy. We remain committed to the
objective of ensuring that the stability gains secured
so far are sustainable. In other words, we must get this
transition right. A close working relationship between
the Mission and its counterparts in the Government
is key to avoiding substantial gaps in critical areas,
especially in security. As we have stated in the past,
the consolidation plan must be owned by the Haitian
leadership as a platform for taking over their primary
responsibilities in a sustainable manner.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Brazil's long-term
commitment and solidarity with Haiti, and also our
confidence in the Haitian people's determination to
persevere and succeed in their quest for independence,
stability, democracy and prosperity.

