Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to take a few moments to share the communique
just issued by the Peruvian Foreign Office regarding
the recent events in Nigeria. It indicates that Peru
firmly condemns the car-bomb attack on the United
Nations facility in Abuja, Nigeria. Criminal acts like
that of today, which caused the deaths of nearly 20
people, cannot be tolerated, particularly when they
target United Nations staff, working devotedly day-in
and day-out for international peace and development.
Expressing its solidarity with the victims, their families
and the United Nations, the Government of Peru urges
the relevant authorities to do everything in their power
to bring to justice those responsible for such a heinous
crime.

Regarding the matter before us today, my
delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for having
convened and organized this debate, offering us the
opportunity to speak on a matter to which Peru is
deeply committed. We are also grateful for the concept
paper from the President of the Council (S/2011/496, annex). We also join in the thanks expressed to the
Secretary-General for his contribution to today's
debate.

As indicated in the concept paper prepared by the
delegation of India, peacekeeping operations have
become a core instrument of the Organization in
fulfilling its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. These are
multidimensional operations involving military,
civilian and police personnel. We have accordingly
seen an increase in their number, in the diversity of the
tasks assigned to them, and in the risks they face. Yet
the resources allocated to them have not increased
proportionately to their tasks and the risks they face.
That is why this debate is important to preparing for
the future of peacekeeping operations.

That involves not just the provision of
appropriate human, logistic and financial resources, but
also the harmonization of operational concepts to
establish clear guidelines and procedures. Such
preparation is of the greatest importance, and my
delegation believes that we are very far behind in
providing for the needs of the peacekeeping operations.

I believe it is important to emphasize the
participation of the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Peru is of the opinion that we need close
interaction and greater understanding among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries so that clear, realistic and
achievable mandates can be drawn up and available
resources used most efficiently. As recommended by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in
its most recent report (A/65/ 19), there must be full
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries so that they can participate from the outset in
all aspects and stages of peacekeeping operations,
especially when changes are made to the mandates of
missions. That is important in allowing lessons learned
to be assimilated and the experience and technical
knowledge of the troop- and police-contributing
countries to be brought to bear on the planning and
organizing of the missions through a triangular
cooperation.

As early as 2000, the Brahimo report
(S/2000/809) identified the most pressing challenges to
be faced and noted that the keys to the success of a
multidimensional mission are the commitment and
political support of the parties involved, rapid and
effective deployment with enhanced capacity, and a
peacebuilding strategy. Although we have made
progress on those elements, much still remains to be
done, particularly given the changing international
context and the fact that mandates are increasingly
complex and sensitive, as are the basic principles of
action for peacekeeping operations.

We have to ask whether we are meeting these
requirements when we draw up the mandates for
peacekeeping operations - for example, when they are
entrusted with the task of protecting civilians - or
when a full assessment is made of the circumstances
and capacity to deter and respond in legitimate self-
defence or in defence of the mandate.
In resolution 1894 (2009), the Security Council
reaffirmed its practice of drawing up reference
parameters to evaluate the progress of the
implementation of peacekeeping mission mandates,
including protection of civilians mandates. Such
parameters, along with the guidelines and strategic
frameworks being drawn up in various areas, are
important elements, and we must work still harder to
achieve a consensus that can be reflected in operations
in the field.

It is similarly important to recall that the majority
of peacekeeping operations carry out the earliest
peacebuilding operations. In September 2010, 10 of the
16 peacekeeping operations had mandates covering a
wide variety of peacebuilding operations, including the
direct implementation of such tasks by mission
personnel. That reveals the links and interactive
dynamic among achieving, maintaining and building
peace. Those aspects must therefore be provided for in
the mandates and resources allocated to peacekeeping
operations.

In concluding, I wish to underscore the
importance Peru attributes to preventive diplomacy in
peacekeeping operations and in the Peacebuilding
Commission. It is of the greatest importance that we
develop and implement measures that will permit us to
prevent conflict and reduce the risk of conflict flaring
up or recurring. The Secretary-General has reiterated
that point on many occasions, as did the Brahimi
report; the presidency of the Council reiterated it in
July. There remains an urgent need to establish
strategies and an effective system for conflict
prevention in the long term. That will require a holistic
approach, taking into account the relational dynamic
between security and development - an integrated,
coherent approach to the work of achieving, keeping
and building peace.

