Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): My delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report and
especially for the clear and encompassing measures he
proposes for tackling the problem of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I welcome also the presence of
Mr. Vieira de Mello among us. His commitment to
humanitarian causes is always inspiring.

Since the Council held its last debate on this issue,
new conflicts have broken out. The aggravation of conflicts
in Africa and East Timor have taken a heavy toll on the
civilians caught in those situations. We commend the role
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights throughout
the tragic events in East Timor, and we firmly support her
recommendation that the atrocities and violations of human
rights committed in East Timor be investigated and
punished.

According to a study quoted in the June issue of the
Red Cross Review, civilians accounted for 5 per cent of the
victims of the First World War, whereas the estimated toll
for the armed conflicts of the 1990s has reached some 90
per cent. These figures are sufficient to depict the
unspeakable magnitude of the human disasters to which we
bear witness nowadays.
Atrocities are being committed every day in the name
of religious beliefs, ethnic or national origin, and political
loyalty. The humanitarian catastrophes in Kosovo, Angola
and East Timor constitute telltale signs in this regard. It
seems that the whole legacy of human reason has given
way to a moral vacuum in which everything is permissible.

Fortunately, the Security Council's readiness to deal
with this problem is evidence of the political will to
change the present reality and start weaving a safety net
for civilians affected by armed conflict, especially the
most vulnerable groups, such as children, women and the
elderly.

Since the presidential statement of 12 February 1999
concerning the protection of civilians, the Security
Council has grappled with other related matters,
particularly the question of humanitarian assistance to
refugees in Africa and the plight of children affected by
armed conflict.

The Security Council can and must contribute to the
effort of promoting a climate of compliance, that is, to
halt flagrant and grave violations of universally accepted
international humanitarian and human rights law. The
imperative of ensuring that humanitarian relief is safely
provided as a collective responsibility should not
automatically imply the involvement of the Security
Council in these matters. There are situations of massive
abuses that may pose real threats to international peace
and security. In those cases, the option of enforcement
action should not be ruled out. The contribution made by
Ambassador Turk in his statement towards clarifying a
very difficult problem was extremely relevant and, I
think, should be considered by all of us.

Apart from the goal of alleviating the suffering of
civilians in armed conflicts, we should bear in mind that
lasting peace hinges very much on preventive measures.
I do not refer here to prevention as part of a shortsighted
security approach, but to the construction of solid pillars
for a pacified society through cooperation for
development, poverty eradication, and the strengthening
of the rule of law. As a matter of fact, the fundamental
objective of the United Nations is to prevent conflicts
from breaking out rather than tackling their effects.

With regard to the issues touched upon by the
Secretary-General in his report, I would like to highlight
four aspects that have to do with the work of the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

First, it is fundamental to maintain the momentum
created by the note by the President of the Security
Council of 29 January 1999 on the work of the sanctions
Committees. Secondly, together with the assessment of
the impact of sanctions regimes, the Security Council
must consider applying humanitarian exemptions, as
appropriate, to measures adopted under Article 41 of the

 

United Nations Charter. Thirdly, priority should be given to
the development of so-called targeted or smart sanctions, so
as to penalize those directly responsible for wrongdoing
rather than aggravating the hardship facing the population
as a whole. Finally, the Security Council must set up
reliable mechanisms with a view to monitoring the flow of
weapons to regions torn by armed conflicts. Those who
violate multilaterally negotiated and Security
Council-mandated arms embargoes should be held
accountable for the use of such weapons.

The 40 recommendations submitted by the Secretary-
General must be borne in mind, but at this stage it would
be useful to focus on those capable of galvanizing
immediate consensus. The aspects I have just stressed could
be a good starting-point.

The success of our efforts depends on integrating the
contribution of the Security Council in a broader framework
in which other branches of the United Nations system and
the States concerned have an equally central role to play.

The complex nature of the challenges before us should
not be cause for despair. The abhorrent images of civilians
targeted in armed conflicts should not dash our hopes for
an era of compliance. Those images remind us that our
differences with others are less important than our shared
capacity to experience pain and suffering. It is that shared
capacity that provides the moral basis for taking joint
measures to protect civilians from the ravaging
consequences of armed conflicts.

