Mr. Abbas's response was simple: an unequivocal no.

Two years later, Prime Minister Netanyahu did
something unprecedented. In an attempt to restart
negotiations, he initiated a 10-month freeze on
Jewish construction in Judea and Samaria. That was
a precondition to which no Israeli Prime Minister, not
even Yitzhak Rabin or Shimon Peres, had ever agreed.
But soon enough, the 10 months passed, and Mahmoud
Abbas was nowhere to be found. He never came to
the table.
In 2013, Secretary of State John Kerry opened
another attempt at negotiations. Once again, Prime
Minister Netanyahu was ready to talk and negotiate.
Once again, Chairman Abbas responded by breaking
his commitment to Secretary Kerry. He chose the
unilateral action of joining international conventions.
Then he sought peace with Hamas, the internationally
recognized terrorist organization, without even
demanding that it renounce violence.

Today, as we speak, the current United States
Administration is once again working very hard to make
progress towards peace. Mr. Abbas, however, is once
again looking hard for an excuse. This time he claims
it was the American announcement about Jerusalem
that drove him to reject negotiations. By recognizing
Jerusalem as Israel's capital, President Trump simply
stated what should be clear to everyone.

Let me be clear. For thousands of years Jerusalem
has been the heart and soul of our people. Jerusalem
has been our capital since the days of King David.
And Jerusalem will remain the undivided capital of
the State of Israel forever. We will always insist on
Israeli sovereignty over a united Jerusalem. But even
fair-minded observers would agree that, under any
possible agreement, Jerusalem will be recognized
internationally as our capital.

After all these years of Abbas's rejectionism, one
thing is very clear: when we extend a hand, Abbas
extends a fist. Only when the terrorists ofHamas extend
a hand does Abbas embrace them with open arms and
without preconditions. Mr. Abbas has not even insisted
on the basic human gesture of demanding the return of
the Israeli civilians and the remains of Israel Defense
Forces soldiers Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul, savagely
being held by Hamas.

Israelis are an optimistic people. We weathered four
bloody wars with Egypt while waiting for a leader like
Anwar Sadat to courageously visit Jerusalem. It took
decades of talks with Jordan until the time was right
for King Hussein to enter into what he rightly called a
peace of the brave.

Three times a day Jews in Israel and all over the
world turn to Jerusalem and pray for peace. We ask the
following from God:

"Grant peace, goodness and blessing, grace, loving-
kindness and mercy to us and unto all Israel and all
of the world."

We have no doubt that the day will come when the
Palestinian people will also be blessed with leadership
that shares these noble aspirations. This will be a
leadership that condemns violence and ends the
shameful practice of paying salaries to terrorists.
It will be a leadership that educates its people on
tolerance instead ofpeddling anti-Semitism. It will be a
leadership that recognizes that Israel is and always will
be the national homeland of the Jewish people.

Israel eagerly awaits the day when such a
Palestinian leadership will emerge and bring hope for a
better future for its people and our region.

