Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to thank
Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director of the Operations and
Advocacy Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their insightful briefings.

South Africa co-sponsored and supported the
adoption of resolution 2474 (2019) on missing persons
in armed conflict, but it is also heartening to know that
some of the countries experiencing conflict as we speak
also co-sponsored the resolution.
Let me commence by welcoming the convening of
this meeting on this matter as a stand-alone item for
the first time, giving it the attention it deserves. We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Kuwait
presidency, especially our friend Ambassador Alotaibi,
for their efforts to focus attention on this crucial
matter. Kuwait has had the misfortune of experiencing
the devastating impact and trauma of missing persons
in armed conflict situations first-hand, as have many
other countries. We hope that the ongoing efforts and
cooperation between Kuwait and Iraq will bring closure
to the matter of missing men, women and children as
soon as possible.

While South Africa acknowledges the important
role the Council can play in addressing this phenomenon,
especially by addressing the root causes of conflict
situations, which give rise to missing persons, we
would like to emphasise that the primary responsibility
resides with States themselves. States must ensure that
the people within their respective borders are accounted
for and protected; that records of prisoners of war are
well kept; and that the graves of those who have died
are preserved and properly marked. Modern technology
can assist us in accurately identifying mortal remains,
especially those in the unmarked graves that dominate
the landscape of conflict areas.

We take this opportunity to welcome the positive
role played by the International Committee of the Red
Cross in assisting national actors, where needed, to
locate missing persons and to provide support on related
matters in addressing this disturbing phenomenon,
including by communicating with families of missing
persons, where possible.

We are deeply concerned by the rise of incidences
ofmissing persons in armed conflict. The impact ofthis
problem extends beyond the victims themselves and has a
lasting and prolonged impact on the affected families and
communities. We must also take note that, in situations
of armed conflict and in the context ofmissing persons,
those who are most vulnerable - particularly women,
children, the elderly and displaced persons - are
most affected. The uncertainty surrounding missing
persons is deeply traumatic and requires the due
attention of national authorities, regional mechanisms
and the broader international community. South Africa
believes that international cooperation on this matter
is indispensable, especially in terms of technical
development and cooperation, which may assist in
locating missing persons.

Drawing from our own experience, South Africa
would like to underscore the important role of
truth, justice, reconciliation and accountability in
consolidating peace gains and achieving sustainable
peace. In this connection, we wish to highlight the
importance of addressing the repatriation of mortal
remains to their own countries of origin. This would
assist in the healing process and in finding closure for
the affected families and communities. We believe that,
as a matter related to the protection of civilians, the
issue ofmissing persons suffers from the same problems
relating to the lack of implementation of international
humanitarian law.

At this juncture, we wish to highlight the
prominence of the respective provisions of the Geneva
Convention of 1949, the seventieth anniversary of
which we are celebrating this year, in guiding the
responsibilities of States and parties during armed
conflict. In this regard, we would like to emphasise the
importance of accountability mechanisms that focus on
building national and regional capacities. The sooner
we account fully for all missing persons in all armed
conflicts, the sooner we will be able to find closure and
heal the wounds inflicted by conflict, and the sooner
lasting peace will prevail.

