Iran and Afghanistan enjoy common religious, cultural, linguistic and historical backgrounds, and our stability, sociocultural development and economic growth are intertwined and mutually reinforcing. As our President stated very recently, we consider Afghanistan's stability as our own stability. Afghanistan's decades-long insecurity and instability can end only through a comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process involving all Afghan factions, including the Taliban, supported by neighbouring, regional and international partners. The peace process must preserve and promote past achievements, particularly the present Constitution, the right of the people to self-determination through elections and the right of ethnic and religious minorities and women, as well as the commitment to combating terrorism. However, as peace and violence cannot go hand in hand, to reciprocate the goodwill of Afghanistan's Government in the peace talks, the Taliban must halt its attacks against Afghan defence and security forces. We support the peace talks and believe that their successful conclusion requires flexibility and patience by all sides, placing the interests of the people of Afghanistan above all other interests. As we stated to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons during her recent visit to Tehran, Iran continues to call for a further engagement of the United Nations in the peace process and stands ready, in coordination with the United Nations, to further contribute to that process. Afghanistan's security situation remains a source of concern owing particularly to the terrorist acts perpetrated, including by Da'esh, whose presence poses a serious threat to the security of Afghanistan and of the region. As a manifestation of external interference, the presence of foreign forces is another source of Afghanistan's instability. However, as many countries have stressed, their withdrawal must be orderly and responsible and must not lead to a security vacuum in Afghanistan. Accordingly, prior and simultaneous to the withdrawal of foreign forces, Afghanistan's military and security forces must be supported and strengthened. Likewise, effective assistance must be extended to Afghanistan in combating the illicit production of, and trafficking in, narcotic drugs as a source of financing terrorism and other crimes. A durable peace in Afghanistan cannot be established without promoting its economic conditions, which requires strong regional and international support. For our part, in addition to hosting more than 3 million Afghans despite facing the savage United States economic war, we have promoted economic cooperation with Afghanistan. Linking that landlocked country to the high seas and other countries through Iran's Chabahar port is a prominent example of close partnership between the two countries. Just last week, we inaugurated the Khaf-Herat railway, which connects Afghanistan's railway to Europe through Iran. The Presidents of both countries called the inauguration of that project a historical event, further strengthening bilateral and regional economic cooperation, thus enhancing the foundations of durable peace and stability in Afghanistan. The Islamic Republic of Iran is committed to contributing to a more secure and prosperous Afghanistan through further enhancing relations between two fraternal nations.
