Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I, too,
would like to thank Jan Egeland for his briefing. I pay
tribute to him for truly being our collective conscience
and for doing so much to bring relief to all of the crises
and disasters that he deals with.

I would like to start with the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo - an electoral process
on a knife edge and unacceptable violence from 20 to
22 August between security forces loyal to President
Kabila and those loyal to Vice-President Bemba. Those
second-round candidates owe it to the Congolese
people to restate their commitment to the peace process
and to resolve the political differences between them
by peaceful means. After the election, it will be
incumbent on all political parties to act responsibly
within the framework of the new institutions in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Given the massive investment that the Council
and the United Nations have made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we will have to be ready to
make very clear our condemnation of any violence and
to make absolutely certain, to the extent that we can,
that the democratic process comes out of this and
makes progress.

We share the alarm expressed by Jan Egeland
about the widespread and serious nature of the sexual
and gender-based violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This is not just a human rights concern;
it has a long-term impact on peace and security. There
is a moral imperative to ensure that there is no
impunity for the perpetrators. There are also pragmatic
reasons, because ending impunity contributes to a
sustainable peace. That is why the efforts by the
Congolese authorities - and we would like to see
more of them - and the zero-tolerance approach of the
Secretary-General are crucial in tacking those abuses.
We should be clear that no one can be exempt from
punishment for such crimes.

But our efforts will come to nothing if the scale
of need in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains as immense as it is today and if we fail to
respond to it. We need a greater response delivery that
is coordinated, and we need to make sure that we do
not spoil what has been achieved by being unable to
see it through.

Turning to the situation on the ground in Uganda,
which changes by the day, I welcome very much,
speaking from a British viewpoint, the steps now being
taken by the Ugandan Government. We have long
believed that there could never be a purely military
solution to the conflict in the north. We therefore very
much welcome the signing of the cessation of
hostilities agreement between the Lord's Resistance
Army and the Ugandan Government.

There is no question that there is a long way to go
before we actually get a comprehensive negotiated
settlement. But such unease as I had about the process
in Juba was, I have to say, partly assuaged by the fact
that Jan Egeland himself was actually in Juba talking to
people. Despite the progress being made, however, 1.7
million people are still living in extremely difficult
conditions in camps for internally displaced persons,
and that has to be a major concern.

I hope that the arrangements being put in place by
the Government in Kampala, and the measures which
will flow out to northern Uganda through the Joint
Monitoring Committee, will, in a mix of cooperation
between the Government, non-governmental
organizations, the United Nations family and those
countries that are trying to help the process, ensure
progress and actually keep up the pressure for
sustained movement. The Government of Uganda has
reacted well in recent months. It deserves our support
so that it can see through what it is trying to do.

Ending conflict, ensuring stability and
demobilizing and demilitarizing the fighters must be
the priorities. I think that we all have to recognize that
reintegration and reconciliation will be very, very
difficult. But in addition, an essential part of a better
future will be the establishment of the rule of law and
the delivery of justice - justice which ensures
stability, progress and reconciliation and which will
inevitably require an end to impunity for those who
have committed the gravest of crimes against
humanity. But there is a sequence which we should
sensibly follow.

There are, of course, many situations of
humanitarian concern in Africa which merit our
attention, and we have addressed only some of them
this morning. Darfur has been referred to. Let me stress
the need to actually implement resolution 1706 (2006),

to get the mandate of the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS) extended and ensure that the Mission is
reinforced, and to make sure that we are taking all the
steps that we should take to deliver security in Chad,
expecting that we may have to face an influx of more
refugees into Chad - and we look forward to
proposals from the Secretary-General in that respect -
and that all of us maximize the pressure on the
Government in Khartoum to actually accept a United
Nations force to replace AMIS.

Looking beyond Chad, one of the situations that a
number of colleagues have referred to and which I, too,
want to pick up on, is the situation in Zimbabwe.
Mr. Egeland briefed the Council on this following his
mission in December (see S/PV.5331). It would be very
helpful to have an update on how he now sees it, and
some thoughts about what all of us in the United
Nations family can do to try and ameliorate what is an
increasingly grim situation.

As I understand it, more than one year after
Operation Murambatsvina, displacements continue, and
almost none of the victims of that operation have
benefited from the so-called programme of re-housing.
But the issue is not just re-housing. There is a severe
food shortage, which is not just down to the drought:
This is the fifth year in succession that there has been
such a shortage. Inflation is running in excess of 1,200
per cent, and the blatant and continuing disregard for
human rights is there for all to see.

That is not just a domestic crisis for Zimbabwe; it
is resulting in migration flows, placing enormous
burdens on neighbouring countries and producing
inherent instability. So it would be very helpful if the
Under-Secretary-General could give us his perception
of the scale of the difficulties and how we can help the
people of Zimbabwe.

