Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We join our colleagues in
thanking the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for presenting the first report on the activities
and results achieved by the Committee during the
period from 11 June to 5 December. We express our
deep appreciation to Ambassador Motoc, Chairman of
the 1540 Committee, for his efforts in advancing the
organizational aspects of the Committee, which have
not always proved to be a simple task.

Since this is the last opportunity which my
delegation will have to express its views on the
important work of the 1540 (2004) Committee in the
Security Council, I would like to address some of the
fundamental issues involved.

The scope and purpose of resolution 1540 (2004)
are clearly defined in its eighth, ninth and fourteenth
preambular paragraphs. Operative paragraph I of the
resolution is also self-explanatory:

"[A]ll States shall refrain from providing
any support to non-State actors that attempt to
develop, acquire, manufacture, possess, transport,
transfer or use nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery."

To that end, all States are required to adopt, enforce
and report to the Committee on the steps taken or
intended to be taken in accordance with their national
legislation and administrative procedures. It is
important to note that, as explicitly agreed in resolution
1540 (2004), those measures have to be achieved by
Member States through national measures.
As the Chairman's report clearly indicates, the
Committee has got off to a good start. With the
adoption of necessary guidelines and the submission of
a large number of national reports by Member States,
including Pakistan, the Committee is now well placed
to begin in earnest the substantive work of considering
those national reports. However, by its very nature, the
work of the 1540 (2004) Committee will be complex
and difficult. Ambassador Motoc therefore not only has
our admiration, but also our commiseration for the
challenging tasks which lie ahead of him.

First, as we all know, there are no agreed
international standards in areas in which the
Committee would be examining the actions to be taken
by Member States. There are various levels of
adherence, acceptance and implementation of regimes
pertaining to nuclear, chemical or biological weapons
and means of delivery. Regardless of the number of
States parties, the level of national implementation in
the context of the Chemical Weapons Convention is
less than satisfactory, despite the fact that the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) is a properly constituted and fully functional
organization equipped with specialized back-up and
support and aided by executive and deliberative bodies.
The OPCW has found it difficult to raise the level of
implementation of obligations by States even after the
lapse of seven years.

The case of the Biological Weapons Convention
is even more difficult. There is a provision for
verification of States' compliance with their treaty
obligations, but at present there are no means to
determine violations of the Biological Weapons
Convention by some Member States, especially in the
context of alleged research and development of
defensive bio-weapons.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is an important instrument. However,
its provisions are in several respects now unrelated to
reality. There are three nuclear-weapon States,
including Pakistan, that are not recognized by the NPT
but whose cooperation is obviously essential to
realizing the objectives of nuclear non-proliferation.
And, in the area of means of delivery, it is the most
difficult to define. There are no universally agreed
norms, let alone an international treaty on missiles and
other delivery systems.

Secondly, the Committee will have to grapple
with the largely unresolved issue of definitions that not
only will leave many legal and technical loopholes, but
will also create problems about where, when and how
the provisions of the resolution would be applied or
implemented by Member States. While the resolution
has tried to come up with certain definitions, many
questions remain.

Thirdly, there are other equally important
questions, such as the capacity of States in terms of
resources, qualified manpower and expertise that will
arise. All of us know of the vast differences in the
economic, industrial, financial, legal and trade profiles
of Member States, especially the differences between
the developed and the developing countries. Moreover,
administrative, legal and law enforcement capabilities
vary considerably among Member States. That has
become obvious in the context of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. It is therefore not surprising that
over 100 States, including developed countries, have
not yet been able to submit their national reports.

Fourthly, there are also valid questions regarding
the capacity of the 1540 (2004) Committee in the
context of its expertise, manpower, resources and,
more importantly, limited time frame. We wonder if the
Committee can do its job with only four experts. We
hope that the Committee will approve the hiring of
more experts, particularly from developing countries of
Asia and Africa, to assist in its work. Such a decision
would also help to dispel the widely held perception -
outside the Council, perhaps, if not inside - that the
whole process of drafting the resolution, the push for
its implementation and the composition of the
Committee's experts and staff are being led by the
developed countries to the exclusion of a large number
of developing Member States. It is obvious that the
provisions of technical assistance that may be required
by some States will have to be sought from other States
or concerned international organizations, and not from
the Committee itself.

Fifthly, the Committee will have to ensure that it
does not infringe upon, or erode the authority, or
duplicate or complicate the work of established treaty
regimes and international bodies established under
them. In that context, it will have to recognize the
differentiated nature of the obligations of Member
States.

We hope that the Committee will keep some of
those complexities in perspective while it proceeds
with the consideration of national reports. Those
complexities will be compounded further if attempts
are made to enlarge the scope of the 1540 (2004)
Committee beyond its mandate to prevent the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by non-
State actors, including terrorists. We hope that the
Committee, when considering national reports, will
keep its focus on that specific scope and the objective
of resolution 1540 (2004). Nor should it lose sight of
the fact that the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction is, in the final analysis, inextricably linked
to the achievement of the disarmament of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons and other means of
delivery.

