I would like to express my appreciation to Germany for organizing this meeting on climate and security. Climate change, like the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), poses a threat to human security worldwide. It is of a different nature than the armed conflicts that the Council has always dealt with. However, as recognized in resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad basin region, climate change and ecological changes, among other factors, do have adverse effects on regional stability. Japan regards climate change just as it regards COVID-19 - through the lens of human security. The security implications of the effects of climate change and the climate-related security risk, referred to in the concept note (S/2020/725, enclosure) should be measured, in Japan's view, by the level of burden they impose on people's survival, livelihood and dignity. Adverse effects of climate change, such as water scarcity, drought, desertification, land degradation and food insecurity, severely impact the people in the Sahel and other arid regions. Sea-level rise and the erosion of coastlines threatens those in small island developing States, particularly in the event of large tropical cyclones such as Cyclone Harold, which hit the Pacific islands in April, and Hurricane Dorian, which ravaged the Caribbean coasts last summer. Citizens living in the temperate zone, including Japan, also suffer almost every year due to floods and landslides triggered by torrential rainfall. In every corner of the globe, climate- related natural disasters are compromising human security. In some places where communities lack resilience, they become multiplier of risk for peace and security. In order to address the various challenges to human security, including those that may cause social instability, which could, in turn, impact peace and security, we need people-centred, comprehensive, context-specific and prevention-oriented responses that strengthen the protection and empowerment of all people and all communities. We also need to consider and take comprehensive action - beyond sectoral silos - that fully take account of the interlinkages between peace and security, sustainable development, humanitarian needs and human rights. Recognizing that climate change is a threat to human security and global prosperity, as well as one of the complex contemporary challenges to international peace and security, Japan has promoted dialogue with seriously affected countries through the processes of the Tokyo International Conference on African Development, the Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting and the Japan-Caribbean Community framework. Japan committed to providing ¥1.3 trillion in 2020 - around $11.8 billion - to support developing countries affected by climate change. Any effort to minimize the negative impact of climate change on human security and social stability, including the climate-related security risk, must take mid- to long-term measures to promote sustainable development. Treating the symptoms alone will not suffice to stop climate change or conflict. Unless we build societies that are resilient, sustainable and free of inequality through the virtuous cycle of environment and growth, we cannot achieve peace and security. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction serves as the most effective instrument to build communities with resilience against natural hazards caused by climate change. Doing our best to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, even in countries affected by conflict and in fragile situations, is the key to social stability. In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the United Nations must play a leading role in furthering international cooperation for robust action against climate- related risks in all their aspects. Japan will be an unwavering and active partner in that endeavour.
