Mr. Augusto (Angola): At the outset, let me
welcome Her Excellency Ms. Delcy Rodriguez Gomez,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, and to thank her for presiding over this
open debate on the critical issue ofrespect for the Charter
of the United Nations and its purposes and principles.
We also wish to welcome and thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban-Ki-Moon, for his comprehensive and
thoughtful briefing.

The founding of the United Nations and the
adoption of the Charter was a remarkable achievement
for the international community - setting principles
for the development of friendly relations among
nations, establishing a principled commitment to
maintain international peace and security, declaring
the goal of achieving international cooperation in
solving international problems and creating a centre for
harmonizing the actions of the nations. Those purposes
and principles have became pillars of international
law and the framework of support for a system of
collective security that, despite setbacks, over the past
70 years has made the United Nations the centre of
international efforts to make the world more peaceful
based on respect for international law, human rights
and cooperation among all peoples and nations.

To maintain international peace and security is the
first purpose inscribed in the Charter. The prescription
to that end is the mobilization of collective action for
the prevention and removal of threats to peace. Through
such a multilateral approach, the United Nations became
the main forum for collective, multilateral action by the
international community, not only in the maintenance
of peace but in other domains oflife as well.

The General Assembly, as a main organ of the
United Nations, has responsibilities that cannot be
declined in the maintenance of international peace
and security. However, it is on the security Council
that the Charter and the Member Sates entrust special
powers on matters pertaining to international peace
and security. By delegating to the Security Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and for acting on
its behalf, throughout the years the United Nations
membership has been providing tangible political and
material support to the Security Council, permitting
the discharge of its mandate in a world that is ever more
complicated and bellicose.

The Security Council has powers, inter alia, to
determine whether a situation constitutes a threat to
peace, to make recommendations and decide upon
provisional measures, to decide on measures, whether
or not involving the use of armed force, to mobilize
forces and assistance from Member States, and to plan
for the application of armed forces. In the discharge
of that powerful mandate, conferred upon it by the
international community, the Security Council is
bound, according to the Charter, to act in accordance
with its purposes and principles, putting the Security
Council, as powerful as it might be, under the scrutiny
of the Charter provisions, whose principles the Security
Council is bound to abide by.

To develop friendly relations among nations is
the second purpose inscribed in the Charter, while
respecting the principle of equal rights and the right
of all peoples to self-determination, with the final aim
of strengthening universal peace. Those principles,
establishing the pattern for relations among Member
States, became the cornerstone of contemporary
international relations: sovereign equality, the
fulfilment by States of their obligations in good faith,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, non-interference
in other countries' internal affairs, refraining from the
threat or use of force, solidarity with United Nations
preventive or enforcement actions against any State and
the primacy of enforcement measures under Chapter
VII.

Those principles have become commonplace in
diplomatic life, an integral part of diplomatic documents
and a part of common knowledge in international
relations. However, the reality is not so rosy as the
proponents of the Charter idealized. The purposes and
the principles enshrined in the Charter are violated
time and again. Interference in other countries' internal
affairs and violations of sovereignty are a quite common
and well-known feature of international relations, which
is in clear disrespect for the Charter, while negatively
impacting international peace and security. Therefore,
the need arises for a renewed approach in meeting the
noble purposes and principles of the Charter in order to
address evolving global dynamics and challenges.

To achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems is the third purpose inscribed
in the Charter - which, in our view, has been the
most successful and the most tangible contribution
of the United Nations to world peace and security.
International cooperation under United Nations auspices
comprises, inter alia, the fight against terrorism and
international crime, human rights, social and economic
development, climate change, epidemics, humanitarian
assistance and migration. Specialized agencies make
a unique contribution to international cooperation
development in all sectors of human activity - from
food and agriculture to health, labour, education,
culture, intellectual property, refugees, commerce,
atomic energy, and the list could go on and on.
Moreover, the United Nations presence in all Member
States through country teams or other structures attests
to the scope and importance of the United Nations
system in promoting international cooperation to solve
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character.

Finally, the United Nations, as a centre for
harmonizing the action of nations, must meet the aims
of the Charter. In its role as the world parliament, the
General Assembly's agenda and its influential work
attest to the international community's commitment to
multilateralism. The willing participation of States in
the debate and decision-making process translate good
will and awareness on the importance of cooperating on
a wide range of issues that are matters of concern for the
entire international community. The recent adoption of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), the outcome of the latest
Conference on Financing for Development and the
recent holding of the Climate Change Conference are
but a few instances the importance the United Nations
has assumed as the privileged centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations.
This is an excellent opportunity for once again
reaffirming our faith in, and commitment to, the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, which remain as valid and as relevant as they
were at the time of the Charter's adoption. Member
States are resolutely called upon to accept and apply
those principles as a recognition of the primacy of
law in international relations, where dialogue is the
best solution to solve international problems and avoid
recourse to the use of force.

Finally, we wish to commend the Venezuelan
presidency of the Security Council for providing us this
opportunity to discuss and take stock of our collective
responsibility at a time when the international
community faces enormous global challenges, such
as the proliferation of conflicts, famines, epidemics,
climate change and so on. To face such challenges,
international cooperation under United Nations
auspices is a key element.

