Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I would like to briefly
address some of the remarks made in the Chamber this
morning.

First of all, I would like to refer to the so-called
parallel structures. In order to have something parallel,
one needs to have something to which it is parallel.
Those are the only structures that exist in that part of
our sovereign province. Those are the only structures
that are providing any kind of order in that part of the
territory. There are no other structures. Truly parallel
structures are ones that are not in line with resolution
1244 (1999), but that are organized based on the
unilateral declaration of independence of 17 February
2008.

I think that the lack of trust is what is really at the
heart of what we are discussing here. I remember the
time when there was very little trust in Serbian
institutions in Kosovo and when the whole series of
parallel structures - actually, the entire life of Kosovo
Albanians - was organized in a way that was entirely
parallel to the legal institutions of the Republic of
Serbia. At that time, every single country in the world
recognized the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Serbia. I am referring to the pre-1999
period. They were structures that had absolute
parallelism with the legal structures of the Republic of
Serbia, because the Albanians had no trust in the
structures of the Republic of Serbia. Today, the
situation is pretty much parallel in the north. Kosovo
Serbs have zero trust in the structures that are Pristina-
based. That is simply a fact of life and a part of the
reality that we have to take into account when we try to
resolve peacefully the problem that we have at hand.

In response to a statement made here with regard
to the Ahtisaari Plan, I would like to underline that this

Plan was not in line with resolution 1244 (1999). It was
discussed here in the Chamber on numerous occasions
and failed to receive the support of the Council. I
would like to remind members that, despite numerous
attempts, the Ahtisaari Plan did not receive the
endorsement of the Council. For us in Serbia, it is null
and void.

In speaking about human organ harvesting and
trafficking, one country here today repeatedly referred
to that as organized crime. It may be organized crime if
one is trying to sell somebody's organs on the
international black market for organs, but it is a war
crime when several hundred civilians are allegedly
taken to a clinic to be killed and their organs removed
during a conflict. That is a war crime, not organized
crime, and it should be treated as such.

All of the war crimes committed in the wars of
Yugoslav succession have so far been treated in the
same way, with the Security Council being kept abreast
of what was going on in the investigations. What we
are asking for is simply to be treated in the same way
and that this serious, heinous allegation of a war crime
be treated in the same way as any other war crime,
namely, that it not be hidden from the international
community. That is what the families of the victims
demand.

Serbia strongly reiterates the need for
transparency and fairness in this investigation. I appeal
to the members of the Security Council to allow
fairness and transparency to prevail for the sake of the
families of the victims.

Finally, I would like to underline once again that
Serbia has made and will continue to make strong calls
for peace and stability inside the territory. President
Tadie today made a very strong call for that, and I wish
to reiterate it here in this Chamber. We need to refrain
from the use of force and from violence. Barricades are
not in anyone's interest, but they must not be removed
violently; that is only going to lead to more violence.
The best way to ensure full freedom of movement in
the territory is through dialogue, engagement and close
work between the parties, especially the parties on the
ground, all of which Serbia strongly supports.

