Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mark
Lowcock, for their briefings.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
catastrophic, and our collective response must rise to
that challenge. The civilian population continues to
pay the highest price of the clashes; September was the
deadliest month of the year. Respect for international
humanitarian law is non-negotiable; it is binding on all.
The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure,
must be an absolute priority.

Every effort must also be made to ensure
immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
The increasing restrictions imposed by the Houthis
on humanitarian actors prevent millions of people
from receiving humanitarian assistance. That is
unacceptable. It is further essential that contributions
to the humanitarian response plan be made without
delay. In that regard, we welcome the announcements
made by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates at
the General Assembly's ministerial week.

Only a political solution will make it possible to put
a lasting end to the suffering ofthe Yemeni population.
We therefore call on the parties to seek such a solution
with the assistance of the United Nations, as quickly
as possible and without preconditions. We must waste
no more time and work without delay to that end, even
as we regret that the Al-Hudaydah Agreement is not
fully implemented. In that regard, we reiterate our full
and complete support for the Special Envoy. Progress
towards a cessation of hostilities could contribute to
that objective.

We have taken note of the announcement made by
the Houthis on 20 September that they would cease
their strikes on Saudi territory. That announcement
is positive and has been followed by a relative decline
in gunfire exchanges. It must be followed by tangible
progress on the ground and in the long term. The
recent release of prisoners was encouraging. We note
the positive signals sent by Riyadh regarding the
Houthi proposal. We hope to see an expedited easing
of tensions.

The United Nations has an essential role to play in
supporting those efforts and in helping to restore trust
between the parties. Moreover, there is a great risk that
clashes in the south will create an additional front. We
also welcome the progress made possible by the Jeddah
talks, initiated by Saudi Arabia. An agreement appears
to be imminent, and we hope that it will be concluded
as soon as possible. The engagement of various factions

of Yemeni society is crucial to resolving the conflict.
The fight against terrorism remains a priority issue in
southern Yemen.

France remains fully mobilized and committed
to the search for a political solution, the only possible
solution to that conflict. The French authorities will
continue to act to that end, including at the highest
level, in the context of the efforts led by the President of
the Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, to ease tensions
in the region.

