Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Today's agenda item on the plight of children
in times of conflict provides me with the opportunity
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's
accession to the presidency ofthe Council for this month
and to assure you of my delegation's support during
your presidency. I take this opportunity to reiterate
my gratitude to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Togo, who carried out his work in an
exemplary manner last month while presiding over the
Council.

I express our gratitude to Luxembourg, represented
by Ms. Sylvie Lucas and the Deputy Prime Minister,
and which chairs the important Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue,
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, UNICEF and Save
the Children, which is indeed doing exemplary work on
this issue that is so important for humankind.

The agenda item under discussion today is a crucial
issue for us, as it relates to children and the future of
humankind and of our shared world, which must be
protected from threats, particularly in conflict.

The situation concerning children in the Central
African Republic, which improved slightly in 2012,
has once again become alarming and even critical
since the crisis that led to regime change on 24 March.
Indeed, whether it is the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA), children enrolled in the various rebel groups,
or simply those deprived of education because of the
war, the children of the Central African Republic are
experiencing severe hardships that compromise both
their future and their lives.

In the case ofthe LRA, attacks often target schools,
where the rebels recruit children for use as child soldiers
or to carry loot and stolen and pillaged items if they
are boys or as sex slaves and cooking staff if they are
girls. It is the same for other rebel groups, in particular
the Seleka, which has recruited children for the same
tasks. What is distressing is that even those previously
removed from conflict and who have passed through
transition centres and returned to their family and
social environment are recruited again. These children,
including street children in cities, have not been not
spared forced or voluntary recruitment.

While the proper place for children is and
remains in their family, at school, on the playground
or at recreation centres, those affected by conflict are
enrolled in so-called self-defence militia to protect their
village, becoming choice targets in conflict. Those
fleeing into the bush with their parents to avoid being
killed are exposed to the weather, mosquitoes and wild
beasts and risk certain death.

Meanwhile, schools, if they are not destroyed,
simply become barracks where tables, benches and
textbooks are used for firewood. What kind of a world
do we live in? Teachers themselves try to shelter in the
bush to save their own lives and those of their family
members. This sad picture, as Ijust said, ruins any hope
of building a peaceful country, as its future workforce
will not be adequately trained or educated.

The scourge can be contained or ended in the Central
African Republic only if we build a State of law that
respects and guarantees rights and freedoms, including
those of children; create a peaceful environment
where families can do their best to create a decent life
for themselves with a view to promoting the healthy
emotional and physical development of the child; and
make school a second venue for socialization, after
the family, by ensuring that it remains status-neutral
and protected from conflict and that its facilities and
property are not occupied, vandalized or destroyed
by belligerents; and only if the State, civil society and
non-governmental organizations mobilize financial,
human and logistical resources to that end. That is why
a reasonable share of the budgets of these moral and
physical entities must be set aside and increased each
year for children and their development.

The Central African Republic, a fragile country
and victim of recurrent conflict, must break the cycle of
rebellion ifit wishes to build a State oflaw and effectively
preserve its achievements, and do its all to comply with
international standards in order to protect children in
their lifesty1e and environment. That is why we express
the desire to strengthen our cooperation with the United
Nations, UNICEF and non-governmental organizations
involved in the issue in order to find ways and means to
eradicate the scourge. If, as the saying goes, "the child
is the father of man", in the future we must spare no

effort to protect children if we want this to be a world
ofpeace, security and, above all, development.

