The Government of Colombia categorically rejects sexual violence in all settings, including armed conflict. Based on our belief that this problem needs to be addressed with a gender-informed approach, Colombia has adopted measures to safeguard the rights of women, girls and boys in conflict settings. To that end, the State of Colombia has enacted national laws applied through the development and implementation of public policies, plans, programmes and projects to support victims and prevent crimes of sexual violence. Colombia's normative framework includes 15 provisions that comprehensively ensure the protection of victims, access to justice, reparations and psychosocial support and uphold their reproductive and sexual rights. Moreover, the Constitutional Court in 2008 recognized the commission of acts of sexual aggression in conflict as violations of international norms, such as the Geneva Conventions and article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. In addition, the Victims' Comprehensive Support and Reparation Unit - the State entity tasked with attending to and meeting the needs of victims of the armed conflict in Colombia - recently published a document containing guidelines for psychosocial support to victims of sexual violence in armed conflict. This was the result of joint work by the International Organization for Migration and the United States Agency for International Development, organizations that share Colombia's interest in addressing this phenomenon in the most comprehensive and precautionary way. Likewise, the Office of the Attorney-General gives serious priority to investigations involving gender-based violence, with a view to ensuring that perpetrators are duly prosecuted and victims protected. Through the Transitional Justice Steering Group and Victims' Registry, the Attorney-General places emphasis on problems affecting the rights of children and adolescents, gender-based violence and crimes committed against protected categories, with a view to providing appropriate support to victims. For its part, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, a mechanism that administers justice to strengthen the transition towards peace, is equipped with a standing body, the Gender Commission, tasked with promoting the effective implementation of a gender-informed approach in the justice component of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. The efforts of the Government have not been decimated during the coronavirus disease pandemic. The Gender Technical Working Group of the National Reincorporation Council has been working since the onset of the pandemic to develop methods to address cases of sexual violence that occur during these conditions that enable appropriate action and prevention. However, despite ongoing efforts and the progress made in this area, Colombia continues to face great challenges owing to the persistence of criminal actions by residual groups of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional and other armed actors that continue to commit violations, thereby undermining the rights of women and children in various parts of the country. These armed groups and criminals are seeking intimidate and control the community through sexual violence. The State, under the leadership of the Presidential Counsellor's Office for Human Rights and through the Intersectoral Commission for the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of and Sexual Violence against Children and Adolescents, monitors and coordinates actions to counter these types of crime in the territories. It is important to highlight that, under the leadership of President Ivan Duque Marquez, the State's public policy line for the prevention of the recruitment or use of children and adolescents and for the prevention of sexual violence against them by organized armed groups and organized criminal groups was updated and formulated. With respect to criminal conduct involving uniformed members of the public forces, it must be made clear that under no circumstances do such acts correspond to any State policy. On the contrary, President Duque Marquez has emphatically stated that the State will not tolerate any type of abuse of minors. The Government has publicly and insistently requested that progress be made in criminal investigations both in the course of ordinary justice and with respect to disciplinary investigations in the Office of the Attorney General against the perpetrators of these crimes. Furthermore, the Ministry of Defence and the military forces have shown no tolerance for such acts. The Colombian State calls for strengthening the fight against the crime of sexual violence in all its forms and dimensions, which necessarily requires mechanisms for comprehensive reparation for the victims, as well as effective sanctions and condemnations imposed by the international community against the illegal armed groups, which are the main perpetrators of these practices.
