Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French): We are honoured by the presence of His
Excellency the President of the Togolese Republic. We
thank him for presiding over this important debate and
for his opening statement.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Togolese presidency for taking this
initiative and for making possible a reflection on how
to improve integrated responses from the international
community to the challenge of organized crime in
Western Africa and the Sahel. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), Ambassador Fedotov, for their very useful
presentations. We agree with their analyses and
recommendations.

Portugal has long been a strong supporter of a
regional approach to the challenges facing West
African countries. That is also a central concern of our
tenure in the Security Council, one that we often
stressed during the past year. In the meeting we
organized during our presidency last November on new
challenges to peace and security, international
organized crime figured in a pre-eminent way (see S/PV.6668).

We believe that efforts aimed at tackling issues
such as organized crime from a purely bilateral level
are not only insufficient but can even be
counterproductive. Indeed, given the transborder nature
of the traffics in question, success in combating
transnational crime in one single country can easily
lead to increased trouble for its neighbours. Crime
networks increasingly have access to new technologies
and vast financial resources - often larger than those
available to affected countries - which allow them to
shift activities rather quickly from one country to
another. In other words, organized crime and its
ramifications function within a regional context, not
within the framework of national borders. Therefore,
responses must take that reality into account. Unless
there is an effort not simply of coordination but of
pooling resources, chances for long-term success in
combating transnational crime are rather slim.

In the particular case of Western Africa and the
Sahel, there is clearly a widespread understanding of
the need for regional, multilateral solutions for the
challenges posed by transnational crime. Recent United
Nations reports, namely, those on the impact of the
Libyan crisis in the Sahel region (see S/2012/42) and
on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (see S/2012/45), show
that countries and regional and subregional
organizations have in recent years launched a number
of initiatives directed towards combating various forms
of organized crime. In the particular case of the Sahel
countries, Governments have demonstrated the
political will to jointly address growing instability in
the region. That is an important point, inasmuch as it
highlights the centrality of locally owned solutions for
the problems facing West Africa and the primary
responsibility of local actors to define their priorities
and their strategies. As in other areas, the role of the
international community should therefore be that of
assisting existing initiatives, especially by enhancing
institutional capacity and promoting more cooperation
and a better understanding of how comprehensive the
current challenges are.

In that context, I would like to highlight three
aspects, which in our opinion deserve the particular
attention of the international community. First, as most
studies and reports indicate, the confluence and
juxtaposition of illicit trafficking, violence, corruption
and terrorism represent a serious challenge to peace
and security in Western Africa and the Sahel. There are
documented linkages among different forms of
organized crime and also between organized crime
networks and terrorist and rebel groups operating in the
region. However, we still need to know more about
how those linkages operate, particularly in the matters
of the financing of operations, the recruitment base and
the proliferation of weapons and ammunition. In the
case of piracy, we must understand more clearly the
connection between attacks at sea and criminal
networks operating in the countries of the region.

That is why we support more systematic
reporting on transnational crime trends in West Africa,
as well as on the efforts undertaken to tackle those
trends. But we also believe that such efforts would
benefit from greater information-sharing among the
countries in the region, including intelligence-sharing.
International efforts should be aimed at enabling more
cooperation in that respect.

Secondly, we should aim at finding an
appropriate balance between repressive measures
against organized crime and the need to address the
social and economic context. Some of the countries in
West Africa still find themselves in post-conflict
situations, with fragile institutions and serious
economic and social problems - chiefly very high
rates of unemployment - leaving very few options
open, especially for young people. Therefore,
recognizing the link between security and development
allows us to focus on the root causes of instability and
functions as a conflict-prevention measure. The recent
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in this
area, including the meeting last year of the four West
African configurations to discuss the problem of
transnational crime, is a good practice from which the
Security Council should also benefit, through more
regular interaction with the PBC.

My third point is related to the need to address
the legal and institutional gaps in the region.
Appropriate legal instruments and capable institutions
are crucial to countering organized crime, to
preventing and punishing corruption and to fighting
impunity. International initiatives, such as those
undertaken by UNODC and the West Africa Coast
Initiative, aimed at strengthening those two dimensions
by providing training and expertise, should be
encouraged and strengthened as a matter of priority.

There is certainly much to be done at the national
level in that respect, but given the nature of the
challenges, we should focus our attention on the

development of regional instruments to tackle
organized crime. Recent reports, as well as the concept
note (S/2012/83, annex), have made concrete proposals
to that end, but I underline in particular the priority
that in our view should be given to judicial cooperation
and capacity-building.

In that respect, we encourage relevant
institutions, including UNODC, the United Nations
Office for West Africa, the Economic Community of
West African States and the African Union, to work on
innovative solutions, directed at the support of
appropriate judicial mechanisms to prosecute organized
crime-related cases on a regional basis, thus relieving
local judicial systems of the burden of having to face
transnational criminal networks alone.

In that judicial perspective, we must be aware of
the transnational nature of the trafficking in question,
which requires that special attention be paid to
developing and supporting programmes, both national
and regional, aimed at strengthening border-
management capacities.

I have previously mentioned various ongoing
initiatives that originated in the West African region.
Some of those initiatives have triggered international
support for their implementation. I would mention in
particular the support provided by the European Union
as part of its strategy for the Sahel, which has a strong
security and development focus. Ms. Helga Schmidt,
Deputy Secretary-General of the European Union
External Action Service, will be underlining that
concrete cooperation later in this meeting. Portugal
naturally supports her statement.

To be successful, international involvement
requires coherence in the efforts taken by the
international community. A coordinated and integrated
approach is thus of the essence, building on experience
gathered and on solutions and lessons learned in
similar situations of concern in other regions of the
world. Such an approach would help prevent the risk of
duplication and ensure that international responses
effectively address the multiple dimensions of such a
complex phenomenon as organized crime.

As a member of the Security Council, Portugal
stands ready to collaborate in our collective effort to
find new and bold responses to a problem that extends
beyond the West African region, and thus indeed
affects us all.

