Mr. Stefanile (Italy): Italy welcomes today's debate.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.

Today's discussion follows a series of meetings of
various kinds organized by Security Council members
since 2007 on the relationship between climate and
security. Italy has constantly contributed to that dynamic
by regularly attending the meetings and by promoting,
during its last term on the Council in 2017, an Arria
Formula meeting on the security implications of rising
temperatures. Therefore, we very much appreciate the
initiative of the Dominican Republic, which ensures
continuity in the discussion and confirms that an
increasing number of Member States are determined to
keep the attention of the Security Council on a topic of
the utmost relevance.

As stated by the Secretary-General, climate
change is the defining issue of our time, and also
a direct existential threat to humankind and our
planet. We are already witnessing the increasingly
destabilizing consequences of climate change and
climate-related disasters in vast areas of the world,
from the Sahel to Central America and the Caribbean,
from South-East Asia to the Pacific, as well as in the
Mediterranean region. Hurricanes, droughts, sea-level
rise and extreme weather conditions can be considered
new forms of a natural hybrid threats to global security
due to their devastating effects on access to water and
food, health conditions and socioeconomic development
in an increasing number of countries.

Some members of the international community,
such as the countries of the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin
and the small island developing States, are especially
vulnerable to climate change, and therefore more
exposed to fragility risks. But the consequences of
climate-related disasters in terms of humanitarian
crises, destabilization, resource-driven conflicts, forced
displacement and migration flows have an immediate,
direct impact on the security of the entire planet.

The first dimension for intervention by the
international community obviously relates to prevention
and mitigation. Reducing the impact of climate-related
disasters will largely depend on our capacity to
contain global emissions within the targets of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. Notwithstanding the
progress made at the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties, held in Katowice, Poland, much remains to be
done to achieve that crucial goal. The high-level meeting
promoted by the President of the General Assembly
to be held on 28 March and the climate summit to be
convened by the Secretary-General on 23 September
will be instrumental in intensifying and accelerating
international action at all levels.

At the same time, it is essential to strengthen global
efforts in terms of adaptation, disaster prevention and
emergency preparedness. The main policy document in
that field is the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction, and the Italian Government is fully engaged
in supporting its effective implementation.

Italy is a high-risk country itself, exposed to
frequent earthquakes, floods, landslides, volcanic
eruptions and other dramatic events. Given that high
vulnerability, Italy has developed strong expertise in
civil protection activities. We are eager to share that
expertise and are actively engaged in supporting local
and international partners to build and develop national
capacities in response to natural disasters.

As far as Africa is concerned, we operated in
response to El Nifio in Ethiopia, Mozambique, Malawi,
Eswatini and Zimbabwe. In the Sahel area, Italy is
strongly supporting the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Next Monday in Rome, in
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, we will launch the new Africa
Centre for Climate and Sustainable Development to
facilitate assistance projects on food security, clean
water and energy.

Italy has also established innovative partnerships
with the Pacific small island developing States, the
Caribbean Community and the Alliance of Small Island
States countries, with a focus on reinforcing national
capacities on climate-related issues.

While being mindful of the contents and characteristics
of its mandate, we believe that the Security Council
should also play its part and systematically incorporate
the security dimension of climate-related impacts in
its analysis and deliberations, including on country-
specific situations, in coordination with the wider
United Nations system.

We have before us a global and multidimensional
challenge. All the relevant international actors and
institutions, as well as national authorities and the private
sector, must therefore adopt a coordinated and inclusive
approach to provide the most effective response.

