Mr. Hume (United States of America): First, I
would like to assure you, Sir, that I take every
opportunity I can, here or outside the United Nations,
to enjoy Colombian coffee. We are very grateful and
pleased at your presence here and at the leadership of
the Colombian delegation during this month. Here, we
associate ourselves fully with the comments made by
colleagues.
Fortunately, there have already been many
interesting comments which give reason for reflection.
Most of them, I think, are shared by most members
here. That will allow me to be relatively brief in what I
say. Not mentioning something does not mean that I
disagree with it. I just want to make one or two
comments on points that have already been made.

First, I would like simply to state - because it is
already apparent from the discussion here - that the
Council is constantly faced with a dilemma in how it
organizes its work. Most members of the Council, or
all who have spoken, have rightly thanked the
Colombian delegation for organizing a meeting of
members of the Council at the Princeton Club:
someplace away from the United Nations. They have
described the benefit of that meeting variously as
brainstorming and soul-searching, but most members
of the Council used the words "open" and "frank" to
characterize the discussion that took place.

Most members of the Council who spoke have
also said that there is a need for transparency in our
work. I think that if we were sitting on red seats, as
spectators, we would realize that there is a bit of a
dilemma here in that a discussion that takes place at the
Princeton Club may be open and frank and candid for
members of the Council, but it is hardly transparent for
the general membership. They may also wonder why
private individuals who are not representatives of
Governments on the Security Council participate in
such a discussion and they do not. I say this entirely in
the spirit of knowing that we all wrestle with this
dilemma every day.

There were also questions as to why we got what
I think were called "background notes", rather than the
briefing notes that members of the Secretariat used
when they briefed us. In my experience in the Council,
whether the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations sits at the foot of the table in
this Chamber or at the head of the table in the
consultation room, he essentially says the same thing.
So I am not sure that there is a problem here with the
background notes being inadequate.

But inevitably it is the same dilemma over
transparency and being candid and frank, and over how
individuals who participate in this work because they
represent Governments can ask questions and take
positions - which indeed they must at times- that
are not official positions of their Governments.
Otherwise how do we explore what it is we are doing
and try to understand the challenges? Because the work
is not easy.

So I would say, on the one hand, our delegation is
very grateful for the discussion that you, Sir, organized
on the challenges of regional peacekeeping in Africa.
At the same time, I think that we will continue to
wrestle with this dilemma of transparency and our
obligation to the general membership - which the
United States delegation feels very strongly, as I
believe all of us here do - and how we combine this
with having discussions in which we, as individuals
seeking the truth or seeking peace, are able to ask
questions and make statements and test ideas without
them being labelled "the representative of the United
States said", or "the representative of Norway said".
And this inevitably is a challenge to which there is no
easy answer.

My final comment, I hope, will be brief. It was
mentioned by the representative of Norway that it
would be better at times if we were able to issue
statements that were focused and short. This is a theme
that, as we all know, is frequently repeated in the
consultation room as we go over our work. I would just
like to share a comment that was used by a United
States humorist at the beginning of a letter he wrote
about 100 years ago. He explained to his
correspondent, "I have written you a long letter
because I did not have time to write a short one".

