Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Modibo Toure
and Ambassador Mauro Vieira for their comprehensive
briefings on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, and extend
our full support for their commitment to facilitating a
political solution to the crisis.

Kazakhstan is deeply concerned by the protracted
political stalemate in the country. We join others in
calling on all stakeholders to engage in an inclusive
political dialogue and immediately implement the
Conakry Agreement and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) road map to end
the deadlock and restore institutional viability. It is
therefore necessary to avoid differing interpretations of
the Agreement.

We commend the mediation efforts of ECOWAS,
under the leadership of Presidents Faure Gnassingbe of
Togo and Alpha Conde of Guinea, as well as by the
other members of the group of international partner
organizations on Guinea-Bissau. We have taken
note of the decision of ECOWAS to impose targeted
sanctions on those obstructing the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement. We express hope that
this decision will contribute to finding a solution to
the crisis and strengthen democratic institutions and
capacity-building for State organs.

We welcome the extension until April of the mandate
of ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB),
which plays a crucial role in ensuring stability in
Guinea-Bissau, and urge international partners to
continue supporting ECOMIB. The importance of
peacebuilding, good offices and coordination efforts of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau cannot be underestimated. We therefore
support the Secretary-General's recommendation to
renew the mission's mandate for one more year. We also
agree with his proposal to assess the mission, should the
political impasse continue. We note the importance of
holding legislative and presidential elections according
to the constitutional time frame, and call on international
partners to provide the necessary technical, logistical
and financial support for the electoral process.

The current political crisis may further fuel
transnational organized crime, drug trafficking and
terrorist activities. Therefore, increased national
engagement and international support are critical
to enhancing and extending reforms in the security,
judicial and law enforcement sectors. In addition, the
most effective measures must be sought to ensure the
country's stability and resilience by increasing support
for the education and health sectors, as well as the
existing development plans, including Terra Ranka and
the United Nations peacebuilding plan.

In conclusion, we welcome the active engagement
of the Women's Facilitation Group, and impress upon
the national authorities the importance of ensuring
the participation of women and young people in the
political process at every stage and at all levels.

