Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
following countries, Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Iceland and
Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.

In recent months, the Middle East has once again
witnessed turbulent times. It is now important for all of
us to look ahead and work strenuously to stabilize the
region.

In Lebanon, we have already seen some
encouraging developments. The European Union
welcomes the overall deployment of the Lebanese
armed forces in southern Lebanon, supported by the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
We have noted the almost complete withdrawal of
Israeli troops, and we call on Israel to withdraw also
from the Lebanese part of the town of Ghajar, in
coordination with UNIFIL. We stress that Lebanon's
sovereignty over its land, sea and airspace must be
respected. We also call for the immediate release of the
two Israeli soldiers whose abduction sparked the Israeli
military operation.

The European Union would once again like to
reiterate its commitment to support the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

We can all recall the numerous useful meetings
held during the General Assembly's ministerial week,
including in the Council, on how to break the deadlock
in the Middle East. There seems to be a consensus
within the international community on the urgent need
to make progress towards a comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict, based on relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Road Map, and with a
negotiated two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict at its core.

In order to achieve this, we first need to focus on
the most pressing issues. The European Union remains
deeply concerned at the continued Israeli operation in
the Palestinian territories and deplores the loss of
civilian life it has brought. It calls on the Palestinian
leadership to bring an end to violence and terrorist
activities, including the firing of rockets into Israeli
territory.

The recent intra-Palestinian clashes are also a
cause of great concern. Violence is not the solution. We
call for an end to violence and for restraint from all
sides. Security is a matter of concern for everyone.

The European Union once again reiterates its call
for the immediate and unconditional release of the
abducted Israeli soldier. We also repeat our call for the
immediate release of Palestinian ministers and
legislators in Israeli custody.

A very pressing issue is the question of the
Palestinian Government. The European Union
expresses its support to President Abbas and calls on
the Palestinians to join his efforts towards national
unity and the formation of a government with a
political platform reflecting the Quartet principles and
allowing for early engagement. Such a government
would also be a key factor in allowing the European
Union to pursue its goal of strengthening the capacity
of Palestinian institutions.

Another issue of utmost urgency is the alarming
humanitarian and economic situation in the Palestinian
territories. Sixty-five per cent of the Palestinians live
below the poverty line and civil servants are on strike,
since they have not been paid for many months. The
European Union has done its utmost to find ways to
alleviate the daily situation of the Palestinians. Our
combined assistance to the Palestinians in 2006 will be
in excess of €650 million, which is more than in
previous years. That assistance is channelled partly via
the temporary international mechanism, and also
through United Nations organizations and other
channels. The temporary international mechanism has
now been extended for a further three months, and we
are currently examining the modalities for its
expansion. We encourage other donors to make full use
of the mechanism in order to address the needs of the
Palestinian people.

The European Union also reiterates its call for an
immediate resumption of the transfers of withheld
Palestinian tax and customs revenues by Israel, as this
would also have a significant impact on the Palestinian
economy. We have called on Israel to consider the
resumption of such transfers via the temporary
international mechanism, to improve the deteriorating
economic and humanitarian conditions in Gaza and the
West Bank. We also recall the utmost importance of the
full implementation of the Agreement on Movement
and Access, particularly the permanent opening of the
Rafah, Karni and other crossings.

We must all work to solve those pressing issues.
We must bear firmly in mind the overriding goal: an
early resumption of dialogue between the two parties
with a View to relaunching negotiations on the basis of
the Road Map. As long as this conflict is not resolved,
peace will not be secured anywhere in the region. The
European Union reiterates its continuing support to
Israeli and Palestinian efforts to advance the peace
process.

