Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Madame President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.

My delegation extends its deep condolences to
the Government and people of Turkey and to the
families of the victims of the earthquake that struck
Turkey on Sunday. We also express our deep
condolences to the Kingdom and people of Saudi
Arabia on the passing away of their Crown Prince.

The Vietnamese delegation wishes to thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, on United Nations Day. I would
also like to extend my appreciation to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his comprehensive briefing.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

For more than 60 years the region of Middle East
has seen many wars and much bloodshed. Millions of
Palestinian people remain displaced from their
homeland, live under dire circumstances due to the
blockade and are subject to violent attack in many
forms. The Palestinian people continue to be denied
their fundamental and inalienable rights of self-
determination, first and foremost among them the right
to create an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine.

More than a decade ago when the General
Assembly met in 1988 to consider the question of
Palestine, the Palestinian side presented a plan to
advance peace. New circumstances have created new
hopes for a just and durable peace settlement in line
with the legitimate interests of all parties. Palestine
made difficult decisions and, in the words of President
Mahmoud Abbas, "decided to adopt the path of relative
justice" (A/66/PV.]9). A clear illustration is the
Palestinian agreement to establish the State of Palestine
on only 22 per cent of the territory of historical
Palestine.
However, the peace process soon reached a
stalemate because Israel still refused to become
engaged on issues buttressed by international law and
numerous United Nations resolutions, and intensified
the building of settlements on the territory of the State
of Palestine. While we recognize the legitimate
concerns of all parties, we trust that the realities of the
Middle East over the past six decades now show that
those concerns should and can be promoted only in the
framework of earnest negotiations covering all of the
aforementioned issues.

Viet Nam closely follows developments related to
the peace process in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, and strongly supports the
struggle and rights of the Palestinian people and all
efforts for peace in the region. Given the prolonged
stalemate and the continued serious encroachment on
the rights of the Palestinian people, and given the
strength of the internationally recognized achievements
of the Palestinian authorities and people in building
their State, President Mahmoud Abbas, on behalf of the
State and people of Palestine and in the exercise of
their inalienable rights, has submitted the State of
Palestine's application for full membership in the
United Nations. Viet Nam supports the will of the State
and people of Palestine.

Viet Nam also supports negotiations between the
parties concerned and welcomes renewed efforts by the
Quartet, the League of Arab States, countries of the
region and the United Nations to help to promote
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on all core issues. We
call for intensified efforts by the international
community, in particular the Security Council and the
Quartet, to address the current political and
humanitarian crisis and to promote a just, lasting,
comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the Arab-Israeli conflict
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425
(1978), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the
Madrid terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet Road Map, which emphasize, among
other things, the principle of land for peace and the
right of all States in the region to live in peace and
security.

