Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me join others in welcoming you to the presidency, Sir, and say that the United Kingdom looks forward to working with you and your delegation. I also thank the representative of Belgium for an excellent stewardship of the Council's business during the month of February. Let me start by thanking the Special Representative for her briefing and her continued efforts, together with those of her Mission, to support and advise the Iraqi Government. Their work is important and, as we have all heard, it is a difficult time. She has our staunch support. While Iraq has made notable progress in recent years, as many speakers, including the Special Representative, have said, the past few months have been challenging. Regarding the latest setback, the resignation of the Prime Minister, I agree with the representative of the Dominican Republic - we need to appeal to Iraq's leaders at this time to put the Iraqi people and the sound governance of the country first. The delay in forming a new Government that will command the confidence of the Iraqi Parliament and people is regrettable. The United Kingdom calls on all Iraqi leaders to put the national interest first and to work together constructively to support a new prime minister. Iraq urgently needs an inclusive and representative Government committed and able to deliver on the demands of the Iraqi people. That aim is all the more important given the clear dissatisfaction with the status quo shown by the large-scale demonstrations in Iraq since October last year. Thousands of Iraqi citizens have protested to voice legitimate demands for political, economic and social reforms, but hundreds have been killed and thousands injured. The Iraqi people have the right to protest peacefully, and we are deeply concerned by the disproportionate use of force by security forces, including the use of live fire, and human rights abuses, including attacks on journalists. The United Kingdom urges the Iraqi authorities to follow through on their commitments to conducting credible investigations into the violence and holding those responsible to account. We also unequivocally condemn attacks on diplomatic premises. It is vital that protests remain peaceful. I would like to tell the Iraqi Ambassador that the United Kingdom stands ready to support Iraq in delivering crucial reforms that address popular concerns. We welcome the progress made on electoral reforms and urge the Government of Iraq to continue engagement with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the international community to ensure that the new electoral reform law delivers on protestors' demands, including for credible, free and inclusive elections. As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/140) highlights and as the Special Representative outlined, Da'esh remains a persistent threat to Iraq's security, as well as to the region and the wider world. We therefore hope that Iraq and the international community can continue to work closely together to address that common threat. The Global Coalition to Defeat Da'esh continues its support to and close partnership with the Iraqi security forces, in full respect for Iraqi sovereignty. I am proud that British troops in Iraq have trained over 100,000 members of the Iraqi security forces. Militia groups continue to threaten Iraq's stability and risk escalating regional tensions. We condemn the storming of the United States Embassy in Baghdad on 31 December and the continued attacks by militia groups on military bases and diplomatic premises. The Government of Iraq has a duty to ensure the safety of all diplomatic premises in Iraq, but we urge all parties - and I want to stress that this includes Iraq's neighbours - to show restraint and to avoid dragging Iraq into a conflict, which is not what the Iraqi people need. We are deeply concerned that 1.4 million Iraqis remain displaced and over 4 million Iraqis will need some sort of support and assistance this year. Reports of forced and undignified returns of displaced persons are troubling, and I take this opportunity to recall that under international conventions all returns must be safe, dignified and voluntary. The United Kingdom is ready to _ support Iraq in delivering durable solutions, including on reconciliation, reconstruction and provision of services. It is particularly important that political instability and the protests do not distract from or prevent action being taken to address the grievances that drove the rise of Da'esh. Having heard the briefings today, we all know that recent months have been difficult for the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi people. There has been progress on key issues, including regional outreach, discussions between Baghdad and Erbil and reconstruction through the Funding Facility for Stabilization. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General said, there are grounds for hope and we should not overlook the progress. But I want to echo what was said by the German representative in particular about corruption and the importance of tackling it. My last point relates to the Iraq-Kuwait file. I pay tribute to the work of the Kuwaiti representative, who is in the Chamber. As the United States and German representatives said, the recent developments on the file are very welcome. The United Kingdom remains committed to helping to strengthen relations between Iraq and Kuwait through the work of the Tripartite Commission, which we support. We stand ready to continue to support the next Government of Iraq as it continues to deliver on the legitimate demands of protesters and to implement crucial reforms. We urge maximum restraint and peaceful dialogue on the part of all sides. There is space for hope and for a brighter future for the Iraqi people.
