Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): I wish to make use
of this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. It gives my delegation
particular pleasure to see the representative of a fellow
African country, Cameroon, presiding over the debate
on the important issue that is on the agenda of today's
meeting of the Security Council.

South Africa also wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on small arms, document
(S/2002/1053), and wishes to express its appreciation
of the Security Council's continued interest in this
matter.

My delegation notes with some concern that, just
over a year after the adoption of the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, we are still faced with the proliferation and
excessive accumulation of those weapons.

The Programme of Action on small arms that was
adopted in July 2001 sets out the steps that we as
Member States need to take at the national, regional
and global levels in order to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects. With its adoption we
recognized and highlighted the problems associated
with those weapons by placing them on the
international agenda, but we have now gone beyond
that stage and must move towards long-term, concrete
action. South Africa believes that the Programme of
Action remains the only globally recognized
framework that we now have for the implementation of
the commitments that we as Member States made in
July last year.

The proliferation and excessive accumulation of
small arms and light weapons around the world - and
particularly in Africa, where they are still the weapons
of choice in intra-State conflict - have not abated.
These internal conflicts on our continent are by their
very nature particularly violent in character; and the
impact that they have on civilian populations is
catastrophic. Not only do women, children and the
elderly fall victim to violence, but those that are able to
flee are often forced to do so, with the result that those
internally displaced people are no longer economically
active. The adverse impact that this has on social and
economic development in these countries is
incalculable and often takes decades to overcome.
In Africa, our New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) includes a peace and security
initiative that maps out the promotion on our continent
of long-term conditions for development and security.
In that context, we as Africans aim to build our
continent's capacity to manage these conflicts by
strengthening our existing regional and subregional
institutions to deal with conflict prevention,
management and resolution; peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace enforcement; post-conflict
reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction; and
combating the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.

The heads of State or Government of the African
Union have this year also expressed their concern that
no single factor has contributed more to socio-
economic decline in Africa and to the suffering of
civilian populations than the scourge of conflicts
within and between States. In that regard, they adopted
a Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union
whereby a Peace and Security Council was established
in the Union, as a standing decision-making organ for
the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts. The Peace and Security Council will serve as
a collective early warning body to facilitate prompt and
effective responses to crisis situations in Africa.

We are encouraged by the developments in
Angola this year and, more recently, in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. Yet, at the same time, we are faced
with enormous challenges. I have just referred to a
comprehensive approach to post-conflict peace
initiatives, as set out in NEPAD. To that end,
diplomacy and concrete efforts to disarm, demobilize
and reintegrate ex-combatants are integral to this
approach. Our experience in Southern Africa has
showed that, paradoxically, illicit transfers of small
arms pose a potentially bigger threat to neighbouring
countries when a country is emerging from civil strife
than while it is involved in such strife. Accordingly,
South Africa fully supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations relating to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration initiatives and the
need to include measures relating to such efforts in the
texts of peace agreements.

South Africa believes that, of all the levels at
which the Programme of Action should be fully
implemented, none is as important as the need to focus
on national implementation measures. Without a
concerted effort to implement- where they do not
exist or are not functioning effectively - systems that
are aimed at controlling legal arms transfers and
thereby contributing to preventing and eradicating
illicit arms transfers, our collective endeavours to do so
at the regional and global levels will be futile.

In this context, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendation that States should
establish the necessary legislative and administrative
measures, including the use of authenticated end-user
certificates, to ensure effective control over arms
transfers. South Africa has adopted a strict policy on
this issue, and the legislative framework for this policy,
the National Conventional Arms Control Bill, has been
approved by our National Assembly and is nearing the
final stages of adoption.

My delegation also supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that efforts be made to
develop an international instrument to trace illicit small
arms and light weapons. In this context, South Africa is
pursuing these efforts through its participation in the
group of governmental experts established by General
Assembly resolution 56/24 V, entitled "The illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects", to
examine the feasibility of developing such an
international instrument. It is our hope that this expert
group will come up with concrete recommendations at
the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly.

We are also encouraged by the Secretary-
General's recommendation for enhanced interaction
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council on the issue of small arms. While we also
recognize that both organs of our Organization have
distinct mandates and roles, we would caution against
embarking on separate or parallel courses of action on
this issue that would duplicate our undertakings in
terms of the Programme of Action.

Finally, South Africa also supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations regarding arms embargoes
and related Security Council sanctions. South Africa
believes that not only is it incumbent upon all Member
States to respect and abide by these, but that their full
implementation will rigorously curtail the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. The
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
Protocol on the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and
Other Related Materials calls upon its member States
to enact the necessary legislation and other measures to
sanction the violation of Security Council arms
embargoes, and our domestic draft legislation, to which
I have just referred, also contains such a provision.

In conclusion, South Africa believes that the
Security Council plays, and will continue to play, an
indispensable role in preventing, combating and
eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects and in the implementation of
the Programme of Action on small arms. Accordingly,
we trust that the Council will remain seized of this
matter.

