The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. It reaffirms
its support for the Djibouti Agreement and peace
process as the basis for the resolution of the
conflict in Somalia. It also reiterates the need for
a comprehensive strategy to encourage the
establishment of peace and stability in Somalia
through the collaborative efforts of all
stakeholders.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signing of the Kampala Accord on 9 June, and
commends the leadership shown by President
Museveni and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mr. Augustine P. Mahiga in
facilitating this agreement.

"The Security Council calls on the
signatories of the Kampala Accord to honour
their obligations. It takes note of the appointment
of the new Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government and looks forward to the
prompt appointment of a new Cabinet. It calls on
the signatories to ensure cohesion, unity and
focus on the completion of the transitional tasks
set out by the Djibouti Agreement and the
Transitional Charter. It calls on the Transitional
Federal Institutions (TFIs) to build broad-based
representative institutions through a political
process ultimately inclusive of all, taking into
account the need to ensure the participation of
women in public life.
"In this regard, and recalling the Security
Council's meetings with Somali parties in Nairobi
on 25 May, the Security Council calls on the TFIs
to consult widely with other Somali groups,
including local and regional administrations, and
to work closely with the countries of the region,
regional organizations and the wider international
community. It welcomes the upcoming
consultative meeting, with the participation of the
TFls and all Somali stakeholders, which should
agree on a road map of key tasks and priorities to
be delivered over the next 12 months, with clear
timelines and benchmarks, to be implemented by
the TFIs. The Security Council notes that future
support to the TFIs will be contingent upon
completion of these key tasks. The Security
Council urges all Somali stakeholders to
participate constructively and responsibly in this
meeting.

"The Security Council reiterates the primary
responsibility of Somalis to achieve peace,
security and reconciliation in Somalia. It recalls
that targeted measures can be imposed on those
that engage in or provide support for acts that
threaten the peace, security or stability of
Somalia, including acts that threaten the Djibouti
Agreement or the political process or threaten the
TFIs or the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) by force, violate the arms embargo or
obstruct the delivery of or access to humanitarian
assistance in Somalia.

"The Security Council commends the
progress made by AMISOM. and the Somali
security forces in consolidating security and
stability in Mogadishu, and recognizes the
significant sacrifices made by these forces."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/201 l/ 13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.55 am.
11-38694
