Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
We are pleased to welcome among us Mr. Diarra,
Prime Minister of Cote d'Ivoire. We thank him most
warmly for his briefing, to which we listened with
great interest. I am thoroughly convinced that Council
members are well aware of the extent of his tasks and
of the efforts he is making, which they appreciate.

Unquestionably, as the Prime Minister has
stressed, new progress towards reconciliation in Cote
d'Ivoire has been registered since last May and the
adoption of resolution 1479 (2003). I think it is useful
to recall the key elements of that progress.

The first is the total ceasefire signed on 3 May by
the Forces armees nationales de Cote d'Ivoire (FANCI)
and the Forces nouvelles. The western part of the
country has been pacified. Secondly, the cantonment
sites for belligerents have been identified. It is
important to recall that a declaration ending the war
was adopted on 4 July. As was also indicated, a draft
law on amnesty has been submitted by the Council of
Ministers to the bureau of the National Assembly. The
Prime Minister also noted that the normalization of
relations between Cote d'Ivoire and its neighbours has
begun. We also welcome the establishment of a climate
of trust in C6te d'Ivoire, which is essential for the
complete implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis and
Accra Agreements.

However, as was also underlined, the process
remains fragile. Much remains to be done for
reconciliation in C6te d'Ivoire to be a complete
success. I am thinking in particular of the cantonment
of forces and of the disarmament of the Forces
nouvelles, which should follow the vote on the amnesty
law. I believe it was very useful to have, thanks to the
Prime Minister and his delegation, a presentation of
this programme, which enables us to see all the work
planned and its importance for the success of the
process.

I should like also to welcome the involvement of
President Kufuor and the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which
are clear evidence of its political and operational
capacity to help restore civil peace in Cote d'Ivoire.

While remaining very vigilant about the effective
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement,
the international community will continue to support
the ECOWAS Mission in Cote d'Ivoire (ECOMICI). I
believe that the donors conference held recently, on 18
July, in Paris gave some encouraging signs in this
respect.

Let me add that, on the ground, ECOWAS and
French troops are continuing their efforts in support of
the peace process. In keeping with resolution 1464
(2003), France early next week will publish a report on
the activities of Operation Licorne. The Council will
also be renewing the six-month authorization it had
granted to the peacekeeping forces. In that respect, my
delegation will be submitting a brief technical draft
resolution early next week.

Finally, as Council members are aware, we have
prepared a draft presidential statement embodying
these main points. I understand that the expert-level
meetings that took place this week indicate that there is
agreement on the draft. If that is the case, it could
perhaps be adopted at the end of this meeting, if
members agree.

