Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the American presidency
of the Council for organizing this meeting on the latest
developments in Syria and, more particularly, in Idlib

governorate. We also thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. John Ging for their excellent briefings.
Reports of the imminent large-scale and intense
fighting between belligerents in Idlib governorate are a
source ofgreat concern for my country, inter alia, because
of the risk of exacerbating the already dire humanitarian
situation. Indeed, of the approximate 3 million
inhabitants of Idlib governorate, 2 million - or two-
thirds - face pressing humanitarian needs. In addition,
according to the estimates of the United Nations and
humanitarian agencies, the resumption of fighting in
Idlib governorate would cause a massive displacement
of between 450,000 and 750,000 people.

The certain humanitarian disaster that would result
from the escalation of fighting is compounded by the
risk of the possible use of chemical weapons by the
belligerents. That tragic and alarming event, in my
delegation's view, would once again constitute a breach
of international law on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and undermine the international legal
mechanisms in the area of non-proliferation.

That is why Cote d'Ivoire wishes to reaffirm its
principled position that there is no alternative to the
search for peace through a frank and inclusive dialogue
in Syria. We therefore condemn any use of force as a
means of conflict resolution and urge all Syrian parties
to prioritize political dialogue, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), which lays out the road map for
the peace process in the country.

In conclusion, my country calls on the parties to
the conflict in Syria to exercise restraint to prevent any
deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation,
and urges them to strictly respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and human rights
law. It therefore calls on them to fulfil their obligations
to protect civilians in conflict situations and to refrain
from any action that could impede the delivery of
humanitarian aid to distressed populations.

