Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): Sir,
allow me to reiterate my delegation's congratulations
to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for January. We assure you of our full
cooperation. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his introductory statement, as well as his
Special Representative, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for having
introduced the report (S/2002/l299) before us, and
Ms. Carol Bellamy for her statement.

In the Charter, Member States express their
determination to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to promote social progress, to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security
and to ensure that armed force shall not be used, save
in the common interest. To attain these purposes, my
country has always accepted our responsibilities, since
the adults that we are today were the children of
yesterday; and the children of today will be the adults
of tomorrow.

World leaders, mindful of these responsibilities,
adopted the World Declaration on the Survival,
Protection and Development of Children in the 1990s
and the related Plan of Action, as well as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. These were
important steps forward in seeking specific solutions to
the question of children. The resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly and the Security Council, as
well as the outcome document of the twenty-seventh
special session of the General Assembly, entitled "A
world fit for children" (resolution S-27/2, annex), attest
to the determination of the international community to
make the question of children more central to its
concerns.

Consideration of the report before us attests also
to the determination of the Council to shoulder its
obligations by giving priority to children, still the
stratum of our societies most vulnerable as victims of
the disastrous consequences of armed conflict, of
forcible recruitment as soldiers or labourers, and of
sexual abuse.

My delegation welcomes the taking into
consideration, inter alia, of the normative framework,
of impunity, and of the inclusion of child protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations. There is not the
shadow of a doubt that the entry into force of two
international instruments - the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) - strengthens the international legal framework
to provide greater protection to children in armed
conflict and to punish those guilty of serious abuse
against them.

We must encourage the efforts undertaken by
several States to make their legislation consonant with
relevant international norms. We appreciate and
support ongoing efforts to integrate and strengthen
child protection in peacemaking, peace-building and
peacekeeping. We believe that the coordination of
activities undertaken by various actors is necessary in
this process.

Recent public meetings of the Council on women,
peace and security, on small arms and light weapons
and on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
have helped us appreciate the overall impact of
conflicts on children. But they have, above all, been an
opportunity to look into several aspects echoed in the
present report. These relate, in particular, to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
particularly anti-personnel mines; access by
humanitarian bodies to conflict zones; the impact on
children of the illicit commercial exploitation of
natural resources; and sexual exploitation and sexual
violence against children in conflict areas. In my
delegation's view, these issues, which were
incorporated into the topics of which I just spoke,
should be considered by the Council in an interactive
framework that would bring together representatives of
the various bodies that are responsible for their follow-
up. That would make comprehensive consideration
possible, while bearing in mind the solutions
appropriate to each case.

The aide-memoire and the road map submitted to
us for our meetings on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict would be extremely useful here.
Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the list of
parties to conflicts that recruit or use children in
violation of international provisions that protect them.
This sheds further light on the situation of children in
armed conflict at various levels. However, we stress
that, even if the Council is not directly seized of certain
cases, these nevertheless should be given the necessary
attention. To that end, it is essential that these lists be
updated for the Council. Only if the international
community has access to this information can it ensure
implementation, as recommended by the report. We
also encourage field missions by Special
Representatives. These visits are sources of
information and inspiration that inform us about the
facts on the ground and help us to take useful steps for
future action.
My delegation supports the work of
demobilization, retraining and full reintegration of
children through providing adequate resources, without
which any activity will be doomed to failure. We
therefore appeal to donors to give special attention to
this problem.

I cannot conclude my statement without referring
to the specific situation of children in armed conflict in
Africa. Sixty per cent of the items discussed in the
Council relate to conflicts in Africa, where children are
the prime victims. This is why my delegation stresses
that the common destiny of peoples and children of the
world, particularly those in Africa, must be built in
peace. Peace is possible only if there is development;
and development is impossible without peace. This
means that, for the developing countries - those in
Africa in particular - there must be a minimum of
justice in managing their debt, greater opening up of
the markets of the North to their commodities with
proper remuneration, an increase in official
development assistance and real commitment on the
part of the international community to resolve these
conflicts in all their aspects. To achieve this, there must
be coordination among the various United Nations
bodies and the agencies involved in enhancing the
well-being of children, and between those and regional,
subregional and national actors as well.

Finally, we hope that this meeting will help us
plan future action on the basis of past experience, so
that we can better discharge the historic duty of
bequeathing to future generations, the children of
today, a world of peace, security, justice, progress and
concord.

