Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I should like to
start by thanking Ambassador Takasu for his briefing
this afternoon. His Committee's work is of critical
importance as we pursue the dual-track strategy to
3
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. It has only become
more so following the adoption of resolution 1929
(2010).

The measures imposed by resolution 1929 (2010)
are targeted, proportionate and reversible. If the dual-
track strategy is to succeed, Member States will need
to ensure the full, effective and rigorous
implementation of these measures and those in the
Council's previous resolutions. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) will
have a key role in monitoring, implementation and
advising States, where necessary.

The work programme that resolution 1929 (2010)
tasks the Committee to submit to the Council by
24 July will need to address those measures. It will be
the most ambitious work programme yet. The
contribution of the panel of experts will be essential to
the effective delivery of that work programme. We urge
the Committee and the Secretariat to make every effort
to operationalize the panel as soon as possible.

The most recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency makes clear why these
additional measures were necessary. It states that Iran
has suspended neither its enrichment-related activities
nor work on its heavy water-related projects. This is a
clear defiance of successive Security Council
resolutions. The report states that Iran has produced
5.7 kilograms of low-enriched uranium, enriched at
just under 20 per cent. This is a significant step
towards the ability to enrich to weapons-grade levels.
Iran has no credible civilian application for such
enriched uranium. The report makes clear that, in the
case of the facility at Qom, Iran did not notify the
Agency in a timely manner of its decision to construct
the site and that this is inconsistent with Iran's
obligations under its safeguards agreement.

The report states that Iran has not discussed
possible military dimensions of its programme with the
Agency since August 2008. The Agency therefore
remains concerned about the possible existence in Iran
of past or current undisclosed nuclear-related activities
involving military-related organizations, including
activities relating to the development of a payload for a
missile. The report concludes that Iran has not
provided the cooperation necessary to permit the
Agency to confirm that all nuclear material in Iran is in
peaceful activities.
We remain ready to resume the talks on Iran's
nuclear programme that we started in Geneva in
October. Baroness Ashton, the European Union's High
Representative, is pursuing that with Mr. Saeed Jalili,
the Secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security
Council. Such talks can lead to a solution if they are
purposeful, address both sides' concerns and make
swift progress. In again extending our hand, we show
our determination to resolve these matters through
dialogue and diplomacy. This stands in stark contrast to
Iran's repeated refusals to discuss its nuclear
programme. We remain equally determined to continue
to respond robustly to Iran's refusal to comply with its
international obligations.

