Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to welcome His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, who is with us
at this important meeting. I had the honour to be with
him a few days ago in Istanbul at the United Nations
international meeting on Palestine. I should like also to
thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
and to welcome Her Excellency Deputy Secretary-
General Migiro, who is with us today.

On this sad day, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas condemned
the crime committed in international waters and called
it a massacre. For that reason the Palestinian Authority
has declared a three-day state of mourning to mark the
death of the civilian martyrs who fell victim to this
crime. Regardless of their nationality, we consider
them to be martyrs of Palestine, and we extend our
condolences to their families and loved ones.

At the outset, I would like to express Palestine's
deep gratitude for the Council's quick response in
holding a special meeting of the Security Council at the
request of Palestine, Lebanon and Turkey, in order to
investigate Israel's blatant aggression against the ships
heading for Gaza, which caused the martyrdom of a
number of victims as well as to injuries and the
detention of those on board. These people were
activists for peace and freedom; their only slogan was
for peace. They were carrying only food, medical
equipment and other supplies for our civilians.

Israel has carried out its threats to suppress acts
of solidarity with blockaded Gaza. This Israeli crime
and all the threats that preceded it are not new to that
occupying Power; nor are its blatant acts of aggression
and violations directed at Palestinian civilians and
those who support them. The Palestinian Authority has
strongly condemned these acts of Israeli piracy and
views this flagrant aggression and this impunity as a
direct consequence of the international community's
silence and its inability to put an end to Israel's
flagrant acts of aggression and its violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

The international community must condemn this
crime, which runs counter to international
humanitarian and human rights norms. It must bring an
end to the suffering of the Palestinian people and to the
outrageous blockade of Gaza, implement justice and
international law and hold Israel accountable for the
war crime it committed today against the flotilla, as
well as all its other war crimes against the Palestinian
people. We call for an independent, impartial
international investigation into this crime, in order to
punish the perpetrators and to release and protect all
those detained, immediately and unconditionally.
It is high time for the Security Council to take
decisive measures against this serious escalation and
other acts by Israel, a country that always acts as if it is
outside the law and never held to account or deterred.
What led to today's crime are the continuing Israeli
blockade of Gaza, the starvation of its people and the

deprivation of their right to live in freedom and safety
and to have the food and shelter necessary for their
survival. That is what motivated these hundreds of
people from all over the world to side with us. One
after the other, these flotillas will keep coming until
this unethical blockade and the suffering of our people
are ended.

This attack on unarmed civilians on foreign ships
in international waters is more proof that Israel acts as
if it were outside the law. The international community
must therefore take urgent and appropriate steps in this
regard. It is time for the Security Council to come to
address the non-implementation of its many resolutions
on Palestine and the situation in the Middle East. It is
time for it to put an end to the unjust blockade imposed
on 1.5 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and to
bring resolution 1860 (2009) to bear. It is time for it to
end Israel's lack of respect for its resolutions and for
the will of the international community, and to take the
necessary measures to deal with the settlement
activities and other illegal acts that are being carried
out in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
occupied East Jerusalem.

It is the responsibility of the Security Council, by
virtue of the United Nations Charter, to take the
necessary measures to maintain international peace and
security and to put an end to Israel's occupation of
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem and the
territories occupied since 1967. This situation has
lasted for too long; it is time for the occupation to end
so that the Palestinian people may exercise their
inalienable rights and establish an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.

