Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I hope that you, Mr. President, will be patient
and listen to our comments on the briefing by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.

The Government of my country has considered the
thirty-ninth monthly report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l7/445). It expresses its concern and regret over
the approach of the report's authors, which in many
aspects reflects the positions of certain States, parties
and Governments that deliberately distort reality and
deny the basic causes for the situation and humanitarian
crisis in Syria, and the emergence and spread of armed
terrorist groups with the support, financing and
guidance of known Governments.

These Governments - some of which,
unfortunately, are permanent members of the Security
Council - impose unilateral economic measures

against the Syrian people in order to bring pressure
to bear on the people by denying them various basic
resources necessary for a decent life. In this regard, I
note that this morning the Government of my country
has addressed two identical letters to the Secretary-
General and the President of the Security Council
containing its detailed response to the report.

The Government of my country finds it strange
that the authors of the report, who should focus on
humanitarian issues, continue to include issues that
have nothing to do with humanitarian affairs and do
not reflect the reality on the ground. Allow me to share
some key observations of the Syrian Government on
some of this erroneous information.

The authors of the report insist on sending political
messages adopted by the Governments of certain
countries. They accuse the Syrian Government of laying
siege to areas of Syria. The entire Syrian people is under
siege and exhausted on both the living humanitarian
levels, due to the unilateral economic measures imposed
by the Governments of certain Member States - led
by the United States and the European Union - that
shed crocodile tears and bemoan the situation of the
Syrian people.
As for the areas that the United Nations has
classified as under siege, the Organization is operating
under erroneous information. Rather, armed terrorist
groups that lay siege to those areas use civilians as
human shields and deny them the humanitarian aid they
are sent. Those groups sell humanitarian provisions
at exorbitant prices in Aleppo, for example. The
report uses the term "forced displacement" to describe
national reconciliation measures being implemented
in large swaths of Syria - a dangerous posture that
reflects the positions of Governments that continue to
insist on covering for and protecting armed terrorist
groups in Syria. Those national reconciliation measures
have restored security, stability and normalcy to many
Syrian towns and cities. In that regard, we stress that
the reconciliation efforts are transparent operations
through which the Government offers armed groups
the option to lay down their weapons and regularize
their status without any legal charges brought against
them or they can relocate to another area. That does
not apply to civilians, of course, who can go back to
their daily lives after the armed groups leave. We do not
yet know why some senior officials of the Secretariat
feel concerned about Syrians regaining their homes,
security and normal lives.

 

My Government regrets that the authors of the
report have adopted, fully and in a biased way, the
American version regarding the use of chemical
weapons in Khan Shaykhun. The Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic has repeatedly made clear
its principled position rejecting the use of chemical
weapons or toxic chemicals, which is considered to be
a crime against humanity and an immoral, heinous act
that cannot be justified in any circumstance for any
reason or anywhere. We reiterate that we have not used
chemical materials in our war against terrorism. The
incident in Khan Shaykhun was contrived by terrorist
groups, led by the Al-Nusrah Front, with the guidance
and support of the Governments of some States, in order
for Syria to take the blame for the use of such weapons.

The authors of the report insist on remaining
silent on the catastrophic consequences of the illegal
air strikes carried out by the self-styled international
coalition. Those strikes have targeted infrastructure
such as dams, bridges, hospitals, schools and oil
facilities. Moreover, it is well known in the Council
and to world public opinion, that such arbitrary strikes
in northern and eastern Syria have claimed dozens
of innocent civilian victims. We also regret that the
Secretariat continuously promotes the actions of that
coalition and deliberately turns a blind eye to the illegal
nature of the coalition and the fact that it is violating
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The coalition was not created at the request of the
Syrian Government or pursuant to a Security Council
resolution.

The authors of the report continuously try to justify
the aggression of the Turkish military regime - which
backs some armed terrorist groups in Syria - against
the sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is
therefore quite odd that the report states that Turkey's
closing of the Nusaybin/Qamishli border crossing
is but temporary and for security reasons, whereas
in fact the closure began in December 2015 and only
seeks to increase the suffering of the population of the
Hasakah governorate.

The Government of Syria has to date provided its
people with around 75 per cent of its humanitarian
needs. We reaffirm our steadfast policy to ensure the
provision of humanitarian aid and to meet the needs of
Syrian citizens everywhere, without any discrimination.
Thus, we have welcomed the proposal put forward by
the United Nations and the Government of Japan to
facilitate regular monthly humanitarian convoys.

I would also like to make certain observations on
the humanitarian situation.

First of all, my Government again stresses the
obligation of the United Nations to coordinate with it,
in a spirit of partnership and cooperation, all aspects
of the humanitarian efforts with Syria. We must not
submit to the political agendas of certain Member
States or to the demands and allegations of other actors,
which the authors of the report erroneously identify as
"local authorities".

Secondly, the authors of the report must hold the
Al-Nusrah Front terrorist group and its allied armed
terrorist groups responsible for blocking humanitarian
aid because those groups target peaceful residential
areas, block vital roads, besiege several locations and
use civilians as human shields.

Thirdly, the Syrian Government rejects the
allegations and accusations levelled against it by
the authors of the report concerning procedural
and logistical measures concerning the delivery of
humanitarian aid to unstable zones. We reaffirm that
we comply with all agreements on the provision of
aid, including medical supplies, to civilians in need.
Moreover, we want to ensure accuracy in determining
the number of people who receive that aid, and that the
supplies do not end up in terrorist hands. Additionally,
the Syrian Government has facilitated the delivery of
more than 15 humanitarian convoys in April and May,
in keeping with the monthly humanitarian convey
agreement. We will continue to make efforts to ensure
that more convoys can reach those zones.

Fourthly, the authors of the report do not address
the failures of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Syria, which deliberately
delays the operations of the convoys, allows the
delivery of aid to some zones on a monthly basis to the
exclusion of others, and refuses humanitarian access to
zones requested by the Syrian Government. Moreover,
the Office does not provide accurate numbers of the
convoys that are being organized every month in
order to underplay the role and efforts of the Syrian
Government. Additionally, the Office and the authors
of the report purposefully avoid mentioning the joint
International Committee of the Red Cross-Syrian Arab
Red Crescent convoys, and they include neither the
actual numbers of convoys being organised based on
prior approvals, nor the number of people benefiting
from them.

Fifthly, the authors of the report cite the tragedy
of civilians who fled Foah and Kafraya in a narrative
way that it is far from describing the scale ofthat crime,
despite the fact that the terrorist bombing of their
buses in the Rashidin area in Aleppo city on 15 April
claimed the lives of dozens of women and children and
destroyed dozens of ambulances and buses that could
not be replaced due to the economic siege imposed by
Governments of certain Member States upon Syria.

Sixthly, the report continues to promote cross-
border aid, most of which falls into the hands of the
terrorist groups that are rampant in the areas, where
such aid arrives.

The people of Syria continue to be the victims of
the lies and hypocrisy within the Security Council
espoused by the same group of States that do not wish
to see an end to the crisis in Syria but want to continue
to manage and invest in terrorism and in armed
terrorist groups and impose an economic blockade on
the Syrian people.

I now address my comments to the representative
of the United States, who claimed earlier today that she
was speaking on behalf ofa Syrian refugee in Turkey. I
speak here on behalf of millions of Syrians inside and
outside Syria, who call on the Governments f France,
the United States and the United Kingdom and on the
Governments of regimes that support terrorism in
Syria to stop exploiting the Syrian crisis to achieve
their political schemes at the expense of the Syrians'
interests. I call on them to lift the economic blockade
on the Syrian people and to end air strikes on cities,
the destruction of infrastructure and the targeting of
civilians under the pretext of combating Da'esh, and
to stop making up fictitious stories that are similar to
cheap Hollywood movies.

I remind the United States representative and her
colleague from France that the media in their two
countries have questioned the fabricated evidence
provided by the two countries on about the situation in
Sednaya and Khan Shaykhun, yet no one has questioned
the fact that the aircraft of the so-called international
coalition kill hundreds of innocent civilians in Syria
and Iraq.

Finally, my country, Syria, will continue to play a
constructive role to ensure that the Astana and Geneva
meetings are successful, in the context of its involvement
in any genuine effort to put an end to the blood bath in
Syria and to terrorism, and that will help us to find a
political solution, on the basis ofintra-Syrian dialogue,
led by the Syrian people, without foreign interference
or preconditions.

