Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, allow me to commend you,
Mr. President, on convening today's debate. We have
seen a genuine revolution in the working methods of
the Council, with Angola speaking on behalf of six
members. Such initiatives should be supported - for
example, it could be emulated by the new members
joining the Council from the European Union.
The Security Council has been discussing in an
open format the issue of improving its working methods
for several years. We believe that external audits and
periodic stocktaking of the working methods helps
Council members to define areas where there is room
for improvement. However, we think it is necessary
once again to state clearly that the working methods
themselves and decisions on their possible modification
are the preserve of the Security Council. We firmly
believe that the sole goal of reforming the Security
Council's working methods should be to improve the
Council's effectiveness and efficiency in carrying out
tasks to maintain international peace and security,
which is the primary responsibility of the Council in
line with the Charter of the United Nations. Allowing
ourselves to be swept away by populism will only harm
our action.

We have heard criticism of the Council that at times
it treads on the prerogatives of other United Nations
bodies. We fully share those concerns. Our colleagues
in the Council are well aware that we are cautious when
it comes to the consideration of thematic subjects in
the Security Council, in particular when it comes to
those that rightly should fall within the remit of the
General Assembly. Today we heard about plans to
discuss in the Council the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development - and specifically Goal 16. This is not a
matter for the Security Council. This kind of discussion
was planned months before the Agenda was officially
launched, even before the specialized bodies - the
General Assembly and the High-Level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development, which is under the
Economic and Social Council - have the possibility
of beginning to work on a mechanism for conducting a
review of the implementation of the Goals. We cannot
support such initiatives in the Security Council, as
they gravely undermine the Charter prerogatives of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. This issue must be treated extremely seriously.

We must also recognize that many Security
Council meetings devoted to thematic subjects receive
a great response from Member States. The number of
speakers in open debates can exceed 100. On such days
the General Assembly appears to move into the Council
Chamber. Would it not be better to hold such debates in
the General Assembly Hall, where all can speak on an
equal footing?

There is another negative trend with regard to the
revitalization of the General Assembly. Dragging the
General Assembly agenda into the Security Council
draws the Council and its members away from
fulfilling their main task: focusing on country subjects
and issues on which it can and must take urgent and
tangible decisions. Perhaps due to a lack of time and the
possibility of an in-depth, patient investment of effort
into mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of each
conflict situation, on the initiative of several countries,
the Council is increasingly pushed into adopting rushed
decisions and sanctions mechanisms based on invoking
Chapter VII of the Charter. The effectiveness of such
decisions leaves a lot to be desired. They often lead to
merely worsening a crisis.

There has been a lot of commotion in recent months
in connection with the selection of the next Secretary-
General. Moreover, at times the discussion has not
been on substantive or technical issues. The Secretary-
General still has over a year left in his mandate.
However, some delegations seem intent on launching
the selection process right now. We do not think there
is any practical value in that, other than point-scoring
for those promoting the initiative. Furthermore, we
should not be putting further pressure on the current
Secretary-General, much less bringing into the United
Nations the "lame duck" concept - as the saying goes
in certain countries whose political systems are hardly
paragons of effectiveness.

What we really should be focusing in the context
of choosing the next Secretary-General is the need for
further democratization of the work of the Secretariat. It
cannot be considered normal when you have a situation
whereby three key positions - the Under-Secretaries-
General for peacekeeping, political and humanitarian
affairs - are effectively usurped by three countries.
We believe that, in order to maintain the effectiveness
and legitimacy of the work of the Secretariat, we need
to rotate those and certain other senior posts among all
States Members of the United Nations. It is important
to make the process for their appointment more
transparent.

We are satisfied overall with the relations between
the Security Council and the Secretariat. The leadership
of the Organization is always available to us and has
an opportunity to approach the Council on any issue.
We welcome the work of the Security Council Affairs
Division. However, we would like to draw attention to
another aspect of the work of the United Nations.

The Secretariat is a gracious host, offering its
premises at Headquarters for events on a broad range
of issues organized by Member States. However, we
need to understand that, when holding such events,
all Members of the Organization - bar none - must
respect the rules of the house. In that regard, we think it
is unacceptable that, at the event on combating violent
extremism organized by the delegation of the United
States on 29 September, notwithstanding protests by the
leadership of the Secretariat and certain delegations,
that delegation invited representatives of the self-
declared "Kosovo", which is not a State Member of
the United Nations. Kosovo Albanian representatives
cannot be allowed to enter United Nations territory
except when accompanied by Secretariat officials.
Such action on the part of the United States is an abuse
of its position as host country of the United Nations
and demonstrates blatant disrespect for the Secretariat
leadership. We call for an end to such high-handedness.

On the other hands, when there is a real need to
hear the opinions of newly independent States that are
not United Nations Members, the United States tends to
erect visa barriers. Every year, Georgia introduces to
the General Assembly a draft resolution on refugees that
cannot be considered without inviting representatives
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to New York. Those
representatives must be given the opportunity to have
their say, even if only at special, informal events at
Headquarters.

The same applies to the participation of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the work
of the United Nations. Situations arise in which
countries that one would imagine to be the strongest
proponents of the participation of civil society actually
block appearances by representatives of NGOs that
hold different views to their own. Those who would be
seen to be objective should endorse the participation,
for instance, of representatives of the overwhelming
majority of the population of Crimea in the United
Nations work.

Many delegations have noted the difference in the
Security Council's approach to countries on its agenda.
Unfortunately, that approach is selective. When drafting
a Security Council position, some of our partners, for
example, have objected to duly reflecting the opinions
ofAfrican States hosting peacekeeping operations, such
as the Sudan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and others. At times even the opinion of
the African Union is ignored. On the other hand, the
positions of third countries on other issues, conveyed
via members of the Council, acquire exaggerated
significance and become an obstacle to the adoption of
necessary decisions. We call on our colleagues in the
Council to act consistently and in a principled manner
on such issues and to be guided exclusively by the need
to strengthen international peace and security.

We have consistently advocated improved
coordination of the activities of the Security Council
with the broadest possible circle of Member States,
as well as with representatives who are competent to
provide information that is important to the adoption
of decisions. To that end, the Security Council is
endowed with appropriate mechanisms, including
unofficial meetings under the so-called Arria Formula.
Unfortunately, however, in recent years there has been a
growing trend to use such meetings to stage propaganda
spectacles in which, for the reference of the Security
Council, certain delegations seek to promote their own
unilateral positions.

Moreover, the cost ofusing United Nations premises
and conference services - including interpretation
in some cases - is met through the regular budget.
In other words, all we taxpayers would appear to be
subsidizing the political activities of certain States.
That is unacceptable, and we call on our colleagues to
use the Arria Formula format exclusively for its original
end of providing greater clarity to the Security Council
with respect to situations on its agenda.

We are convinced that the Council would benefit
from a democratization of its work, facilitated by a
more balanced distribution of obligations informally
linked to the so-called penholdership of some dossiers.
Certain Council members should not consider countries
or even regions to be their exclusive purview or act as
mentors on issues concerning those countries. Such
conduct is a remnant of days gone by that we need to
abandon.

In conclusion, with respect to the issue of the veto,
which has been raised today, although we do not believe
that it is relevant to the matter of working methods, the
veto is one of the key provisions of the Charter that
prompts Council members to reach consensus. I would
simply say that it is clear why undermining the right of
veto is the goal ofthose who would seek a mathematical
majority on the Council, yet it is unclear why the veto
is sometimes criticized by representatives of countries
or regions that, in the absence of the veto, would find
themselves under massive pressure from a particular
group of States. I would suggest that they consider their
own national interests.

