Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank today's briefers, Deputy Secretary-
General Amina Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila and
Ms. Chitra Nagarajan, for their very comprehensive
statements. I also thank the President for convening
today's meeting to discuss the situation in the Lake
Chad basin region.

Poland has been closely following the political
and security situation in this region, which is facing
a dreadful humanitarian crisis, with about 11 million
people in need of immediate assistance and more
than 2 million dealing with internal displacement,
particularly women and children. We believe that the
Security Council should remain thoroughly engaged
and monitor the situation carefully.

We support the full implementation of resolution
2349 (2017). We firmly condemn all terrorist attacks,
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights abuses by Boko Haram and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham in the region, including those
involving killings and other violence against civilians,
especially women and children. In that regard, we
appreciate the Multinational Joint Task Force counter-
terrorism operations aimed at ending the Boko Haram
insurgency. However, there remains much to be done
in that regard, since a number of terrorist attacks have
shown that the group remains a significant threat,
especially in north-eastern Nigeria.

In order to end the terrorist threat in the Lake
Chad basin region, the United Nations, together with
the countries concerned, must address the root causes
of the violence and instability there, which originate
in the social and economic hardships endured by
marginalized communities. If we do not tackle these
issues, we will not be able to strengthen prevention and
ensure that the conflicts can be sustainably resolved.
Only by empowering the region's marginalized
populations, including women, children and other
communities that suffer from discrimination, can we
effectively counter the spread of violent extremism. At
this stage, humanitarian assistance alone is not enough
to ensure stable and sustainable livelihoods for the
people affected. Long-term development assistance
must address the vulnerabilities of the region, including
food insecurity and climate change.

Climate change is a global threat facing all of
us today. It hinders access to resources and causes
extreme weather events, disasters, food insecurity
and water shortages. All of those factors can lead
to the escalation of local and regional conflicts
and increases in migration. Poland recognizes the
devastating consequences that climate change and
ecological degradation, among other factors, are having
on the stability of the region, and we are aware of the
importance of increased international engagement in
addressing these problems.

As we celebrate World Water Day and the launch
of the International Decade for Action: Water for
sustainable development (2018-2028), we would like
to stress the important role of water in the peace and
security agenda. We must address the adverse effects that
water, or the lack of it, can produce and the challenges
it can pose, and pay more attention to the importance
of adequate risk assessment and management. While
concentrating on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace, we should not forget Sustainable Development
Goal 6, as we have already seen several water-related
crises. We therefore welcome regional initiatives
aimed at improving the situation in the Lake Chad
basin, revitalizing local ecosystems and supporting
sustainable livelihoods.

As President of the twenty-fourth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Poland
will continue to lead climate negotiations in the spirit
of the Paris Climate Change Agreement, ensuring the
equal participation of all countries and inclusive and
transparent negotiations, while bearing in mind that
resolving climate-security issues is in the interest
of countries vulnerable to climate change. Effective
adaptation to and mitigation of climate change can also
be perceived as conflict-prevention tools that can make
a significant contribution to building resilience among
the countries affected.

