Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Guehenno for his enlightening
briefing about developments in Kosovo. My delegation
pays tribute to him and to his entire team for their
efforts to keep Council members informed about the
vicissitudes being encountered by this region and
others.

At a time when the international community is
closely following developments in the Balkans, and
more specifically the general elections that will be held
on 17 November 2001 in Kosovo, my delegation
welcomes the good conditions in which the
preparations for the elections are being carried out. We
are also pleased to note the positive and productive
attitude adopted by all parties concerned. This attitude
guarantees broad participation by all ethnic
components of Kosovo and points to the success of the
entire electoral operation.

We welcome the decision here taken by Kosovo
Serb political parties to participate in the elections. We
are convinced that this wise decision, which we have
constantly encouraged, will have an important impact
on the future of the province, in general, and on the
participation of ethnic minorities in the new political
structures that will emerge from the elections, in
particular. The goal for those new political structures is
that they be representative and that they guarantee the
right of all inhabitants of Kosovo to safety and
security, respect for differences and participation in
healthy public life. Clearly, the priority of these new
political structures is to banish hatred and attitudes
based on ethnic considerations and to promote peaceful
coexistence. Broad participation in the electoral
process will ensure its success and will give it the
necessary legitimacy. We encourage the continuation of
contacts by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) leadership with
the Belgrade authorities in order to bring about better
coordination in the lead up to the elections.

My delegation once again reiterates its disquiet at
ongoing acts of violence. We deplore this attitude,
whose main victims are civilians. We think that the
approach of the elections is creating a climate of
tension, for which we need to prepare. Increased
vigilance is necessary with a view to addressing any
possible violence. In our view, such violence is based
on the absence of trust that still prevails among ethnic
communities. That trust can be restored, in particular,
by eliminating pockets of tension and by strengthening
confidence-building measures among the inhabitants of
Kosovo. We welcome the signing of the new United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) regulation 2001/17, which is intended to
establish rules on the sale of properties in mixed
neighbourhoods in order to be sure that transactions
involving minority properties are valid in those multi-
ethnic areas, and thus to safeguard the multi-ethnic
nature of the province.

The question of refugees and displaced persons
remains a major source of concern. We think it is
essential to speed up the return of refugees and
displaced persons and to guarantee them optimal
security conditions, particularly in areas where they are
minorities. Once they have gone home, refugees must
be able to return to their homes, and their rights must
be restored. Furthermore, we believe that as winter
approaches, UNMIK should be prepared to give them
the best possible living conditions.

It is essential to deal with the question of
prisoners and missing persons with due dispatch and
preferably before the elections. The search for
solutions to the humanitarian aspects of the Kosovo
question will go a long way to help promote
reconciliation among the various ethnic communities.

My delegation is pleased at the economic
progress made in recent months in Kosovo. I saw for
myself, during the visit of Security Council members to
Kosovo, this new economic spirit, which we encourage
and which should be maintained.

Moving from emergency rebuilding to a new
phase of economic reform is healthy for Kosovo and
the entire Balkan region. We are convinced that the
positive impact of these decisions will be felt very
quickly.

