Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for this month, which has been very
busy with important issues. I would also like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his informative
and invaluable briefing.
My country's delegation would like to congratulate
the fraternal Syrian people for the achievement
represented in their agreement to establish the Syrian
Constitutional Committee, which we hope will be
instrumental in ending the suffering of the Syrian
people and reaching a Syrian-led political settlement
under the auspices of the United Nations for the years-
long Syrian crisis, which has only grown deeper. We
appreciation the tireless efforts of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and the key role played by Special
Envoy Pedersen, who has been working in collaboration
with the relevant parties to reach that important
agreement. We also express our appreciation for the
positive spirit that was shown by the Syrian parties
in concluding that achievement. Perhaps that progress
now calls on all of us to rapidly build upon it by taking
tangible steps, as follows.

First, the work of the Constitutional Committee
should start as soon as possible and focus on substantive
issues, while avoiding any complexities or procedural
disputes that would only prolong the suffering of the
fraternal Syrian people.

Secondly, we have to work in parallel and without
delay on the remaining issues ofthe political settlement,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), and not to

use the Constitutional Committee as an alternative to
other necessary procedures.

Thirdly, serious and collective measures should be
taken to fight terrorism and illegitimate armed groups
throughout Syrian territory, and not to blindly follow
the attempted change of names that those terrorist
groups have used to conceal their identity. At the same
time, measures should be taken against the parties that
continue to finance those terrorist groups and provide
them with weapons, not to mention the related political
cover, which is seen by all and ignored by some.

It is perhaps our right, or it is our duty, to
legitimately wonder about who contributed to the
arrival of thousands of foreign fighters in Syria, who
armed and funded them, who provided them with
safe havens in egregious violation of international
law and the resolutions of this Council, as well as the
sovereignty of Syria and the rights, security and life
of its fraternal people. I would like mention that there
has been a spillover of this danger outside of Syria, as
thousands of terrorists are now in Libya.

In the same vein, Egypt calls upon the Security
Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to
shoulder their responsibilities and immediately stop
the flow of terrorists and foreign fighters from Syria
to Libya and other areas in Africa. In recent months,
thousands of them were transferred supported,
financed and protected by certain parties that provide
these terrorist elements with safe corridors to move to
other regions so as to continue their subversive acts
and their destructive schemes in the Middle East, in
flagrant violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That also constitutes a very serious threat
to international peace and security.

Fourthly and lastly, the efforts of certain parties
to undertake demographic engineering so as to change
the demographic composition of northern Syria should
cease, since they seek only to expand their regional
influence. We must emphasize the importance of
accurate implementation of international standards on
the voluntary and safe return of refugees to their homes
and of not transferring them to other areas in order to
alter the original Syrian demography in certain areas of
the country.

My country's delegation would also like to draw
the Council's attention to the importance of the
elements contained in the joint communique issued on
26 September by the Foreign Ministers ofthe small group
on Syria, reflecting a balanced and objective vision of
the next steps to bring about a political settlement of the
crisis and put an end to the humanitarian tragedy.

In conclusion, Egypt reiterates its determination
to tirelessly support all efforts to achieve a balanced
and sustainable political settlement that ensures the
restoration of security and stability to sisterly Syria,
while fully maintaining its sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity as well as the safety of its people.

