Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this important open debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. We commend
the Permanent Representative of Portugal, Ambassador
Jose Filipe Moraes Cabral, for his dedicated efforts as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We acknowledge the
role that the Working Group is playing to advance ways
to further enhance the transparency, accountability and
overall efficiency of the Council's work.

The interest of the entire international community
in the matter under consideration is obvious and arises
from the functions of the Security Council. In fulfilling
its Charter-mandated obligations, the Council acts on
behalf of all States Members of the United Nations and
therefore should be duly accountable to them. Almost
one year has passed since the Council's last open debate
on its working methods (S/PV.6672), at which a number
of important issues were raised. During this period, the
Council continued to further implement presidential
note 507 (S/2010/507) and agreed on several measures
to increase interactivity, inclusiveness and efficiency
in the internal work of the Council, as eventually
reproduced in presidential note 402 of June 2012
(S/2012/402).

More attention has also been paid to achieving
a wider participation of Council members in the
decision-making process and to improving the existing
practice of penholdership and the designation of
chairpersons to subsidiary bodies. The Council has also
discussed ways and means to enhance its interactivity
with non-members and to promote its responsiveness to
their inputs and contributions. Unfortunately, obstacles
remain, and more should be done to address existing
differences. We hope that the Council will take the
initiative and initiate a process of genuine reforms of
the Security Council to meet the expectations of the
international community.

It should be noted that the reluctance and
sometimes even unwillingness to change stereotypes
by preserving existing practices complicate the process
of reaching agreement on matters of importance to the
United Nations membership. The reasons for keeping
the Council's current rules of procedure provisional
for decades are also self-explanatory. Today's debate
on the working methods, procedures and practices that
the Security Council applies in fulfilling its Charter-
mandated functions represents an excellent opportunity
to identify possible short-comings in areas requiring
improvement and adjustments.

We welcome the increase in the number of
public meetings of the Council, which amounted to
more than 145 this year. The quality of this increase
certainly depends on the Council's genuine readiness
to take into consideration the views and contributions
of non-members and regional and subregional
organizations, including through the reflection of
their proposals and inputs in the outcomes of public
meetings. While we stress the importance of close
interaction with regional and subregional organizations
to facilitating early response to disputes and emerging
crises, appropriate steps also need to be taken to improve
the quality of briefings as sources of information
in an effective early warning and crisis prevention
mechanism.

More should be done to further improve in
practice the content and narrative quality of the
Council's annual reports as a main communication
tool between the Council and the general membership.
We welcome the efforts of our Colombian colleagues
to make the latest annual report more complete
and detailed. Among other things, there is a need to
include analysis in the monthly reports prepared by the
rotating presidencies, which should also contain more
information relating to consultations of the whole. The
Council should also resort frequently to Arria Formula
meetings to ensure more interaction and informal
dialogue with the international community, similar to
that organized in May on the peaceful settlement of
disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, which was
open to all Member and observer States, international
organizations, academia and civil society.

Another important issue that requires additional
efforts is the Council's control over the implementation
of its own decisions. It is unacceptable that a resolution
of the Security Council containing imperative demands
for concrete action should be ignored or interpreted in
a way to avoid their implementation. Special attention
should be given to situations involving regional
arrangements referred by the Security Council with a
View to encouraging the development of the peaceful
settlement of disputes or conflicts. Needless to say, the
silence of the Security Council concerning the apparent
disregard of its resolutions on issues pertaining
to international and regional peace and security
and attempts to undermine them with ambiguous
considerations is dangerous and cannot constitute an
accepted practice of the Council's working methods.

In conclusion, let me note that the Council must
enhance the efficiency and Viability of its working
methods. Minor changes to the working methods will
stimulate and promote general reforms that could
be commensurate with contemporary realities. Real
improvements should require a change in approach
towards the primacy of general and collective interests
over national and individual ones.

