Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Mr. President, let me
join others in thanking you for having convened this
briefing. I wish also to thank Under-Secretary-General
Herve' Ladsous for his informative remarks. We owe a
great debt to the Police Commissioners for the first-
hand knowledge they have provided to us in their
briefings, especially the insights they have given us on
the civilian police in the protection of civilians.

Nigeria recognizes the significant role of police in
United Nations peacekeeping and continues to deploy
its police personnel in support of United Nations
operations. We have deployed formed police units
in the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali; and we have deployed
individual police officers in UNMIL, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire.

One vital aspect of police work in the framework
of peacekeeping is community policing. The regular
engagement by the police with local communities
and their leaders is crucial to addressing disorder and
criminality. These and other mandated activities serve
to enhance trust and confidence between the police and
the people they serve. Indeed, it lays the foundation for
the performance of other police functions, especially
the protection of civilians and crime control.

This brings me to the issue of accountability.
Guidelines for the conduct of mission personnel, both
civilian and military police, are always clearly delineated
at the first instance. The challenge lies, therefore, in
identifying the appropriate entity to enforce discipline.
Nigeria believes that as the State bears responsibility
for training and equipping its personnel, it must also
take charge of enforcing discipline when infractions
are proved. We underscore the imperative of ensuring
that offenders, especially those who engage in sexual
exploitation and the abuse of women and children,
are brought to justice. The Secretary-General's zero-
tolerance policy for such offenses must be enforced
scrupulously and without exception.

In terms of human rights and the protection of
civilians in a peacekeeping context, police officers
play a Vital role. We acknowledge the incremental
improvements in the levels of resource provision and
training provided by the United Nations to enable this
role. This support must be sustained with a greater
focus on understanding, and I want to emphasize
this, regional geopolitics and other dimensions of the
conflict in question.

Several speakers before me have touched on the
need for an increase in the deployment of women in
police contingents. We all seem to accept this in
principle, and we support increasing their numbers
in police contingents and ensuring that they are
properly and adequately equipped so as to ensure their
effectiveness. As women bear the brunt of violent
conflicts, we believe that women police officers are
better placed to appreciate their challenges and mitigate
their plight. Women should therefore be sufficiently
represented in all efforts to investigate and prosecute
alleged perpetrators of sexual exploitation and abuse in
the context of peacekeeping.

It is also important to deepen the level of
consultation and collaboration with police-contributing
countries so as to clarify the responsibilities, demands
and necessary skill sets required of its personnel. To
achieve this, there must be appropriate training, so as
to inculcate international best practices and standards
on a continuous basis.

We note the outcomes of the recent reviews
initiated by the Secretary-General on peacekeeping.
What remains to be done, we believe, is implementing
them in a manner that will enhance the accomplishment
of their mandates, especially as they pertain to the
protection-of-civilians mandate. It is our hope that
the challenges faced by individual police officers and
formed police units in the context of peacekeeping
missions will be addressed comprehensively. This is
critical to empower them and ensure the overall success
of United Nations peacekeeping.

The question our delegation would ask is this: how
receptive have communities been to women police, and
what are the challenges that these women face on the
ground?

