Mr. Downer (Australia): I am very pleased to have
the opportunity to address the Security Council today on the
important issue of Africa. Africa/Australia links are long-
standing. Our connection with Africa extends back at least
to the 1790s, when, during the early years of European
settlement in New South Wales, Cape Town provided
Sydney with shipments of flour and barley that saved the
infant colony from starvation. And legend has it that the
origin of the many eucalyptus trees that now grow in
southern Africa can be traced back to seeds that were
contained in the soil used as ballast for the colonial ships.

Our contemporary relations are based on the linkages
we have with many nations of Africa through the
Commonwealth, through direct people-to-people ties - as
evidenced by an increasingly significant African community
in Australia - and through growing economic and
Government-to-Government links.

On Monday, I addressed the United Nations special
session on small island developing States, emphasizing
Australia's linkages with our own Asia-Pacific region.
Clearly that is where our foreign policy priorities lie. But
this is not to say that we do not have global horizons and
that we do not recognize the fact that our relationship with
Africa is one of real potential.

Our relations with the countries of Africa have always
reflected our strong commitment to the principles of
decolonization, self-determination and democracy, as well
as an unwavering commitment to the struggle against
apartheid. This was a commitment backed up by the
application of sanctions at some cost to the Australian
community. Australian soldiers have been involved in many
United Nations and other international peacekeeping
operations in Africa, including most recently in Western
Sahara, Somalia and Rwanda. We are helping rid Africa
of the scourge of landmines. We support the United
Nations-fostered peace process in Angola and the efforts
of the sanctions Committee under Ambassador Robert
Fowler to strengthen sanctions against the UNITA rebels,
and we support and encourage current regional peace
initiatives in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

These are practical examples of Africans working
together to develop solutions for African problems.
Australia will continue to support and encourage these
regional efforts, just as we are demonstrating our
readiness to contribute to regional solutions in our own
Asia-Pacific region.

The African continent is home to some 700 million
people, a significant part of humanity. By any major
measure of the world's well-being, therefore - whether
in health, an end to famine, the fate of the environment or
peace and good governance - if Africa is not faring
well, the world as a whole suffers.

Australia has a modest but carefully targeted aid
programme in Africa that has been maintained at an
average of over $80 million Australian dollars a year over
the past five years. We are helping African countries at a
practical level with assistance in the areas of health, sport
and education, including through scholarships and rural
development programmes. Good-governance
programmes - and these include more than just election
monitoring - also make up a significant component of
our aid budget.

Australia is also aware of the importance many
African countries attach to the question of debt relief. Our
Government supports the principle of providing faster,
broader and deeper debt relief to heavily indebted poor
countries, linked to the goals of poverty reduction,
sustainable development and good governance. Australia
announced at the September meetings of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank in Washington just
the other day that Australia would provide $A 35 million
to the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative.
This is more than double our existing pledge.

We are realistic about the effects of this Initiative.
We do not support unconditional debt relief that may give
Governments an excuse not to pursue policies which
promote sustainable economic growth and alleviate
poverty. Unconditional debt relief could also encourage
further accumulation of unsustainable debt or discourage

 

creditors from providing future assistance. It is important
that we work for a durable and sustainable solution to this
problem. If debt relief is to be truly effective, it must be
part of a process of sound economic management.

In the past few years, Australia's interests in Africa
have taken on a new dimension with the emergence of
Africa as a significant market for Australian trade. In the
last five years, our exports have increased by almost 140
per cent, to $2.2 billion - more than our exports to Latin
America and Eastern Europe combined. Our imports from
Africa have also doubled in about the same period, albeit
from a low base. Much of this growth in trade is
attributable to the opening up of the market in South Africa
following the abandonment of apartheid and the
liberalization of many African economies.

Australians have also begun to invest in Africa,
against the overall trend of falling foreign direct investment
flows into Africa. We estimate that Australian investment
in sub-Saharan Africa currently stands at about $A 2.5
billion. Much of this is associated with Australian mining
ventures, particularly in countries such as Ghana and
Tanzania, where Australian mining companies have been
taking a leading role in revitalizing the mining industry.

I have spoken today of Australia's ties with Africa.
With the resourcefulness, stamina and goodwill between
Australians and Africans, I know that we cannot fail to
build stronger and more productive links between our two
lands in the future. Australia stands ready to help the
nations of Africa meet the challenges of the next century,
just as we have lent a hand in the past. But we must all
recognize that the most important, the most fundamental,
work will be done by the peoples of Africa themselves.
And in that regard, although the problems still to be
overcome are formidable, there is cause for optimism.

In the past decade, we have seen the end of the stain
of apartheid. We have seen great strides made in
conservation and environmental protection, on a local and
regional basis. We have seen the beginnings of a
fundamental attack on endemic famine and poverty, and the
development of more sustainable economies; and we have
seen more countries commit themselves to the cause of
reform and good governance.

The road of change and reform is one which no
country finds smooth, but it is one that we must all take,
for to do otherwise is to invite stagnation and long-term
decay. There will be hardships ahead for the peoples of
Africa as they take this path, but they can count on the
support of the Australian people in their journey. It is
with great confidence, therefore, that I look at Africa at
the birth of the new millennium. May it mark a new
beginning for all Africans in which we may realize the
full potential of that ancient continent.

