Mr. Yap (Singapore): At the outset, we would
like to welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, and to thank
him for his detailed briefing. It was a useful update of
the Secretary-General's comprehensive report, which
we would like to thank the Secretary-General for.

We reiterate our support for the tireless efforts of
Special Representative Haekkerup and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in fully implementing resolution 1244
(1999) and primarily at this time in building the
necessary conditions for free and fair general elections
and an all-inclusive provisional self-government in
Kosovo. Specifically, we support the goals of securing
the engagement and participation of Kosovo Serbs and
other minorities, the return of refugees and displaced
persons, the development of a safe and secure
environment and the building of public administration
and economic capacities. These are essential for the
handing-over of authority leading to substantial
autonomy in Kosovo, as mandated in resolution 1244
(1999). We note the good progress made by UNMIK.

At the same time, however, we note that a number
of problems in achieving those goals remain.
Significantly, Kosovo's security situation remains
precarious, with violence against minorities and
criminal activity continuing unabated, despite the
reinforcement of law and order. Also significant is the
fact that, in the election campaigning that started this
Wednesday, the ethnic Albanian parties are using the
platform of independence for Kosovo.

We would therefore appreciate Mr. Haekkerup's
assessment of the extent of ethnic minority, especially
Serb, participation in the upcoming elections and the
provisional self-government institutions thereafter, and
of what this portends for Kosovo's stability. While not
wanting to sound pessimistic, we would like to ask Mr.
Haekkerup about the contingencies that are being
considered by UNMIK to ensure that things do not get
out of hand.

Should Kosovo's transition to substantial
autonomy be carried out smoothly, UNMIK will have
accomplished an important mandate under resolution
1244 (1999). At the public meeting on Kosovo this
July, we stated that

"The United Nations responsibility to Kosovo
does not end with the elections and the
establishment of the structures of provisional
self-government Resolution 1244 (1999) must
be strictly implemented until an agreement on the
final status of Kosovo is reached. The need for a
continued and substantive United Nations
presence in post-election Kosovo, supported by
other international agencies and interested
parties, is obvious [T]he eventual termination
of the United Nations presence must be
gradual and carefully structured to bolster, not
undermine, the painstaking progress achieved."
(S/PV4350, p.]6)

We stand by this.

We look forward to UNMIK's facilitating a
political process designed to determine Kosovo's future
status, taking into account the Rambouillet accords, as
mandated by the Security Council under resolution
1244 (1999). Continuing dialogue with Belgrade on
this is important.

