Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank you very much, Mr. President, for having kindly organized this open debate as part of Viet Nam's presidency of the Security Council on an issue that is more timely than ever, that is upholding the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. I would also like to commend the Vietnamese Permanent Mission for the concept note (S/2020/1, annex) drawn up for this meeting, which fortunately provides a valuable framework to deepen our reflections on this topic. This debate comes at a time of elevated tensions and increasing concern in the Persian Gulf. In that regard, I would be remiss if I did not associate myself with the call for maximum restraint as made by Secretary- General Antonio Guterres, with a view to avoiding escalation, unnecessary destruction and suffering. Our Organization, the fruit of a compromise entered into in the wake of the Second World War, has since shown itself capable of playing a crucial role in the lives of all peoples and of resisting the myriad challenges that we have faced over time. Initially conceived by some 50 States, including the Republic of Haiti, our Organization today has 193 Members with a considerable broadening in its purview over recent decades, which certainly testifies to the relevance and deep importance of its Charter. For the peoples of the United Nations it has been first been a matter of ensuring that we have the means for collective and appropriate action in order, inter alia, to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice within one lifetime brought untold suffering upon humankind. To reach that ambitious objective, the founding fathers of the Organization defined a range of purposes and principles in Articles | and 2 of the Charter, which constitute a true legal basis for the multilateral system. Furthermore, in the declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, the States Members of our Organization renewed their commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and justice, as well as to an international order based on the rule of law, which represents the essential underpinning for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world. They affirmed that they were "determined to establish a just and lasting peace all over the world, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations." (resolution 67/1, para. 3) In other words, the Charter of the United Nations holds a central place in international life. This instrument makes the Security Council an important pillar in the architecture of the Organization, conferring upon it the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. On the eve of the celebration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we reflect back with satisfaction on the road that we have travelled since 1945, although much remains to be done to raise our Organization to meet the ideals of its founding fathers. The scrupulous observance of the Charter of the Organization will certainly contribute to develop a multilateralism that is more conducive to international peace and security. We must therefore fight relentlessly and with all our strength to safeguard all the gains made, while respecting the spirit and the letter of the Charter. Tangible and irrefutable progress has been made in a number of areas, particularly in the contribution to decolonization, economic assistance, human rights and even the codification of international law. With regard to disarmament and the maintenance of international peace and security, we still need to step up our collective efforts. Today we must jointly and resolutely address major challenges, such as the complex problems of terrorism, transnational organized crime, drugs, inequality, refugees, abject poverty and climate change, to mention just a few. The reform of our Organization, which must take into account current and emerging challenges, remains a pressing need. My country welcomes all the efforts made to achieve a reform that holds out hope for peace, justice and development for all, and will continue to make an active contribution in that regard. In conclusion, allow me to briefly mention the upcoming commemoration to mark 10 years since the earthquake that ravaged my country on 12 January 2010, which claimed the lives of at least 220,000 people, including 102 members of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, as well as the appalling material damage. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of all those who perished in that tragedy. The people and the Government of the Republic of Haiti will never forget them. This is also an opportunity for me to reiterate to the Council the readiness of the President of Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moise, to make a lasting commitment in the country to the path towards genuine reconstruction. The holding of an inclusive national dialogue conducive to peaceful political, economic and social governance that respects the provisions of the Constitution of Republic will be a sine qua non for the work of our country's President in future. In that regard, it is my fervent wish that the United Nations, in accordance with the provisions of its Charter, will continue to play an important role in our country, including through the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, established pursuant to resolution 2476 (2019).
