Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank the
Government of Nigeria for organizing this important
meeting. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
remarks and his commitment, and that of the United
Nations to doing better. My appreciation goes as well to
Ambassador Keating for sharing with us his experience
and many insights. All who are privileged to serve on
the Security Council must learn from what the world
let happen in 1994. Ambassador Keating has helped us
to do that.

Nigeria, New Zealand, Spain and the Czech
Republic were given special praise last week by the
Rwandan Government for their efforts during the
genocide. Now, thanks to Ambassador Keating, we can
add Argentina and Djibouti to that short list of those
that were up-standers - not bystanders - during the
worst horrors to occur since the Holocaust.

Nine days ago, I had the privilege to join
representatives from across the globe in Kigali to
mark the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan
genocide. We bowed our heads in remembrance of
the more than 800,000 men, women and children who
were so ruthlessly deprived of life. We rededicated
ourselves to assisting in the still-unfinished task of
recovery, reconciliation and reintegration and joined
with President Kagame in saluting the unbreakable
Rwandan spirit, as he put it, that has enabled the people
of that beautiful land to build a better future without
forgetting the past.

As dignitaries sat solemnly at the ceremony,
however, we began to hear the screams and wails of
Rwandan women - mothers, wives, daughters and
sisters - who gave haunting voice to what every
survivor must feel, and not just on anniversaries. Every
single day the people of Rwanda, including many at
the Rwandan Mission here in New York, and their
families live without those who matter most to them.
Two hundred people had to be carried out of Amahoro
Stadium last week, convulsed by grief. Millions more
live with that daily despair.
The stadium itself where we sat was the stadium
that during the genocide sheltered 12,000 people who
lived in complete squalor under the eye of General
Dallaire's dwindling force. The stadium itself will
always be a reminder of what the United Nations might
have been able to accomplish ifits top officials and the
United States and other leading Member States had sent
United Nations reinforcements rather than extracting
most of the peacekeepers on the ground.

As President Clinton has said many times, the
failure of the United States to act during the 1994
genocide in Rwanda is his greatest regret. All of us,
whether we were in Government or not, in the Security
Council or not, must look inward to consider what more
we might have done.

Today we consider again the paramount question
of lessons learned - learned not just in theory or on
paper but truly understood, felt and applied in practice.
In so doing, we benefit from instruments that did not
exist two decades ago, including the Office of the
United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the International Criminal Court,
the responsibility to protect doctrine, improvements
in regional peacekeeping capabilities - and in that
regard I would note in particular the participation of
Rwandan peacekeepers who perform exceptionally
and admirably in the cause of atrocity prevention in
the Central African Republic and elsewhere - more
nimble deployment of accountability mechanisms, and
a welcome surge within civil society of anti-genocide
awareness and activism.

I mention that last dimension in particular because
during the genocide in Rwanda, while 800,000 people
were killed, one American Member of Congress,
Patricia Schroeder, explained the United States
response by noting that her home state of Colorado was
home to a research organization that studied Rwanda's
imperilled gorilla population. As she puzzled publicly
over the United States response and described United
States citizen engagement, she said

"there are some groups terribly concerned about
the gorillas. But - it sounds terrible - people just
do not know what can be done about the people".

All of the political pressures cut in favour of
avoiding action rather than creatively responding to
help a people in desperate need. Political calculuses
should not dictate our response. As a global community,
we recognize that mass atrocities may emerge from
a variety of scenarios. We have begun to identify
telltale patterns and indicators. We have agreed on the
value of vigilance to prevent unstable situations from
unravelling. We have affirmed - all of us - the duty
of each Government to protect its citizens from mass
atrocities. We have stated our preparedness under the
Charter of the United Nations to respond when States
require help in fulfilling that duty.

In some cases, from Timor-Leste and Liberia to Sierra
Leone, Libya, Kenya and C6te d'Ivoire, we have joined
with local partners to end or deter violence. Recently,
we made progress in assisting the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and strengthening the United Nations in
their fight against those militia who continue to attack
and rape civilians. We have intensified diplomatic
efforts to restore peace in South Sudan, and the United
Nations there has not only provided emergency supplies
to populations displaced by recent fighting but it has
importantly opened its doors in an unprecedented way,
allowing its bases to become islands of protection. The
Africans and French deployed to try to prevent mass
atrocities in the Central African Republic. We quickly
authorized a commission of inquiry, and now we have
authorized a United Nations peace operation to address
the unfolding catastrophe there. We must get African,
European and United Nations forces deployed urgently.

Overall, however, it is both fair and profoundly
unsatisfying to admit that our successes have been
partial and that the crimes against humanity that
persist are devastating. Yesterday, many of us
attended an Arria formula meeting in which we saw
graphic photographs taken in Syrian prisons showing
systematic, industrial-style slaughter and forced
starvation killings of approximately 11,000 detainees.
Those photos were taken in just three of the 50 Syrian-
run detention centres in Syria. To that, we can add
the Syrian victims of chemical weapons attacks,
the children felled by barrel bombs and those being
starved to death in besieged towns and Villages or those
executed by terrorist groups. Twenty years from now,
how will we reflect on the Security Council's failure
to help those people? How will we explain Council
disunity on Syria 20 years after Rwanda?

Too often we have done too little, waited too long
or been caught unprepared by events that should not
have surprised us. Moving forward, we have to do a
betterjob of confronting and defeating the practitioners
of hate. Part of protecting against mass atrocities is
preventing the conditions that allow them - rampant
discrimination, denial of human dignity and the
codification of bigotry. No one should be targeted for
violence simply because of who are they or what they
believe.

In our collective effort to prevent mass atrocities,
we must make creative use of every tool we
have - human rights monitoring, diplomatic missions,
technical assistance, arms embargoes, smart sanctions,
peace operations, judicial inquiries, truth commissions,
courts and other measures designed to influence the
calculations of perpetrators who every day are deciding
how far they are going to go. Every day they are doing
a cost-benefit analysis in their heads about whether the
costs of moving forward exceed the benefits they see in
their often warped perspective.

We must also be innovative in taking advantage
of new technology, like the unmanned aerial vehicles
now being deployed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and even text messaging, which is being used
to raise alarms, track the movements of outlaw groups,
gather evidence of criminal Violations, and naturally
we must always deliver aid to those in desperate need.

We must also remember that preventing mass
atrocities is a global responsibility requiring robust
contributions from all. In particular, we need to
train and equip peacekeepers who head into harm's
way. More countries should do their share, whether
through soldiers, civilians, enablers or other forms of
contribution. I echo my Rwandan colleague's point
that, 20 years after the Rwandan genocide, we should
have moved further beyond what he called "crisis
improvisation". Further, we must enhance the bonds of
trust between us. Historic differences within or between
regional groups must neither lessen our capabilities nor
diminish our willingness to act as one.

Finally, we must ask every State to consider whether
there is more that it can to do remove the political
roadblocks that impede effective action. Again, with
thousands of lives at stake in Syria and elsewhere,
obstruction is untenable and cooperation is a moral and
strategic imperative. Tomorrow afternoon we will also
have a chance to shine a spotlight on the horrors going
in the darkness of North Korea.

Our task is as straightforward as it is Vital - to
ensure that when our successors gather in this Chamber
two decades from now they will not speak of more lost
opportunities and failures. Instead, their words will be
of respect - respect for the comprehensive anti-atrocity
steps we took together. Let them say in their time
that we in our time moved beyond deadlock to unity,
beyond remembrance to mobilization and beyond mere
promises to the kind of bold and concrete actions that
end wars and stop genocide before the searing pain it
causes can be heard in the cries of those left behind.

