Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Madam President, for
your kind comments to my Ambassador, Ambassador
Claude Heller, regarding the manner in which he
served as Council President in June and by wishing
you every success during the month of July. I also wish
to endorse what other delegations have said in
welcoming the President of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Boris Tadic'; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier; and Mr. De Kermabon,
representative of the European Union and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo; and of course
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

My delegation would like to begin by expressing
its regret over the violent inter-ethnic incidents in
recent months in the northern region of Kosovo,
including those in recent days. Since last May we have
indicated our concern to this Council, because those
acts involve violations of the human rights of the
civilian population and have led to the loss of innocent
lives. We also wish to express our concern that the
recurrence of those incidents could lead to an unstable
situation in the region, which would make it difficult to
reach a peaceful solution to the situation of Kosovo,
one acceptable to both parties.

For Mexico, the stability and development of
Kosovo and the region depend on reconciliation
between the communities. That is why we support the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to facilitate dialogue and
cooperation between the parties, the local communities
and the relevant international and regional
organizations, in conformity with resolution 1244
(1999).

We would like to reiterate in that respect the
importance of the Security Council exhorting the
parties to respect international law, abstain from any
act of provocation that could increase the tension or
Violence, and promote efforts to bring about an
environment of calm, stability and political dialogue,
an environment of tolerance and reconciliation. That is
very important, particularly to avoid tensions before
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice.

We are convinced that a lasting solution to the
status of Kosovo must respect international law,
including resolution 1244 (1999). That resolution
continues to be the legal framework for bringing about
that solution, and that is why the United Nations is the
main forum in which to promote it, through dialogue
and in collaboration with regional organizations such
as the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

In my delegation's opinion, in order to prevent
new outbreaks of violence and instability in the
northern Kosovo, it remains essential that the process
of reconciliation be accompanied by policies that are
aimed at guaranteeing the socio-economic stability of
the communities in a non-discriminatory manner. It is
especially important to bring the perpetrators of the
acts of the past few days to justice once the
investigations into the case have been concluded.

With regard to Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence, we remain alert for the advisory opinion
to be issued by the Court. We consider it essential to
use all of the mechanisms for the peaceful solution of
disputes in order to arrive at agreements on the final
status of Kosovo that will guarantee the political,
economic and social development and thus respect for
the human rights of all its inhabitants.

The delegation of Mexico firmly believes that all
of the parties have the capacity to overcome past
divisions and create a new environment that will make
possible future solutions based on international law.
We hope that peaceful and constructive dialogue will
bring about mutually acceptable solutions that will
promote the stability of Kosovo and the Balkans
region.
