Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Under- Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and Syria's use of chemical weapons. For my country, this is an important issue that demands the tireless attention of the Council. On the subject of a possible briefing by Mr. Bustani, Belgium believes that he does not have the necessary experience on the subject of our agenda, namely, the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). Indeed, it would have been more relevant to invite the current head of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the head of the Investigation and Identification Team. Belgium condemns any use of chemical weapons anywhere by anyone for any reason. The use of chemical weapons is simply unacceptable. It is a violation of international law. In presidential statement S/PRST/2019/14, adopted on 22 November 2019, the Council affirmed that the proliferation of chemical weapons and their means of delivery constitutes a threat to international peace and security. In the same presidential statement, the Council also reaffirmed its support for the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC) and for the work of the OPCW. The Council should act in accordance with its statements. We must redouble our efforts to ensure that Syria complies with its obligations as a State member of the OPCW. The Syrian authorities should provide clear explanations for the discrepancies and inconsistencies in their initial declaration. Any ambiguity in their declaration leaves open the possibility that Syria may be stockpiling chemical weapons and potentially using them against its own people. Syria's full compliance with its obligations under the Convention is essential. The Council should continue to demand that Syria fully and immediately implement resolution 2118 (2013). Syria must ensure access, freedom of movement and the unhindered conduct of the OPCW's work. It has been established by several independent investigations that the Syrian authorities have used chemical weapons against the Syrian people. The use of chemicals as a weapon cannot go unpunished under any circumstance. Justice is essential in order to prevent the re-emergence of chemical weapons. The use of chemical weapons is a war crime. Since 2010, it has made no difference whether this crime takes place in an international or internal conflict. We call on all States parties that have not yet done so to ratify the amendment to the CWC in order to strengthen international capacity to combat impunity. We call on States to continue to support the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Finally, the Security Council should not accept the disinformation campaigns of certain Member States. Belgium once again reaffirms its unwavering support for the OPCW and Director General Arias. We look forward to the upcoming Executive Council session in The Hague and the presentation of the report on the measures that Syria has taken to fully implement the Chemical Weapons Convention.
