Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie for his briefing.

The fourth report of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine presents a
worrying depiction of the deteriorating human rights
and humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the
country. It gives an account of extensive breakdown of
public utilities as well as a mass exodus of citizens. The
intensified clashes between the Ukrainian military and
rebel forces over the past few days indicate a collapse
of the rule of law, which has led to grave violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

To address the humanitarian situation in eastern
Ukraine, the parties to the conflict must engage in direct
dialogue with the aim of resolving their differences.
There can be no military solution to the conflict.
Rather, as we have observed, since the conflict began,
that will only exacerbate the political and humanitarian
situation and continue to take a toll on innocent
civilians. Undoubtedly, efforts by the Government to
regain control of the rebel-controlled territories have
come at a huge cost in terms of civilian casualties and
the destruction of vital infrastructure. It has also led to
a rapid escalation of hostilities. We therefore urge the
Government to ensure full application of international
human rights norms and guarantees.

In the face of the rising number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), we urge all sides to allow free
and safe movement of the population. We also reiterate
our call for an effective preparedness mechanism
that will alleviate any challenges that IDPs might be
exposed to, particularly as the winter approaches.

The Government of Ukraine should work stridently
to establish a unified registration system for internally
displaced persons and exempt humanitarian assistance
from taxation. It should also ratify the United Nations-
Government customs agreement that would facilitate
the entry of humanitarian workers and goods to the
region.

The parties to the conflict must exercise restraint.
They must respect the Charter of the United Nations,
work on the basis of consensus, show commitment to
compromising and seek a comprehensive settlement
through peaceful means. We reiterate our call on
Member States with influence to work assiduously and
to use the existing bilateral and multilateral instruments
in resolving the crisis.

For its part, the international community should do
more to promote peace and dialogue. In that connection,
we acknowledge the purposeful and spirited engagement
of the United Nations in the efforts to re-establish order
and stability in Ukraine. It should continue to play a
pivotal role in resolving the crisis. Nigeria supports all
efforts that would result in the easing of tensions and
propel the parties towards a peaceful settlement.

On the economic impact of the crisis, we note
the crippling effects of the recession in Donetsk and
Luhansk, which, if not properly addressed, could have
a severe impact on the rest of the country. The region,
which is the hub of industrial enterprise and mining,
has been harshly affected. Factories and businesses
have shut down. Public utilities have been damaged, gas
reserves have been exhausted and there is a shortage of
water and medical supplies. The task of rebuilding will
indeed be very daunting, particularly in the light of the
economic recession currently gripping the country.

The challenges facing the Government of Ukraine
are enormous. The yearning for the restoration of law,
order and security, on the one hand, and the arduous
task of combating the armed separatist groups, on the
other, cannot be overemphasized. Nigeria reaffirms
that only a cessation of hostilities and the return to
dialogue can present an opportunity for the redress of
the humanitarian situation. To that end, we believe that
the recommendations contained in the report, which
stressed the imperative for the entrenchment of the rule
of law, accountability and the administration ofjustice,
are central to the sustainability of peace, security and
development in Ukraine.

