Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia is seriously
disturbed that the draft resolution contained in
document S/2014/189 before us was vetoed. Its purpose
was to reaffirm the fundamental principles and norms
governing relations between States in the post-1945
world - obligations that form the core of the Charter
of the United Nations - respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, the obligation
to refrain from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, the illegality of the acquisition of territory
through the threat or use of force and the obligation to
settle disputes by peaceful means.

As the body mandated under the United Nations
Charter with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council has a primordial responsibility to
uphold those obligations. As Council members, we do
so on behalf of all Member States. The draft resolution
directly and carefully reflects those fundamental
norms. There is nothing in it that any State Member of
the United Nations could reasonably oppose. Russia's
decision to veto the resolution is therefore profoundly
unsettling.

The referendum to be held tomorrow in Crimea
is dangerous and destabilizing. It is unauthorized and
invalid. The international community will not recognize
the result nor any action taking on the basis of it.

With or without a resolution, the message
from Council members and the wider international
community has been overwhelming. The de-escalation
of the current crisis is imperative. Russia must pull back
its forces to their bases and decrease their numbers to
agreed levels. It must allow international observers
access to Crimea. It must demonstrate its respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine,
including by desisting from any recognition of or action
on the basis of the results of the Crimean referendum.
It must engage in direct dialogue with Ukraine, as
Ukraine has repeatedly requested, either bilaterally
or through a diplomatic mechanism such as a contact

group.

Russia can be under no misapprehension about the
action the international community is demanding it take.
Should it fail to respond, there will be consequences.
The international community will demand it.

