Mr. Traavik (Norway): First of all, I would like
to commend the delegation of Mauritius and you,
personally, Mr. President, for having organized this
debate on the situation in Africa. Let me also warmly
welcome the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), Mr. Amara Essy, at today's
meeting.

Norway sincerely hopes that the views expressed
and the ideas presented during this open debate will
contribute to a better understanding of the issues at
hand and to a more coherent approach on the part of
the Council in its response to African conflicts.
The conflicts have caused, and are causing,
appalling human suffering and misery. Millions of
people have lost their lives or been injured, and
countless civilians have been uprooted from their
homes or separated from their families. This terrible
human toll is the backdrop to our debate on the
situation in Africa, and we must never forget that.

Neither must we forget that armed conflicts have
a devastating effect on economics and the development
efforts of the countries affected by them. Thus, conflict
resolution and development efforts are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. In the post-
conflict phase, there is a clear need for closer
coordination between United Nations peace operations
and long-term development actors.

In his report on the prevention of armed conflict,
Secretary-General Annan underscored the need to
move from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. My delegation fully subscribes to that. The
challenge before us is to promote a coherent and
integrated approach to early warning, conflict
prevention, crisis management and conflict resolution.
The use of coercive and military measures must be
backed up by efforts in the political, humanitarian and
development fields.

The Security Council itself has not always
addressed evolving conflicts in Africa in an adequate,
or even a timely, manner. In our View, the Council must
be ready to scrutinize how it can further strengthen its
efforts to assist peace efforts on the African continent.
In our View, this issue deserves immediate attention.

Conflict resolution is not the responsibility of the
Security Council alone, however. The main
responsibility clearly rests with the parties to the
conflict in question. If the cycle of violence is to be
broken, a crucial prerequisite is that the warring parties
truly commit themselves to an agenda for peace.
Lasting peace cannot be imposed by others; it must be
secured by Africans, who acknowledge the close
linkage between peace and development and who
desire a secure and prosperous future for their children.
The leaders of Africa must have the political will to
build cooperation with the United Nations in defence
of peace and security.

In spite of shortcomings and setbacks, some
headway has recently been made in various parts of
Africa. There have been positive developments in
Sierra Leone; the peace agreement between Ethiopia
and Eritrea is holding; and the inter-Congolese
dialogue has been initiated. In all three conflicts,
constructive dialogue has taken place between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations such as the OAU, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Southern African Development Community.

In Sierra Leone in particular, the cooperation
between ECOWAS and the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone was essential in bringing about a
ceasefire. The combination of a strong United Nations
presence, targeted sanctions, an active regional
organization and the tireless efforts of regional leaders
in mediating between the warring factions and
neighbouring countries now seems to be paying off.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
the OAU in the field of combating the spread of small
arms and eradicating landmines is another positive
example ofjoint efforts. The steps taken by ECOWAS
in agreeing to a moratorium on trafficking in small
arms should serve as an example to other regions in
Africa and elsewhere. Regional organizations have an
essential role to play in implementing the Programme
of Action of last year's Conference on small arms. Let
me add that enhancing cooperation with such
organizations is one of the priorities for Norwegian
efforts in this regard.

My delegation welcomes recent developments in
which regional organizations have been more proactive
with regard to conflict resolution in Africa. Given their
first-hand knowledge of the situation on the ground and
their vested interest in seeing conflicts resolved, they
have a crucial role to play in this field. The United
Nations, for its part, has expertise and resources that
can assist regional efforts. The roles are clearly
supplementary and mutually reinforcing. It thus seems
that the proposal of Mauritius to establish a working
group to consider ways of improving relations between
the United Nations and the OAU is a constructive and
timely one.

We must acknowledge that there is still
significant potential for further enhancing regional
capacity and improving coordination between the
United Nations and regional bodies. As a member of
the Security Council, Norway will continue to promote
such coordination. Moreover, we are encouraged by the
fact that several African leaders have become actively
engaged in the search for solutions to complex regional
conflicts. This demonstrates that Africa is increasingly
assuming responsibility for resolving its own conflicts.

