Mr. Pinheiro da Silva (Portugal) (spoke in French): I would like, first of all, to express our
gratitude to France for organizing this very important
debate on the protection of civilians. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the President of the
Central African Republic for their briefings.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement made
by the Deputy Head of Delegation of the European
Union and the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland, who spoke on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

Civilians affected by conflict situations continue
to suffer the consequences of ongoing hostilities and
are the main victims of violations of international
humanitarian law as well as systematic human rights
violations. Millions of people are exposed to violence
on a daily basis, including sexual Violence and
exploitation, and they are forced to try to survive in
very precarious conditions with respect to access to
water, food, shelter and health services. In very many
parts of the world, humanitarian access to the neediest
populations is being deliberately blocked. Millions
of children and young people are being deprived of
education. Schools and hospitals have been subject to
attack, and humanitarian workers are being targeted.
Mass displacements that are due to fighting and
Violence are reaching levels without precedent since the
end of the Second World War. We must stop this trend.

The inability to put an end to violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
Violations, which, we must emphasize, may constitute
crimes against humanity and war crimes, underscores
the importance of giving priority to prevention as well
as to the fight against impunity. We must continue our
efforts to translate normative progress into concrete
improvements with regard to the protection of civilians
on the ground.

While Member States have the primary
responsibility to fulfil their international obligations to
ensure the promotion and protection of human rights
and international humanitarian law, it is nevertheless
crucial to strengthen accountability and improve
compliance with international obligations by all
parties to armed conflicts. Where national authorities
fail to take the necessary measures to ensure such
accountability, the Security Council may, if necessary,
play a more proactive role. Portugal recalls that the
International Criminal Court can play an important
deterrent role, complementary to that of courts at the
national level.

Undeniable progress has been made in recent
decades with respect to the integration of a civilian
protection component into United Nations peacekeeping
mission mandates. However, the United Nations and
its peacekeeping operations should work to keep pace
with a changing world and the rapid transformation
of the nature of conflict itself, and should anticipate
the risks and needs with a View to finding more
efficient approaches.

We recognize that the risks are higher and
threats are now more global than in the past, and the
operational environments in which United Nations
missions are working are more complex and dangerous
than ever. United Nations missions are increasingly
having to struggle to protect their own personnel and
innocent civilians on the ground in order to fulfil
their mandates. The adjustment includes, inter alia,
the United Nations having to endow its missions with
modern and flexible capabilities, including through
a human rights protection component, which helps
to strengthen the performance of the peacekeeping
operations themselves. In many respects, the
preparation of peacekeepers is the cornerstone of the
capacity-building process for missions in terms of the
implementation of the protection-of-civilians mandate.

Portugal reiterates its commitment to continue
to conduct training programmes for members of its
national security and armed forces who have been
deployed to international peacekeeping missions.
Such training programmes cover such issues as gender
equality, violence against women and girls, including
all forms of sexual violence and gender-based violence,
as well as trafficking in human beings.

Portugal has assumed its responsibilities with
regard to the deployment of personnel and forces
to United Nations peacekeeping operations and has
already decided to strengthen its participation in that
framework during the current year, 2016.

The results of the three review processes on United
Nations peace and security efforts have led to certain
clear conclusions and provided us with good avenues
for the United Nations to explore in remaining relevant
in the maintenance of peace and security. We believe
that only a consistent focus on addressing root causes
and intensifying political diplomacy efforts in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, together with the

humanitarian aspect of development and peacebuilding,
will effectively enhance respect for international
humanitarian law and promote responsibility on the
part of all parties, as well as humanitarian access to
those in need, thereby strengthening collective efforts
to address the mass movements of people we are
witnessing every day.

Recalling the words of the Secretary-General on
the current humanitarian situation, "given the blatant
inhumanity," the international community can no
longer remain an accomplice of collective apathy.

