Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Mr. Simonovic' for his briefing today. I
would also like to thank him and the United Nations
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine for
producing the report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
published yesterday.

The United Kingdom welcomes the report and its
findings. To date, it is the most comprehensive and
independent assessment of the human rights situation
in Ukraine since the onset of the crisis. It is therefore
an important contribution to our discussions on the
situation in Ukraine. Attempts to discredit the report as
biased or politically motivated, as my Russian colleague
has just done, lack all credibility.

The OHCHR report is clear: human rights violations
were a root cause of the popular protests that began in
November last year. The report found that since the
change of Government in late February, allegations
of human rights violations had decreased. But we do
not underestimate the magnitude of the task ahead. In
that regard, it is encouraging that the OHCHR report
finds "clear indications of a willingness by the present
Government to ensure a break with past injustices and
to elaborate a new vision for Ukraine's future". The
United Kingdom is fully committed to supporting
Ukraine in that endeavour.

The OHCHR report comprehensively refutes
assertions made by the Russian Federation in the
Chamber and elsewhere tojustify its illegal intervention
in Ukraine. I will give just three examples.

First, on 1 March, President Putin requested
authority to use Russia's armed forces in Ukraine on
the basis that there was "a threat to the lives of citizens
of the Russian Federation, our compatriots and the
personnel of the armed forces". That oft-repeated
claim underpinned Russia's justification for military
intervention in Ukraine. But the OHCHR report
concludes that in fact attacks against the ethnic Russian
community in Ukraine were "neither systematic
nor widespread". It further assesses that "Russian-
speakers have not been subject to threats in Crimea".
That finding supports those of other independent
authorities, including the High Commissioner on
National Minorities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, who also found no evidence
of violations or threats to the lives of Russian-speakers.

Secondly, Russia bases its justification for the
illegal annexation of Crimea on the legitimacy of the
16 March referendum. On 18 March, in his address to
the Russian Duma, President Putin said, "a referendum
was held in Crimea on 16 March in full compliance
with democratic procedures and international norms".
In stark contrast to that bold assertion, the report
concludes that

"the presence of paramilitary and so-called self-
defence groups as well as soldiers in uniform
without insignia, widely believed to be from the
Russian Federation, was not conducive to an
environment in which voters could freely exercise
their right to hold opinions and the right to freedom
of expression".

The report also states, "the OHCHR delegation
received many reports of vote rigging", including
cases of non-Ukrainian citizens participating
in the referendum, as well as individuals voting
numerous times in different locations. Overall, the
report expresses "serious concern about violations
of the civil and political rights of the inhabitants of
Crimea". It cites cases of abduction, unlawful arrest
and detention, harassment and violence against
peaceful demonstrators, arbitrary arrest and torture.
It also expresses deep concern at the consequences
of introducing Russian citizenship and estimates that
3,000 Crimean Tatars have been displaced.

Lastly, the report contains damning evidence that
Russia has used propaganda and misinformation to
exacerbate tensions and destabilize Ukraine. It says
that the Russian State television and radio broadcasting
company has been "disguising information about Kyiv
events" in an attempt to justify Crimea's return to the
Russian Federation. Moreover, the report states that
greatly exaggerated stories and misinformed reports
were "systematically used to create a climate of fear and
insecurity" to support Russia's case for the annexation
of Crimea.

Turning to current events, the United Kingdom
fully supports the right of freedom of assembly and
freedom of expression. Those Ukrainians who wish
to demonstrate against the Government are entitled to
do so, provided that they do so peacefully. But there
is a line. Well-equipped paramilitary units armed
with automatic weapons are not peaceful protesters. A
legitimate sovereign State must insist on a monopoly
of the use of force. We express particular concern
as Mr. Simonovic' did in his briefing today about the
arming of protesters and their transformation into
quasi-paramilitary forces.

Yesterday, the Ukrainian Government began
an operation to restore law and order in Donetsk, in
eastern Ukraine. The Ukrainian Prime Minister stated
that operations would proceed gradually, responsibly
and prudently. The Foreign Minister emphasized that
the operations were initiated only after all other means
to resolve the situation had been exhausted. We have
received assurances that the operation will comply fully
with Ukrainian and international law, safeguard human
rights and uphold Ukraine's international obligations.

The Ukrainian Government has acted responsibly
throughout the crisis, even in the face of immense
provocation, not least the illegal annexation of its
territory and despite continuing interference from
Russia. We therefore have confidence that Ukrainian
security forces will continue to act proportionately and
in the interests of all citizens of Ukraine.

We have heard from the Permanent Representative
of Russia today a new fantasy narrative about
developments in eastern Ukraine. I have no doubt that
future independent reports from the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights will prove that new
narrative to be as false as the Russian narrative on
Crimea has comprehensively been shown to be.

We remind Russia that it cannot use the situation in
Ukraine, for which it bears significant responsibility, as
a pretext for further illegal military activity.

Our appeal to Russia is simple: stop interfering in
the internal affairs of Ukraine, move your troops away
from Ukraine's borders, rescind the authorization to use
military force in Ukraine and enter into dialogue. The
European Union wants to see Russia as a partner, as a
friend and as an ally. A stable, peaceful and prosperous
Ukraine is just as much in Russia's interest as it is in our
own. Rather than pursuing a strategy of destabilization,
Russia should take its place at the negotiating table
and environment xplain its concerns. We hope that the
quadrapartite talks scheduled for 17 April will provide
just such an opportunity.

