Mr. Albatayneh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I should like also to thank
the briefers.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/360)
on violations against children in armed conflict
around the world makes it abundantly clear that those
violations continue to be committed in a systematic and
wide-scale manner and that there are grave challenges
before us to provide the necessary protection to
children. Perhaps one of the main reasons for the
increasing scope of the phenomenon is the failure to
provide the necessary protection to civilians in general
and children in particular, as well as the lack of a legal
framework to do so. We therefore believe that much of
the work that should be done to provide the necessary
protection and support to the children affected should
take place through the adoption of measures at the
national, regional and international levels.

At the national level, we continue to believe
that it is the responsibility of the State to protect its
civilians, particularly children, through legislative,
legal and judicial improvements and the development
of the policies necessary to deal with violations against
children in armed conflict; to hold accountable the
perpetrators of such violations; and to put an end to
impunity, since impunity and lack of accountability play
a major role in the spread of such criminality and make
the perpetrators believe that they can enjoy impunity.
At the regional level, it is important to promote
cooperation among States so as to devise joint policies
and strategies to address the issue of cross-border
armed groups that recruit children, and to do so through
the promotion of an security and military information
exchange among States, particularly those whose
civilians have been the victims of such violations.

At the international level, in the context of
the Security Council and other legal entities, it is
absolutely necessary not to reach any agreements or
hold any reconciliation processes among regional
parties or parties within one State at the expense of
other important issues, such as holding perpetrators
to account for their crimes. The United Nations should
supervise such processes to ensure that they do not fail
to punish perpetrators for their crimes against civilians
and children in particular.

Jordan continues to be concerned with regard to
certain violations perpetrated by peacekeepers and
members of other international forces not affiliated
with the United Nations, particularly violations against
children. In that regard, we welcome Security Council
resolution 2272 (2016), which stipulates that a military
unit or police unit must be repatriated when there is
definite proof that it has committed violations. We urge
that all those who have been involved in such violations
be held responsible for them.

We also support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General on the establishment of child-
protection units in peacekeeping operations so as to
facilitate the provision of such protection and to make
it a main aspect of peacekeeping operations.

With regard to the baseless and false accusations
made by the representative of the Syrian regime in
our meeting today, we would like to stress that this is
only an attempt to create a diversion aimed at covering
up that regime's failure to shoulder its responsibility
to protect its people and put an end to the killing and
displacement of children. These accusations fly in the
face of reality. Jordan is a country that has definite
credibility in supporting the States and peoples of the
region. We have since the beginning of the Syrian crisis
supported the Syrian people, 1.3 million of whom,
including hundreds of thousands of children, have fled
to Jordan in search ofa safe haven following the killing
and destruction committed by the Syrian regime.

In this regard, Jordan continues to do its utmost
to provide Syrian children and refugees with a chance
at a better future and give them the highest levels of
protection and care, as demonstrated at the London
donors conference, at which the Jordanian Government
presented the international community with an
eight-point document laying out its policy to provide
educational opportunities to all refugee children so as
to provide them with a better future. We continue to
coordinate with United Nations specialized agencies
and non-governmental organizations in establishing
specialized care centres to provide the necessary
educational, health and protective environment to
help children receive the services they need and the
psychological and social support to which they are
entitled.

In conclusion, with regard to the measures taken
by the coalition to restore legitimacy to Yemen and
the responses to all the queries raised with regard to
possible violations in Yemen, we would to see a working
group established to look into and verify the facts on
this issue. As stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/360), the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict continues to consider the
various cases before it and the coalition has invited the
Working Group several times to visit the region and to
review the facts that have been gleaned so far. In this
regard, the work is continuing and Jordan supports all
efforts to protect children in armed conflict. We thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

