Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too, thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.

The Ukrainian crisis has recently seen a turning
point with the election of Mr. Poroshenko as President
of the Republic. On Sunday 25 May, the Ukrainian
people at last made its voice heard through the free and
transparent elections despite the violence by separatist
armed groups in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in
the east of the country. In the first round, there was a
rapid and clear result. We welcome Mr. Poroshenko's
victory. We affirm that we are fully ready to work
with him. From the first round, with its high turnout,
the election demonstrated to us the aspiration of most
Ukrainians for unity.

I would like to briefly come back to the elections.
First, they were free, as there were no fewer than 21
registered candidates. That number speaks to the vast
array of policies on which all Ukrainians were urged to
vote on Sunday in order to build their future. There was
not only one candidate or a predetermined outcome.
Next, they were tansparent, as 2,784 international
observers were accredited to ensure their smooth
conduct. Yesterday, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) reported that the
election respected democratic norms. The President-
elect is therefore fully legitimate. We will closley
review the results of the Central Electoral Commission
and the assessment to be made by the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights on the
conduct of the elections. In passing, I note that the
results also affirm, as if it were necessary, the extent
to which the propaganda condemning the influence of
the fascists in Ukraine was baseless. The two parties of
the extreme right received less than 3 per cent of votes.

The elections are therefore good news, given that
their conduct was threatened on many occasions.
However, we recall that they took place in a
particularly difficult security context. The situation in
the Donbass region remains of great concern. Human
rights violations and restrictions on the freedom of
the press are increasing. Two journalists were killed
last Saturday. Four OSCE monitors were abducted in
Donetsk and are still being detained. They must be
released immediately. Donetsk airport was occupied
by armed separatist groups, before being retaken by
Ukrainian forces. The armed separatist groups must
immediately cease their activities. We call on all those
who have influence over them to use that influence to
allow for a return to calm. Finally, let us no forget that
Crimea remains occupied.

In this tense situation, Sunday's elections represent
nonetheless an opportunity. Mr. Poroshenko, who
will take the reins of Ukraine in early June, will have
three priorities: to restore calm, establish an inclusive
Government and undertake reforms. Those three
priorities should be based on national dialogue, which
must be extended and deepened.

Today, for Ukraine, there is no other way forward
than the path of unity and reconciliation. In that
context, we hope that Mr. Poroshenko will work to
consolidate the unity of his country by continuing the
process of Ukrainian national dialogue launched with
the support of the OSCE on 14 May, and by supporting
the implementation of the memorandum on peace
and harmony, adopted by the Rada on 20 May. Those
initiatives, which provide for inclusive constitutional
reform for decentralization and guarantee the status of
the Russian language, are steps in the right direction.

The process must first and foremost be led by
Ukraine itself, with the support of the OSCE. The
European Union stands ready to support those efforts,
as recalled by the Heads of State in their declaration
at the Council of Europe yesterday. However, it is up
to the international community as a whole to stand by
Ukraine in a useful way in writing the next pages of its
history.

