Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank you, Madam, for having organized this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing.

Today's debate is timely, as the Middle East is
going through a critical phase of its current history,
characterized by an impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process, the intensification of deadly fighting
in Syria, and volatility in the political and security
situation in Lebanon. I shall address the Palestinian
issue first.

The peace process is deadlocked after nine months
of negotiations under the auspices of the United States
of America. The Israelis and Palestinians have been
unable to agree on the negotiating principles. The
negotiation process requires a favourable political
environment and measures that would increase
mutual confidence. Peace efforts cannot bear fruit
if settlement activities continue, if the blockade on
Gaza continues, and if the separation wall continues
to eat up Palestinian land. It is perfectly legitimate to
ask how the Palestinians will build their future State
if Israel continues to modify the demographic data on
the ground by flouting the principles of international
law, its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and its international commitments.

Recent incursions by Israeli police and extremist
groups in the Al-Aqsa esplanade, as well as attempts
to impose Israeli sovereignty over the holy sites, could
enflame tensions, undermine the dialogue process
between Israel and Palestine, and destabilize the
region as a whole. We call on Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to show restraint in their respective
statements and to avoid unilateral actions that could
further reduce the possibilities of pursuing the peace
process. We urge both parties to resume dialogue.
We welcome the valiant efforts of Mr. John Kerry,
the United States Secretary of State, to encourage the
parties to reach a comprehensive agreement. We hope
that he will pursue his mediation efforts to ensure a
resumption of negotiations.

In addition, it is an absolute necessity to involve
other partners with influence on the parties, in
particular the European Union and the League of Arab
States, which could help to move the process forward.
The Palestinian question has been on the agenda of
the United Nations for more than 66 years, and the
Palestinian people are seeing no glimmer of hope in
their efforts to bring an end to the Israeli occupation and
to freely exercise their sovereignty in their territories
within their pre-June 1967 borders.

To conclude on that subject, we invite the
international community to become further involved
in saving the peace process and supporting the two-
State solution, for two States living side by side on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions; the
Madrid principles, notably land for peace; the road
map; previous agreements struck between the parties;
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

With regard to the situation in Syria, we deplore
the fact that violence is increasing to a worrisome
degree each day and that the parties cannot engage in
a political dialogue process aimed at a return to peace.
Almost 10 million Syrians, almost half ofthe population
of the country, are in need of humanitarian assistance.
More than 200,000 Syrians remain besieved in zones
controlled by the Government and more than 45,000 in
areas controlled by the rebels. More than 136,000 have
died and thousands more have been wounded since the
beginning of the conflict. The Security Council must
play a crucial role in settling that conflict and call for
the full implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) to
enable secure and unimpeded humanitarian access for
the United Nations to help and ease the suffering of the
civilian population in besieged cities.

I will conclude my statement by speaking about
the situation in Lebanon. In recent months, the country
has seen a spiral of violence and a series of terrorist
attacks. That is a very worrisome sign of the growing
impact of the Syrian crisis on the security and stability
ofLebanon. Chad firmly condemns all ofthose terrorist
attacks. The massive influx of refugees from Syria into
Libya, which is already approaching 1 million refugees,
has seriously impeded the ability of that country to
meet the humanitarian needs of the refugees. While we
commend the generosity of the Lebanese authorities,
we urge the international community as a whole to
redouble its efforts to bring substantial assistance to
Lebanon, enabling it to improve its means of providing
for the refugees.

Social cohesion and consensus among all political
actors are needed in Lebanon in order to restore State
institutions and to re-establish order and security.
We encourage all political stakeholders in Lebanon
to demonstrate their unity in the face of the terrorist
activities and to move forward on the basis of the
laudable progress that has been achieved recently with
the formation of a new Government.

In order to assist Lebanon in stabiliizing itself,
respect for its soveriegnty and its territorial integrity is
crucial. To that end, we call for the full implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006).

