Mrs. Juul (Norway): First of all, I wish to add
Norway's voice to that of the Middle East Quartet,
which last month again called on Israel and the
Palestinians to act on their previous agreements and
obligations in order to create conditions for the
resumption of negotiations in the near term. With the
same sense of urgency, I call on the parties to fully
engage in resumed negotiations to create a viable
Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967 borders.
There is a broad and growing recognition that we are
nearing a moment of truth. The prospective two-State
solution can ill afford one more abortive process.

Furthermore, in view of Norway's role as Chair
of the ad hoc liaison committee - the donor group
supporting the Palestinian Authority - I must stress
the importance of resumed negotiations to our ability
to mobilize continued donor support for the Palestinian
State-building project. Without forward movement, and
without a political endgame clearly in sight, donors
will have a hard time justifying support beyond their
pledges made in 2007, which are due to expire next
year.

Norway chaired a meeting of the committee here
in New York on 22 September this year. In spite of the
international financial downturn, donors are honouring
their pledges, and support for the Palestinian Authority
is on a par with expectations for fiscal year 2009. In
addition, the World Bank reported 7 per cent growth in
the Palestinian economy on the West Bank, which was
due in part to Israel's easing of restrictions and in part
to the Authority's reform and security initiatives. If
expanded and sustained, those developments will ease
the humanitarian suffering and underpin peace efforts.

But let me be clear: the objective of the
committee is to support the quest for a two-State
solution, whereby the Israeli occupation is replaced by
a free and sovereign Palestinian State living side by
side with Israel in peace and security. The willingness
of donors to maintain high levels of support is a strong
message to the parties to engage in meaningful and
dedicated negotiations to bring the peace process to its
rightful conclusion.

The United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the
Gaza Conflict raises allegations of a most serious
nature. It alleges that both Israel and Palestinian groups
may have been responsible for grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

We believe that the report should first be studied
by the United Nations Human Rights Council, as that
Council initiated the Fact-Finding Mission. The Human
Rights Council is addressing the report this week. As a
member of that Council, Norway will work toward
achieving broad support for a balanced resolution
ensuring appropriate follow-up of the report and its
recommendations.

The parties to the conflict bear the most
immediate responsibility to investigate and prosecute
possible violations committed by forces under their
command. This is necessary, inter alia, to prevent
impunity. Norway is deeply concerned regarding issues
of the protection of vulnerable groups in armed conflict
in the Middle East and throughout the world. The role
of humanitarian agencies is under threat, as are
increasingly their workers themselves. The need to
work towards the full development of international
humanitarian law is a significant legacy of the violent
century we have put behind us. International
humanitarian law needs to be protected, defended and
expanded.

