Mr. Malanji (Zambia): As you have indicated,
Mr. President, I am Honourable Malanji, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia and Chairperson of
the Ministerial Committee of the Organ on Politics,
Defence and Security Cooperation of Southern African
Development Community (SADC). Allow me to deliver
this statement to this meeting of the Security Council.

On 30 December 2018, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo held its much-awaited presidential,
legislative and provincial elections. In line with its long-
standing tradition, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) deployed its electoral observer
mission, which I had the honour to lead. The elections
were postponed from 23 December 2018 following
an unfortunate fire that gutted the warehouse of the
Commission electorale nationale independante in the
capital city of Kinshasa. No party could ascertain
whether it was arson. On that premise, we therefore
consider it an act of force majeure. Security threats and
an outbreak of the Ebola virus also necessitated the
postponement of the elections to March 2019 in three
areas of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
that regard, for us not to be biased, we had to receive
communication from the World Health Organization,
which provided us with clear statistics indicating the
existence of the Ebola virus in those areas. Furthermore,
there were isolated incidences of violence in a few areas
of the country. Such circumstances understandably
created some tension leading up to the election day on
30 December 2018.

Notwithstanding the abovementioned and the
historical challenges facing the country, our considered
view is that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Commission electorale nationale
independante and all stakeholders managed the elections
and the immediate post-election period relatively
peacefully and in a calm atmosphere. In addition, we
note that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo funded the elections, thereby showing its
commitment to consolidating the democratic process in
the country.

SADC has taken note of the release of the
provisional results of the presidential election provided
by the Electoral Commission on 9 January. We also
note that there are some stakeholders that are not
satisfied with the outcome of the presidential election
in particular and that it is within their constitutional
right to present their grievances through the legal
framework of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in a peaceful way. SADC remains on hand to assist the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
process of consolidating their democracy and urges the
international community to give stakeholders in the
country an opportunity to engage themselves and their
legal institutions in the post-election period. I know that
it has already been mentioned by other stakeholders, but

allow me to quote some paragraphs of the statement of
His Excellency Mr. Edgar Chagwa Lungu, President of
the Republic of Zambia and Chairperson of the Organ:

"SADC further takes note of the disputes
that have arisen, and encourages all concerned
stakeholders to remain calm and act in a way that
consolidates democracy and preserves peace.

"SADC calls upon stakeholders with concerns,
including regarding the accuracy of the results, to
pursue any election dispute about the provisional
results peacefully through the avenues provided
by the existing national legal framework, and to
resolve their differences through political dialogue
among all stakeholders.

"SADC reaffirms its commitment to continue
to assist the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo with
respect to neutralizing the negative forces and other
armed groups operating in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo."

