Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam President, for having convened this
emergency meeting. Our thanks go also to Mr. Mladenov
for his in-depth briefing.

Peru notes with deep alarm and deplores the recent
launching of rockets and mortar shells against Israeli
urban centres by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, one of
which struck the yard of a kindergarten. We condemn
any attack against civilians while also recognizing
Israel's right to guarantee its own security and to deploy
legitimate defence measures, in line with the principles
of proportionality, precaution and legality.

We are alarmed also by the bleak outlook for
the situation in the short and medium term and the
exacerbation of inflammatory rhetoric in the wake
of the acts of violence and terror over the past few
days and the deaths of Palestinians that occurred
in Gaza over the past few weeks. In that context, we
would like to commend the Egyptian efforts to bring
about a de-escalation and a ceasefire. We believe
that it is necessary that all parties act cautiously and
with restraint, and adhere strictly to international
humanitarian and human rights law. The Council,
which is responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, must ensure the proper levels of
accountability for the violations that have occurred.

We deem it regrettable that, faced with the
undeniable deterioration of the situation, the Council
has not thus far been able to achieve the minimum
consensus needed for this body to speak out and to
define the actions that need to be taken, including
the need to address the root causes of the conflict and
the urgent need to alleviate the tragic humanitarian
situation in Gaza.

Peru will continue to work constructively to
protect civilians on both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and to promote the resumption of a political
dialogue that will allow us to put an end to this spiral
of Violence and to rekindle the negotiations required in
order to achieve a two-State solution with secure and
internationally recognized borders.

