I have the pleasure to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark. We are grateful to the Indonesian presidency for having placed this very pertinent topic on the Security Council's agenda. Your excellent timing, Sir, allows us to build on the discussions of last month's United Nations Counter-Terrorism Week and the Secretary-General's recent report on this issue (S/2020/754). While it is still too early to fully understand and assess the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the global terrorism landscape, the pandemic leaves the world more vulnerable to terrorism, with the possibility that already existing negative dynamics are coming into play earlier than expected and with more severe consequences. Furthermore, terrorist groups have set up local and regional systems to generate and move funds through illicit and organized criminal activity. This makes it all the more important to ensure that our national, regional and global counter-terrorist financing architecture is fit for purpose. Terrorist networks depend on external financing to run their organizations. That financing must be cut off. We must disrupt the links between organized crime and terrorism in order to identify and stop illicit financial flows to terrorist organizations and criminal networks. We encourage the expansion of existing initiatives as well as the development of new ones to deal more effectively with the nexus between terrorism and organized crime. The Nordic countries fully support the important message delivered by the Secretary-General in his opening remarks during last month's United Nations Counter-Terrorism Week: that counter-terrorism laws and security measures cannot be an excuse to shrink civic and humanitarian space, curtail freedom of association and deny other human rights. We are currently faced with multiple international crises requiring humanitarian, development or security-led responses, and the COVID-19 global pandemic and its effects has only increased competition for Member States' scarce resources. We fully agree with the Secretary-General's point made during last month's United Nations Counter-Terrorism Week that we must harness the power of multilateralism to find practical solutions. Terrorism does not respect national borders. It affects us all and can be defeated only collectively. Hence the demand for a coordinated approach ensuring effective and demand-driven responses that create tangible, gender-sensitive and sustainable outcomes on the ground in Member States has never been made in a more outspoken manner. United Nations Headquarters in New York and the United Nations offices in Vienna must work effectively together, including by making the best possible use of their field presence and by finding the right balance between Headquarters and field presence. We call on the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism to develop strategies to that end, drawing on the specific strengths and mandates of each Office. Similarly, we as Member States must also work together, both within our countries and between authorities and sectors as well as with other Member States. Indeed, coordination and cooperation between authorities has been identified as one key factor in countering organized crime and terrorism. Furthermore, it is important to build and improve partnerships with civil society, including humanitarian and private-sector actors. The Global Counterterrorism Forum has developed a number of practical guidelines and best practices relevant to today's debate that can assist us in translating our shared visions and priorities into concrete partnerships. We welcome the increased collaboration between the United Nations and the Forum, and we call for an even further realization of the potential synergies between the United Nations and the Forum, in particular through Forum-inspired institutions such as the International Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law. That training institute, located in Malta, presents an obvious platform for addressing many of the gaps identified in the Secretary-General's report through capacity-building and experience-sharing. A key prerequisite for promoting a rule-of-law-based approach is the need to move from convictions based on confessions alone to sentencing based on objectively verifiable evidence, not only as a way of ensuring a rule-of-law-based and human- rights-compliant criminal justice response to terrorism but also to ensure a more efficient and more comprehensive investigation and prosecution process, increasing the possibilities of exposing linkages between terrorists and individuals or networks involved in other forms of crime. Such an approach shows that effective counter- terrorism measures and the protection of human rights are indeed complementary and mutually reinforcing objectives.
