The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Brazil.

I welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk J eremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and thank him for his remarks. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for his briefing, and Mrs. Vlora Citaku for her
remarks.

Stability in the Balkans is a matter of serious
concern to Brazil. We see progress and commend the
efforts that have been made to ensure that the region
remains stable and on its way towards further
integration and cooperation. Brazil continues to believe
that resolution 1244 (1999) offers an adequate
framework for a negotiated settlement of the dispute.
We are confident that a fair and legitimate solution can
be reached under the auspices of the Security Council,
consistent with its authority and primary responsibility
in matters pertaining to international peace and security.

Brazil supports the invaluable work carried out
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) in implementing its Security
Council mandate. UNMIK has a key role to play in
Kosovo under the framework of resolution 1244 (1999),
particularly in promoting engagement among Pristina,
Belgrade and other relevant stakeholders. I wish to
comment on recent political developments on the
ground that may have an impact on efforts towards a
final settlement.

The 12 December elections for the Kosovo
Assembly were held in a peaceful atmosphere, as
stressed in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/43). We are concerned, however, by the fact
that UNMIK did not participate in the preparations for
these elections and that they were not called by the

ll-23603
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It is
worth recalling that, under resolution 1244 (1999), the
holding of elections is one of the main responsibilities
of the international civil presence in Kosovo. Attention
also needs to be paid to the remarks made by
international observers regarding complaints and
allegations of irregularities in the voting. The
accusations that the elections in Kosovo failed to meet
international standards need to be investigated.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights a
number of violent incidents affecting members of the
international community in Kosovo. Although the
overall security situation in Kosovo remains relatively
calm, attacks targeted specifically against international
officers and United Nations staff members cannot be
tolerated. Brazil shares the Secretary-General's
concern over the continued misrepresentation of
UNMIK's activities in northern Kosovo and open
challenges to its authority. This situation poses a
concrete threat to United Nations personnel and creates
difficulties in the fulfilment of UNMIK's mandate.

We also take note of Mr. Jeremie's comments
regarding the investigation of allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo. The severity of such allegations
cannot be dismissed. A proper and credible
investigation must be carried out. It would be
interesting to explore possible options that take into
account the need to involve various jurisdictions and
the importance of ensuring consistency with resolution
1244 (1999).

In conclusion, we are convinced that the Council
should continue to keep political developments in
Kosovo under close review. It is our hope that the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade can take place without further delay. As
envisaged in General Assembly resolution 64/298,
adopted in September 2010, it is vital that these
negotiations bear fruit. Dialogue is the best way to
resolve outstanding issues and to ensure peace, security
and stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.rn.
