Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank the Republic of
Congo for raising the important issue of the role of the
Security Council in conflict prevention and resolution,
particularly in Africa. We agree with you,
Mr. Secretary-General, and with you, Mr. President,
that the United Nations, and more particularly this
Council, can and must enhance its capacity to prevent
conflict, particularly on the continent of Africa.

For the United Nations to be more effective in
preventing conflict in Africa, the Security Council
must work more cooperatively and more efficiently
with regional and subregional organizations. In this
regard, the United States joins other members of this
Council in welcoming the provisions of the joint
communique of the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council that
was issued in June 2007 and that calls for a stronger
relationship between the two bodies.

According to the World Bank, 16 of the world's
20 poorest countries have suffered a major war in the
past 15 years. On average, four of every ten countries
coming out of war relapse to conflict in the first five
years of peace. My Government supports conflict
prevention and conflict resolution in Africa through a
variety of bilateral and multilateral programmes.

As announced at the Group of Eight meeting in
2004, the Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI)
was created to address the disparity between the
persistent demand for trained peacekeeping forces and
their inadequate availability, especially for missions in
Africa. In 2005, GPOI trained and equipped 27,000
military personnel from 37 countries to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. That number
is expected to increase to 75,000 by the end of the year.
The United States is supporting four of the eleven
GPOI Peace Operations Training Centres in Africa -
in Ghana, Kenya, Mali, and Nigeria.

The Transportation and Logistics Support
Arrangement (TLSA) of the GPOI contributed $11.5
million in 2005-2006, $5 million of which went to
construct portions of 34 base camps in Darfur. In 2007,
the United States has obligated $32 million to TLSA to
support initiatives including $12 million in equipment
to the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), $6.8 million for the training and
equipping of Ugandan troops supporting the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and $6 million
to support Nigerian deployment to the African Union
Mission in Sudan (AMIS).

GPOI's predecessor, the African Contingency
Operations Training and Assistance (ACOTA)
programme provided training and non-lethal equipment
to over 52,000 peacekeepers from African partner
militaries through July 2007. These partners are now
contributing, or have contributed, to a number of
African peacekeeping operations.

Understanding that economic development is a
crucial component of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution, the United States Congress passed the
African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) on
18 May 2000. This Act offers tangible incentives for
African countries to continue their efforts to open their
economies and build free markets. Thirty-eight of the
48 sub-Saharan States are now eligible for African
Growth and Opportunity Act support. As a result, two-
way trade between the United States and sub-Saharan
African countries increased by 17 per cent in 2006
alone, reaching almost $71.3 billion, with both United
States exports to and, perhaps more importantly,
United States imports from the region growing.

In 2004, President Bush created the Office of the
Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization
(CRS) to harness the full breadth of United States skills
and resources to transform conflict.

As this partial list makes clear, we do have
important programmes in place. What we clearly need
now is more effective coordination between our efforts,
other Governments' efforts, Security Council efforts,
and the efforts of the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations. With such enhanced
coordination, we would all be better positioned to help
prevent conflict before it starts and to assist States
emerging from conflict so the violence of the past is
not repeated.
