Ms. Agladze (Georgia): Let me express my sincere
gratitude to the United Kingdom presidency for
convening today's important debate.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I will now add
a few remarks in my national capacity.

Since the last Security Council debate on this
issue (see S/PV.6108), we have witnessed several major
developments in support of the surge in diplomacy,
such as the steadfast commitment of the Secretary-
General to prioritizing prevention, the strengthening of
the mediation capacity of the United Nations, and the
commitment to creating the High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation. Despite all those efforts, there has been
a ten-fold increase in the number of internationalized
conflicts in recent decades.

At this juncture, it is critical that we take stock
of ongoing mediation processes and reflect on our
challenges and achievements. Let me share our national
experience with regard to conflict settlement, where the
United Nations, along with the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
has a special leadership role as one of the co-chairs of
the Geneva international discussions, which is a unique
and inclusive international mediation platform.

Ten years after the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, we
still face a fully operational illegal Russian military
presence in both occupied regions of Georgia. The
continuous fortification of the occupation lines has
had a heavy toll on the humanitarian and human rights
situation on the ground. Against that backdrop, the
peaceful dialogue formats - the Geneva international
discussions and the incident prevention and response
mechanisms under its umbrella - have a special
role to play. While those formats have proved to be
indispensable in preventing the wide-scale escalation of
the conflict, we must also admit that they have failed to
produce tangible, substantial results. Our main lessons
from 44 rounds held thus far are the following.

First and foremost, neutral and good-faith
mediation is key to a credible process. We now enjoy
an impartial co-chairmanship within the Geneva
international discussions. However, in the 1990s, for
more than a decade conflict in Georgia was mediated
by a party with vested interests in prolongating and
escalating the conflict, which resulted in its full-scale
military intervention and occupation. It is therefore
critical that the Security Council give due attention to
conflicts of interest in its deliberations on the conflict
resolution process. In that context, the unilateral
discontinuation of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia through the veto cast by the Russian
Federation also comes to mind.

Secondly, we could not agree more with the
Secretary-General in stating that getting the mediation
process right can be as important as the substance of
the talks. That becomes essential when we speak about
issues such as the agenda and conduct during the talks.
For almost a decade, we have witnessed permanent
disregard of ground rules of the Geneva international
discussions by Russia and other participants who use
the tactics of so called walk-outs during the discussion
on vital agenda items and blackmailing the peace
formats with the threat of disrupting the negotiations if
issues they dislike are raised. We therefore believe that
the elaboration of concrete measures that prevent such
procedural misuse of the mediation platforms should be
a priority of the mediators.

At the same time, the mediation should not be
confined solely to the facilitation of an environment
suitable for negotiations. The mediators should further
strive to take on the role of defenders of the basic
principles of international law and create incentives
for the parties to be constructive and fair players
in the negotiation. Therefore, misconduct and the
blackmailing of the process need to be dully assessed
and discouraged.

Of course, even perfect mediators would not be
able to achieve progress if the political will of the
parties does not allow it. That has been the case on
fundamental issues of the international discussions,
such as the non-use of force, international security
arrangements and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. For instance, we have many times
unilaterally reaffirmed the commitment to the non-use
of force and firmly respected that principle. We are still
awaiting reciprocity from the Russian side.

Finally, let mejoin others in stressing the importance
of engaging more women in conflict resolution.
We warmly welcome the appointment of Ms. Cihan
Sultanoglu as the United Nations Representative to the
Geneva international discussions and express hope that,
as the first woman co-Chair, she will bring positive
impetus to the negotiations.

In conclusion, let me note that Georgia has
intensified its efforts for reconciliation among the
war-torn population so as to share the benefits of the
country's development and European integration with
the people residing in the occupied territories. A new
peace initiative, entitled A Step to a Better Future,
seeks to improve the humanitarian, social and economic
conditions of the populations and to encourage contacts,
movement and relations based on mutual interests along
and across the dividing lines.

