Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Panama would like to congratulate and
thank the members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat who took part in the mission to Timor-Leste
for their management of that mission. We wish to thank
the South African delegation in particular, for the
detailed report the mission has given us today on the
results of its visit to Timor-Leste, on the achievements
thus far and the continuing challenges (S/2007/711).

The visit of the Security Council was timely, as it
took place before the expiration of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) in February 2008. The mission made it
possible for Council members to gain first-hand
knowledge of events since the approval of the previous
mandate of UNMIT, knowledge which will certainly
have an impact on the framework of UNMIT's new
mandate.

I wish to reiterate Panama's willingness to
Panama to work with other Council members in
renewing UNMIT's mandate, bearing in mind the
achievements thus far and the priorities - some of
which have been highlighted here by the representative
of Timor-Leste - that still require the support of the
United Nations, of UNMIT and of the international
partners.
With respect to the progress that has been made,
we congratulate the Government and people of Timor-
Leste for the conclusion of the presidential and
parliamentary elections and for beginning the process
of security sector reform and promoting the rule of law.

Timor-Leste is still facing challenges such as the
continuation of serious internal divisions, despite the
information of a democratic Government. The people
of Timor-Leste, first and foremost, are responsible for
resolving those problems, and we recognize in that
respect the importance of the process of dialogue and
national reconciliation begun by the Government of
Timor-Leste.

The success of this process will be the best
vehicle for restoring the confidence of the people in
government institutions. The Security Council should
continue to support that process. In view of this, the
new mandate for the Mission should promote dialogue
and national reconciliation among the main political
actors and other members of society, in order to
eliminate the causes of the crisis of 2006.

With respect to the fragile security situation, we
believe that it has improved, but review of that sector
should continue. UNMIT should continue to provide
support for the definition of the legal framework that
defines the role of the police and the armed forces.

On the need to strengthen justice, we have seen
advances in the drafting of laws and trials for the
events related to the 2006 crisis. The recommendations
of the Independent Special Commission of Inquiry
must be complied with and the investigations begun by
the Office of the Prosecutor-General of Timor-Leste of
human rights violations must be completed. UNMIT
should continue its work in the area of technical
cooperation in order to strengthen the judicial system.

Lastly, we praise the efforts of UNMIT and of the
international partners for the support that they provide
to the people of Timor-Leste in crucial areas, including
economic and social development. The work of this
Council now will be to provide UNMIT and
Timor-Leste with ideal tools to consolidate the
achievements that have been made and to ensure
lasting peace and stability and democracy.

