Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): First of all, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the organization of
this meeting of the Security Council on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. As we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999),
it is appropriate and timely to commend the Security
Council for its sustained efforts to ensure the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Through that resolution
and others that followed, as well as through the
relevant presidential statements, the Council has built
and continues to build a solid normative body. The
Secretariat is also to be commended for the work it has
done, of which the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/20009/277) is a fine example. I would like also to
thank Mr. Holmes for his contribution to the debate.

The document presented by the Secretariat
reiterates a sad truth that we all know too well: civilian
casualties in armed conflict, which still far outnumber
those of combatants, continue to threaten or breach
international peace and security in some corners of the
planet. In the face of such threats or breaches, the
Council cannot stand silent or hesitate. Rather, it
should make appropriate and non-selective use of the
instruments provided for in the Charter to put an end to
gross violations of international humanitarian law.

Among such instruments, those set forth in
Chapter VI should be given careful consideration as a
means to stimulate and support the peaceful settlement
of disputes. When Chapter VII action proves necessary
and sanctions emerge as a potentially effective tool, as
proposed in the report, they should be specific and
targeted, so as not to impose further suffering on the
affected populations. In those cases where a
peacekeeping mission is established, it might be
necessary and even morally imperative to give it a
clear mandate to help protect civilians.

While my delegation fully recognizes the
increasing importance of that task in peacekeeping
operations, we concur with the View expressed by the
Secretary-General that it is not exclusively military in
nature. Rather, it is and must be multifaceted. To that
end, we favour a comprehensive approach that seeks to
help address, alongside security concerns, the
underlying political, economic and even cultural
factors of armed conflict and violence against civilians.
Such an approach lies at the heart of some success
stories in peacekeeping, such as the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. Another key element of
success is the need for close cooperation with national
authorities, given the primary responsibility of the host
Government to protect its own population.

A particularly challenging aspect of the issue
before us today is compliance with international
humanitarian law by non-State actors, who must not
forget or ignore the fact that they are bound by such
law. My delegation recognizes the benefits of dialogue
with such actors as a way of obtaining guarantees
regarding the security of humanitarian personnel and
access to populations in need of assistance. It is
essential that the humanitarian purposes of such a
dialogue be entirely clear to all participants and that
the principles of independence, neutrality, impartiality
and humanity, as set out in General Assembly
resolutions 46/182 and 58/114, be fully observed at all
times.

Observing such principles is crucial in addressing
constraints faced by humanitarian actors in ensuring
safe, timely and effective access to those in need.

Difficulties can also be overcome or mitigated by
enhanced cooperation and coordination of humanitarian
actors with States, which have the primary responsibility
for the well-being of their populations. As their citizens
are the main beneficiaries of domestic and foreign
humanitarian assistance, consistent with such principles,
States can only gain from such enhanced cooperation
and coordination. By strictly observing those General
Assembly resolutions, humanitarian actors can also
help to prevent attacks against their personnel, assets
and supplies, as such observance counters
misperceptions that, in some cases, lead to such
attacks. States can also contribute to the safety of
humanitarian actors by educating their agents on the
purposes and benefits of humanitarian assistance
consistent with those four principles, as well as on the
need to ensure the safety and security of all those
involved in delivering such assistance.

It is fitting to recall here the decision taken by the
General Assembly last year, in its resolution 63/139, to
establish World Humanitarian Day on 19 August as a
tribute to those who have lost their lives in the
promotion of the humanitarian cause. We hope that this
will help to raise awareness of the importance of
humanitarian activities worldwide and will thus have a
positive impact on the safety and security of United
Nations and associated personnel.

My delegation expects continued engagement by
the Security Council in efforts to promote the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, within its
powers and functions under the Charter. This
endeavour must be as participatory and transparent as
possible, since the involvement of all interested
Member States cannot but contribute to fostering the
support of States for the Council's work on this crucial
item on the international agenda.
