Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I thank you, Mr
President, and the Egyptian delegation for convening
this timely open debate on United Nations-African
Union peace and security cooperation.

South Africa aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representative of the African Union
(AU) and by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

International peace and security in an increasingly
globalized world are contingent on ensuring the stability
and prosperity of the broader international community.

In that regard, we wish to reaffirm the primacy of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In doing so, we should be cognizant
of the fact that security matters on the African
continent constitute the largest share of the work of the
Security Council. Therefore, we should aim to deepen
cooperation with regional organizations pursuant to
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

The relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union is central to the implementation and
the realization of a fuller understanding of the potential
of Chapter VIII. We should recognize that the African
Peace and Security Architecture has continued to play
a vital role in the resolution of conflict on the continent
since its inception, and is the central framework
through which Chapter VIII engagement with the AU
on peace and security matters should take place. To
give effect to Chapter VIII of the Charter, there must
be greater strategic political coherence between the
two organizations in the resolution, prevention and
management of conflicts in Africa. In that respect,
the relationship between the Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council is of
particular significance.

Resolution 2033 (2012), adopted during South
Africa's presidency of the Security Council in January
2012, recognizes that regional organizations are well
placed to understand the nuances and complexities
of conflicts. Furthermore, their proximity to the
conflicts provides advantages in directly influencing
the prevention and resolution of those conflicts. The
complementary role of the United Nations and the AU
in the resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of
peace and security on the African continent has thus
been affirmed by the Council.

In spite of the adoption of resolution 2033 (2012) and
the practical manifestation of cooperation, we believe
that much still needs to be done to further enhance
that relationship as a matter of utmost necessity for the
sustainable resolution of conflicts on the continent. We
are disappointed that the array of strategies available
for ensuring greater strategic coherence through
regular, timely and effective consultations have not
been exploited by the Council.

To that end, we must develop a more effective
relationship between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council that extends beyond just
their joint annual consultative meetings. That would
also entail more regular consultation and coordination
between the two Councils. In order to strengthen
and sustain the vital relationship between the two
organizations in addressing African conflicts, the
interactions need to be consistent, and we should avoid
a practice whereby the United Nations is selective
in its approach and where the relationship is merely
utilized in times of political convenience. We have
seen situations where the significant role of the AU was
ignored in the cases ofAfrican conflict situations, such
as in Libya and Western Sahara, disregarding notions
of comparative advantage and prolonging both those
conflicts on the African continent and their negative
impact on global security.

In Libya, for example, the failure of the Security
Council to support the African Union in pursuing its
political solution to the crisis has resulted in a power
vacuum in that country. The military solution that was
opted for has resulted in instability, the rise of terrorist
groups and large numbers of migrants fleeing the
conflict, resulting in a serious humanitarian challenge
for the region and beyond. The lesson we should draw
from the Libyan experience is that greater political
coherence and a common vision between the AU Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council are
critical to the resolution of African conflicts.

The issue of capacity-building and sustainable
resource allocation remains a fundamental challenge. In
the past decade, the African continent has demonstrated
sufficient political will and commitment to ridding the
continent of all conflicts and wars. There have been
gains in the full operationalization ofthe African Peace
and Security Architecture, which are illustrated by the
developments in bringing the African Standby Force
and its Rapid Deployment Capability to realization.
However, we believe that it is the responsibility of the
United Nations to provide predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing to AU peace support operations,
especially in those that are undertaken on behalf of the
Security Council, and with a United Nations mandate.

We must acknowledge that, notwithstanding the
Security Council's responsibility in that regard, AU
member States are making greater efforts to assume
greater responsibility on those matters. In that regard,
we note that African troop- contributing countries have
committed and sacrificed their troops in lethal first-
response situations.

The mutually reinforcing relationship between
the United Nations and the AU should extend beyond
the period of conflict and to critical areas, such as
peacebuilding, post-conflict reconstruction and
development. The nexus between peace, security
and development underscores the imperative of
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and
development in post-conflict settings.

In conclusion, the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the AU, have their respective
comparative advantage. As the Secretary-General
highlighted, our strategic partnerships need to be
enhanced through closer collaboration and cooperation
resulting in joint actions to address global peace
and security.

