Mr. Ward (Jamaica): I thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2000/208) on the humanitarian situation in
Iraq and for his remarks to us this morning. I also welcome
the presence in the Council Chamber of Ms. Bellamy and
Mr. Sevan, whose work we value greatly as we carry out
our responsibilities as a member of the Security Council.

My delegation is disturbed by the continuing dire
humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people as outlined in the
Secretary-General's report and in his statement, and as
described in the 1999 report on child and maternal mortality
issued by the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).
We welcome the recommendations put forward to improve
the situation.

It is undeniable that sanctions are a necessary and
legitimate tool for the execution of Security Council
decisions. The deterioration in the humanitarian situation in
Iraq, however, raises questions about the wider issue of the
effectiveness of sanctions in general, and about the
sanctions on Iraq in particular. The Council must find ways
to balance the requirement that Iraq honour its obligations
under the various Security Council resolutions and the
Council's humanitarian obligation to minimize hardship on
ordinary Iraqi civilians. Sanctions regimes established by
the Council must be effective, focused and of limited
duration. My delegation, therefore, welcomes the
establishment by the Security Council of a working group
on sanctions, which will review this issue and recommend
changes as appropriate.

We want to emphasize that the Council must not
become involved in a sterile effort to attribute blame.
Rather, we must focus on finding a solution to the difficult
humanitarian situation in Iraq. The Iraqi people must be our
foremost priority in this regard. An important step in this
process will be objectively to evaluate the extent to which
the sanctions regime has engendered the current situation.
Such an impact assessment is long overdue and should be
undertaken immediately.

Clearly, we are committed to the implementation of
the humanitarian provisions of resolution 1284 (1999),
which the Council adopted out of concern for improving the
humanitarian situation inside Iraq. We are therefore anxious
to explore in the Council all possible means to bring about
the results for which the resolution was adopted. We
support the efforts made by the Office of the Iraq
Programme to review procedures for contracting,
application processing, obtaining approval by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 661 (1990),
and timely distribution of humanitarian supplies within
Iraq.

The provision of humanitarian relief alone, however,
will not effectively reverse the downward trend in the
statistical indicators outlined in these reports. We believe
that the humanitarian situation in Iraq will continue to be
dire in the absence of a sustained revival of the Iraqi
economy. The restoration of the economic infrastructure
is essential to reversing the grim public health indicators
and returning them to the levels and trajectories that
existed before 1991.

An important hindrance to the early implementation
of the humanitarian provisions of resolution 1284 (1999)
is that of the holds placed in critical sectors, in particular
holds placed on spare parts and equipment for the oil
industry sector and on spare parts for electricity
generation. We would welcome the removal of these
holds, and look forward to progress in the processing of
applications.

Removing the ceiling on oil exports is negated by a
lack of capacity to sustain increased production levels.
We reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the necessary additions to the current
allocation for oil spare parts and equipment to reverse
what has been described as the lamentable state of the oil
industry. Of much concern to us is the Secretary-
General's report that the increased level of production
achieved in November 1999 was no longer sustainable,
and that production in recent weeks had decreased by
300,000 barrels per day.

Of equal importance to the future development of
Iraq is the rehabilitation of its electricity infrastructure.
We note from the report of the Secretary-General that
equipment for this sector valued at $488 million is on
hold and that this has delayed necessary maintenance
work, resulting in a continuing deterioration of the
electricity production and distribution network.

My delegation calls upon countries which have
imposed holds to take all necessary steps to ensure that
swift investigations are conducted with a View to the early
removal of these holds. Perhaps Mr. Sevan can advise the
Council of any recent reduction in the level of holds, and
of what, if any, impact this may be expected to have on
the humanitarian programme.

 

The lamentable state of Iraq's health sector is also
cause for great concern. We support the recommendation by
the Secretary-General to have substantial increases in the
scale and scope of inputs into the sector. We also recognize
the importance of implementing complementary inputs to
address the causes of poor health conditions. It is important
and more cost-effective to not only treat diseases but also
prevent them from occurring in the first place. Therefore,
the provision of safe drinking water and sanitation, as well
as vaccination against preventable diseases, is crucial to
maintaining the health of the population.

The long-term, detrimental effect of the
malnourishment of 700,000 children, as stated in paragraph
124 of the Secretary-General's report, is of grave concern.
The combination of potential developmental problems
caused by chronic malnutrition and the lack of an
appropriate teaching and learning environment in Iraq's
schools will have lasting negative effects on future
generations of Iraqis.

The report of the Secretary-General's review of the
oil-for-food programme, issued on April 28, 1999; the
results of the UNICEF survey of infant and maternal
mortality rates in Iraq; and the presentations made here
today raise serious humanitarian concerns. These reports
make it clear that the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Iraq is pervasive and chronic.

The UNICEF figures presented in its 1999 report on
infant and maternal mortality in Iraq are particularly
alarming, as they indicate clearly that children under five
years of age are dying at more than twice the rate of 10
years ago.

It is particularly tragic that Iraq's children have been
made victims of a system which was not of their choosing.
Undoubtedly, the humanitarian conditions which exist in
Iraq today will continue adversely to affect the people of
Iraq long after the sanctions are lifted. It may be useful if
Ms. Bellamy could elaborate on the relationship between
the sanctions and the humanitarian conditions of the
children of Iraq.

Council members must face the facts presented here
today with a positive and constructive attitude if we are to
make progress in alleviating the grim situation. In this
regard, the Secretary-General's recommendations set out in
his report must be given serious consideration by all
concerned.

