Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by addressing my most sincere
thanks to you, Sir, and to the United Kingdom
delegation for having organized this debate on Haiti.

I also stress that we stand side by side with the
people of Haiti, who yesterday relived the fear and
chill of a new earthquake. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Mariano Fernandez, for introducing the Secretary-
General's report (S/2012/128).

Today's discussion is taking place at yet another
moment of political instability in Haiti. That instability
is most unfortunate. Prime Minister Conille resigned
on 24 February after only four months in office. His
appointment followed five months of political deadlock
as the Government and Parliament squabbled over a
nominee. Too many in the political elite remain
indifferent to the dire needs of the average Haitian and
the serious hardship Haitians face in rebuilding their
livelihoods and their country.

Canada welcomes the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Haiti. We
commend the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its vital contribution to the
maintenance of overall security and stability in Haiti.
As the Secretary-General highlighted in his report,
there has been some progress, but daunting challenges

persist and security gains remain fragile. As expressed
in the report, Canada's sincere hope is that Haiti's
political stakeholders in the legislative and executive
branches will rise above partisan bickering. They must
fully assume their responsibilities to ensure continuity
of governance, the proper functioning of democratic
institutions, sound management of public funds and the
strengthening of the rule of law.

(spoke in English)

Canada observes with great concern the
mobilization of armed groups in Haiti. We note that
President Martelly is moving forward to address the
issue, and we hope that actions taken by the Haitian
Government will allow for the dismantling of those
groups to prevent them from destabilizing the country.

We strongly remind the Council that the priority
to which President Martelly has formally subscribed is
the development of the Haitian National Police and the
implementation of all its operational components. We
must not, on any account, distract ourselves from that
objective, in which Canada, along with international
and Haitian partners, has made a very important and
massive investment.

Moreover, only a sincere and hard-fought battle
to eliminate corruption and establish the rule of law
will realize the value of efforts to attract foreign
investment and repair the country's image. Trust can
only be built on concrete and significant action - on
courageous action motivated by the public interest and
based on democratic principles, and not simply on
words.

Canada will therefore look to the Haitian
Government to urgently implement concrete actions.
The Government must take firm steps against
corruption, including through providing necessary
support and independence to bodies such as the audit
commission established to investigate contracts
awarded following the earthquake, and to the
independent experts commission mandated by the
Minister of Justice to investigate unresolved
assassination cases.

(spoke in French)

Canada's commitment to supporting Haiti is long-
term, both in the delivery of humanitarian assistance as
well as the ongoing reconstruction and longer term
development efforts. From 2006 to 2012, Canada has
committed more than $1 billion to Haiti. However,
Haitian authorities must show real resolve to deal with
the true problems still affecting their country. Two
years after the earthquake, our thoughts are with the
Haitian people, who are still struggling to rebuild their
lives.

Canada believes that the Haitian reconstruction
process must be led by accountable political actors
who prioritize and address the needs of the Haitian
people and put those needs before issues of narrow
personal and political interest. The process must be
transparent and fair.

We note that President Martelly moved quickly to
designate a successor to Prime Minister Conille. We
hope that the Parliament and the executive authorities
will act expeditiously to reach an agreement on the
nomination of the new Prime Minister, so that the work
of the Government is not stalled further.

Haiti faces many governance challenges that need
urgent attention - not the least of which are
constitutional reform, and work towards the creation of
a permanent electoral council so that the elections,
which already have been delayed, can be organized.

We all recognize that the wholesale change of the
magnitude required in Haiti does not happen overnight,
but it will not happen at all without steadfast political
will. Haitian leaders need to demonstrate a firm and
unwavering commitment to democratic principles and
the rule of law in order to achieve the sustainable
progress that the international community expects and
the Haitian people deserve.

