Mr. Kozhara: I am very pleased and honoured to
address the Security Council today as Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE).

With its comprehensive approach to security and
in view of its geographical scope, which stretches from
Vancouver to Vladivostok, the OSCE enjoys a unique
position among all other regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Our organization is a strong partner of the United
Nations in promoting international peace and security
in its area. It is a great responsibility for me personally
and for Ukraine to guide the OSCE towards the
implementation of a shared vision of a Euro-Atlantic
and Eurasian security community, as set forth in the
2010 Astana Commemorative Declaration.

The year 2015 marks four decades since the signing
of the Helsinki Final Act. We strongly believe that that
anniversary should serve as a catalyst for re-energizing
the organization. The OSCE needs to retain the political
momentum provided by the Astana Summit. The
"Helsinki+40" process, initiated last year in Dublin,
seems to be a promising framework in that respect.

The Ukrainian chairmanship will facilitate the
Helsinki+40 dialogue, which is focused on overcoming
divergences and clarifying the role and goals of the
OSCE in the modern security architecture.

In the context of the OSCE chairmanship, Ukraine
has set ambitious goals, with a number of priorities
across the three dimensions of security.
With regard to the politico-military dimension,
we aim to update and modernize the OSCE's
politico-military instruments. We remain strongly
engaged with the United Nations Group of Friends of
Mediation and attach great importance to the updating
of confidence- and security-building measures. During
our chairmanship, the organization will continue
to be actively engaged with the United Nations,
and we will facilitate the development of an OSCE
mediation-support capacity.

The Ukrainian chairmanship contributes fully
to the continued efforts of the United Nations in
the promotion of global security and peace. The
achievement of progress in finding a sustainable, long-
term solution to the protracted conflicts in the OSCE
area is at the top of its agenda.

Ukraine is strongly determined to contribute to
the Transdniestrian settlement process. We call for
the constructive engagement of all participants in
the "5+2" talks so as to move forward in solving the
existing social and economic problems and achieving a
comprehensive political settlement.

We are convinced that direct dialogue between
the political leadership of Chisinau and Tiraspol is
crucial. We have been doing our utmost to promote and
to facilitate it, encouraging both leaderships to engage
constructively in the negotiation process.

Ukraine fully supports the work under way within
the framework of the Geneva international discussions
aimed at resolving security and humanitarian issues in
the area of conflict in Georgia. We highly appreciate
the input of the United Nations to that process and
welcome the existing level of coordination among the
three co-chairing organizations.

The Ukrainian chairmanship lends its full support
to the efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group co-chairs in
assisting the parties to find a peaceful solution to the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. During my visit to the
South Caucuses in June, I intend to support the call
of the co-chairs for more active engagement in the
negotiations.

Developments in South-Eastern Europe are a focus
for our organization throughout the year. The European
Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina has

opened new prospects for normalization in that part of
the region.

The OSCE welcomes the Brussels agreement
of 19 April. The leadership in Belgrade and Pristina
should be commended for their courage and vision in
reaching it. I welcome the continuation of that dialogue.
Where possible, the OSCE will provide support in line
with its mandate.

Conventional arms control and confidence- and
security-building measures constitute an important
part of common efforts to strengthen peace and
stability in the OSCE area. As a strong advocate of
non-proliferation, Ukraine, together with Poland,
Belarus and Kazakhstan, introduced the draft of
the updated 1994 OSCE Principles Governing
Non-proliferation. That work is expected to be finalized
before the Kyiv OSCE Ministerial Council meeting, to
be held on 5 and 6 December.

Let me also draw the Council's attention to two
memorandums of understanding that were signed
between the OSCE and the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs, namely, on developing a
partnership on peace and disarmament initiatives
and on promoting the regional implementation of the
resolution 1540 (2004).

We deem it necessary to pay particular attention
to the OSCE response to transnational threats. In that
regard, we see particular merit in deepening cooperation
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. A joint
action plan for 2013-2014 was recently signed with the
latter.

Security, political and economic transitions in
Afghanistan, as well as the withdrawal of international
security forces in 2014, will continue to have
security implications for the OSCE area. As OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office, we are proceeding to further
explore areas that require enhanced interaction with
Afghanistan and improved coordination with the
relevant international actors.

Exchanging military information and contacts, in
particular in border areas close to Afghanistan, is of
paramount importance. The OSCE Border Management
Staff College in Dushanbe plays a major role in that
field. It has trained more than 1,000 border experts,
from 38 OSCE participating States and partners,
including almost 400 Afghan border professionals.

Within the economic and environmental dimension,
the core theme of the Ukrainian chairmanship is
increasing stability and security by improving the
environmental footprint of energy-related activities.
We are also exploring how the OSCE could provide
added value and play a role in the development of new
trade and transport corridors. In both areas, we see
great potential for building on existing cooperation
with the United Nations.

The Ukrainian chairmanship is convinced that
our commitment to the human dimension of security
is, and should remain, at the core of the concept of
comprehensive security. The fight against trafficking in
human beings remains one of the key issues addressed
by the OSCE under the Ukrainian chairmanship. We
continue to pursue a comprehensive, human rights-
based approach to this global crime - in close
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Labour
Organization, UNICEF and the United Nations Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights - within
the OSCE-initiated Alliance against Trafficking in
Persons and on a bilateral basis under the Global
Initiative to Fight Human Trafficking. In that respect,
the chairmanship will organize an international
conference on combating trafficking in human beings,
to be held in June in Kyiv.

Further priorities in that dimension include
strengthening the freedom of media. A human rights
seminar in Warsaw will address the topic of best
practices for crafting legal frameworks to establish and
safeguard free, independent and pluralistic media.

We will also strive to achieve progress in the
areas of the free movement of people, the promotion
of tolerance and non-discrimination, the freedom of
association and assembly, inter-religious dialogue in
promoting freedom of religion or belief, as well as
democratic elections and election observation.

Finally, we attach particular attention to the
promotion of tolerance and non-discrimination through
youth education. In that regard, we plan to host an
OSCE youth summit this summer in Crimea, Ukraine.

Before I conclude, let me once again stress the
value of cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations. A number of our chairmanship's priorities
coincide with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
Five-Year Action Agenda. That is especially true with
regard to early warning and early action in preventing
violent conflicts, building a safer and more secure
world, and supporting nations in transition.

The United Nations is the OSCE's principal partner
organization. As security challenges continue to evolve,
the nature of OSCE-United Nations cooperation has to
become more pragmatic, effective and results-oriented.
We look forward to even closer cooperation with the
United Nations and count on the Council's full support
in the months ahead.
