Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General of the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) as well as the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, the Director of the Africa II Division
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and the representative of Somalia, for their
briefings.

The security and humanitarian situation in
Somalia is of great concern to my country and to the
international community, despite the progress achieved
in the negotiations between the Transitional Federal
Government and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia. Acts of violence and war continue, and in that
respect we reiterate our condemnation of the attack that
took place in October 2008 that targeted the office of
the United Nations Development Programme. We
renew our condolences regarding the victims of that
attack.

There is no doubt that recent developments on the
ground could represent a regression in the efforts that
have been made by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
could negate all the hopes generated by the Djibouti
agreement and the ceasefire agreement.

Today, we call upon all of the parties in the
Transitional Federal Government to overcome their
differences and to unify their efforts to hasten the
formation of a new Government to serve the people of
Somalia. We also call for the coordination of all
regional and international initiatives and efforts in
keeping with the role of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, in order to ensure that these
efforts are mutually supportive, rather than parallel
efforts.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia is
deteriorating daily. Humanitarian organizations and
emergency aid workers are targeted by threats and
attacks from armed groups. The situation has caused
certain organizations to suspend their activities, which
has had an adverse impact on nearly one million
people, who require emergency humanitarian
assistance. The humanitarian situation in central and
southern Somalia is growing particular dire, because
those areas are not covered by humanitarian
organizations.

Another humanitarian problem has been caused
by the violence between factions, which is of concern
to us. That problem affects Somali refugees and
displaced persons. Fighting in Mogadishu has forced
108,000 people to flee the city, and the number of
displaced persons now exceeds 1.3 million.

We also note the acts of piracy off the coast of
Somalia, which pose a real threat to international
shipping. International Maritime Organization statistics
give a sombre picture of the situation. However, there
has been a swift positive reaction on the part of several
countries to Security Council resolution 1816 (2008)
concerning the fight against piracy. We appreciate the
efforts made by all countries that have cooperated with
the Transitional Federal Government in the fight
against piracy and armed maritime robbery. We support
the Secretary-General's appeal to Member States to
participate in those efforts.

In that respect, our appreciation goes in particular
to States that have ensured the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to those who need it. We
support the European Union's proposal that DPKO
play a role in the coordination of operations to fight
piracy off the coast of Somalia. We hope that DPKO
will study the proposal and that it will formulate an
opinion on it.

We are convinced, however, that piracy is a result
of the conflict and instability in Somalia and that it will
end once a political solution to the problems of

Somalia is found. Such a solution must be based on a
comprehensive approach in order to deal with all the
issues related to Somalia.

Now more than ever, there is an urgent need to
deploy an international force on the ground, whatever
it may come to be called. We believe that the recent
agreement signed by the Transitional Federal
Government and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia could form the basis for the deployment of
such a force. The agreement on the cessation of armed
confrontation signed on 26 October, following a
meeting of the High-Level Committee, constitutes an
important step in that direction. There is no doubt that
priority should now be given to the establishment of an
international stabilization force and to strengthening
the African Union Mission in Somalia so that it can be
an integral part of that force.

Unfortunately, however, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/709) provides no timeline
for the establishment of such a force, and the two
briefings we heard today from representatives of the
Secretariat raise further concerns for us. If we
understand matters correctly, it was observed that
conditions are not ripe for the deployment of such a
force, owing to the continuing precarious security
situation. But we all know that the United Nations has
gained a great deal of experience in the deployment of
peacekeeping forces and multinational forces in
conditions of instability in their areas of operations.

If we do not wish to deploy a force at this time,
what are the alternatives? Can we tell the millions of
suffering Somalis that we cannot help them or provide
aid? I do not think that is a solution. In my view, we
must take advantage of the Djibouti agreement in order
to pacify the situation and to begin immediately, in
collaboration with the African Union, to deploy a
stabilization force in Somalia. We support the
Secretary-General's appeal to Member States to
contribute troops, equipment and financial resources
for the establishment of such a force, and we urge
countries in a position to do so to respond to that
appeal so that we can buttress the Djibouti agreement
and restore peace and stability to Somalia.
It is our hope that we will very soon hear the
views of the Secretary-General, as promised in
paragraph 52 of his report, including the alternative
proposals of which he wrote in that paragraph.

08-6107]

Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in 
French): I thank Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Zenenga and

Mr. Mitropoulos for their illuminating briefings. Our

thanks go also to the Permanent Representative of

Somalia and to the Permanent Observer of the African
Union for their statements this morning.

Let me begin by reaffirming my delegation's firm
condemnation of acts violence and violations of human
rights in Somalia, in particular those perpetrated
against the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and humanitarian personnel, and recently,
the 29 October suicide bomb attack against the office
of the United Nations Development Programme in
Hargeisa. We expect the perpetrators of such acts to be
brought to justice.

We welcomed the August signing of the Djibouti
agreement, and we call upon the signatories to commit
themselves, unreservedly and in good faith, to
compliance with it, in conformity with commitments
they themselves undertook. Moreover, all Somalis must
join in the process that is now under way. Here, we
welcome the notable progress attained in the
negotiations between the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) and the joint decisions
that have been taken, including on a cessation of armed
confrontation between the TFG and the ARS, a time
frame for the withdrawal of Ethiopian forces and the
deployment of a joint security force. The 26 October
signing of a ceasefire agreement is also to be
welcomed, and we look forward to its full
implementation. Unfortunately, the present institutional
impasse threatens to undermine these achievements.
That is why we believe that every effort should be
made to overcome it as quickly as possible.

Like the parties themselves, my delegation
attaches the greatest importance to the role of the
High-Level Committee provided for in the Djibouti
agreement, which is jointly chaired by the United
Nations and the African Union. We call upon the
international community to provide the Committee
with all the support it needs to assist the parties in
abiding by their commitments. My delegation
welcomes the willingness of the African Union to
strengthen AMISOM. in support of the implementation
of the Djibouti agreement.

On the deployment of an international
stabilization force, my delegation takes note of the plan

formulated by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and of the initiatives undertaken
by the Secretary-General in that regard. We await with
interest the recommendations promised in paragraph 52
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/709). In
the meantime, my delegation regrets that responses to
the Secretary-General's appeal have been weak and
hesitant. We hope that there will be a speedy response
to his appeal and to that of the Transitional Federal
Government - reaffirmed this morning by the
Permanent Representative of Somalia - to bring about
the deployment of a multinational force and, then, a
peacekeeping operation in Somalia.

But it is the duty of the Council to anticipate
events and the responses that will be proposed by the
Secretary-General, so that it can find possible
approaches to addressing the matter.

The increase in acts of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia exacerbates the security,
socio-economic and humanitarian situation in the
country. We welcome the assistance provided by a
number of States in ensuring the safety of maritime
transport in the area. But we must recall that combating
this lack of security requires the resolution of the
underlying causes of the crisis in Somalia. We are
grateful to the International Maritime Organization for
its efforts, and we consider that its recommendations
merit the closest attention.

My delegation wishes in conclusion to reaffirm
its hope that the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations will continue, with a view to
strengthening the Union's institutional capacity to
support AMISOM, which for the moment remains the
sole credible force in Somalia. We join the Secretary-
General in calling upon the international community to
provide AMISOM. with all possible financial and
logistical assistance. Finally, as we have said here on
numerous occasions, the credibility of the United
Nations and, in particular, of the Security Council is at
stake in Somalia.

