Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Sir, to say how delighted I am to see you presiding
over the work of the Council for April. I have no doubt
that you will discharge your difficult tasks with your
customary brilliance. I would also like to take this
opportunity to sincerely thank Ambassador Mamady
Traore, and the Guinean delegation, for the wisdom
with which he conducted the work of the Council last
month. As previous speakers have said, it was one of
the most difficult months in the recent history of the
Security Council.

As an associate country of the European Union,
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement that will be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Greece, on behalf of the European Union.

Eighteen months since the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) was established under resolution
1373 (2001), Bulgaria welcomes the fact that the
Committee has become central to the universal
campaign against this devastating scourge. This is a
real success story. The beginnings have been very
encouraging, and this needs to be stressed.

I cannot overemphasize the personal role played
throughout these 18 months by the Chairman of the
Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, to whom Bulgaria
pays sincere tribute. Sir Jeremy and his team have lived
up to the extraordinary reputation of the United
Kingdom's diplomacy. They have worked with
unequalled professionalism and personal devotion. Sir
Jeremy has demonstrated that the old profession of a
diplomat is conducive to the commonweal and the best
interests of the international community. I have no
doubt that in the future the CTC will find the ways and
means to draw on the experience of Member States and
the clear thinking of Sir Jeremy.

At the same time, I wish to welcome the
assumption of the Chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee by Ambassador Inocencio Arias
of Spain. He has all the necessary qualities to
demonstrate real leadership on the Committee. I would
like to take this opportunity to assure him of the full
support of my delegation.

The programme of work submitted by the CTC
for the coming 90 days, we think, makes it possible to
reaffirm what has been achieved, in particular with
regard to the creation of a global network to combat
terrorism. We are pleased to see that the Committee is
giving priority to the declaration that was adopted
following the 20 January 2003 meeting of the
Committee. That declaration highlights strengthened
contacts with international, regional and subregional
organizations. There is no doubt that these
organizations have an enormous capacity to help
Member States to implement resolution 1373 (2001).

Bulgaria's experience, from its perspective at the
subregional level, has proved this point. We are very
satisfied with the results of the conference of South-
East European countries held in June 2002 in Sofia.
Bulgaria continues to build on this initial success.

The flow of information at all levels - national,
regional, subregional and international - and the
control of these flows are a sine qua non for the
success of counter-terrorism efforts. On 6 March 2003,
during the extremely useful exchange of views between
these organizations and the CTC, this problem was
highlighted. It is very important that we use modern
technology in countering terrorism. The Internet can be
a powerful driving force behind the exchange of
information. The very interesting web site of the
Committee, with its increasing wealth of information,
is a very good example of that.

Bulgaria stresses the need to prevent access by
terrorists to weapons of mass destruction. We welcome
the intention of the Committee to contact the
representatives of the relevant international
organizations and specialized agencies and to
coordinate these activities with the Committee. It is
very important to strengthen the non-proliferation
regime of weapons of mass destruction, both at the
international and regional level.

Bulgaria has emphasized many times the
importance it attaches to the 12 international anti-
terrorist conventions. As the Council is aware, Bulgaria
is party to all 12 conventions and it reiterates its appeal
to all States that have not yet done so to become parties
to these instruments as soon as possible.

As to the legal context of counter-terrorism, we
once again regret that the Ad Hoc Committee of the
General Assembly, which was to have drawn up a
universal convention to combat terrorism, does not
seem to have advanced in its work at the pace that we
would have wished to see.

My delegation would like to warmly thank the
experts of the CTC for their outstanding work.

We wish to draw the attention of the members and
experts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to the fact
that there are already States that are entering a new
stage - stage B - of implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). I believe we can be confident that the
Committee's experts will be able to deal with these
developments and in due course will be able to assess
the progress made by States that are entering stage B.
But for the time being, what remains important is
undoubtedly the assistance that must be provided to
States that are still trying to fulfil the minimum
required by resolution 1373 (2001). States that are in a
position to lend assistance should do so without delay.
Obviously, a significant number of States are
experiencing major technical and material difficulties.

In conclusion, I cannot fail to mention the fact
that, on 22 February, a law against the financing of
terrorism entered into force in Bulgaria. Experts from
several Bulgarian ministries and governmental
agencies are actively preparing Bulgaria's third report
to the Committee, in which we shall detail information
about measures my country is taking to fight terrorism.
