Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Our vote this morning
was informed by respect for our unwavering
commitment to the ideals of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Adherence to the NPT does not preclude any country
from optimizing its full use of nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes; rather, it guarantees the inalienable
right of parties to the peaceful use of nuclear
technology. The NPT also remains the best framework
for achieving disarmament and the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons. Indeed, Nigeria is pursuing a
peaceful nuclear programme within the parameters of
the NPT, including its safeguards agreement and
additional protocol, in full cooperation and
collaboration with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Thus, we recognize Iran's right to
pursue a peaceful nuclear programme.

Where, however, questions arise and evidence
suggests that a country's nuclear programme and
activities are inconsistent with the provisions of the
NPT, it becomes a matter of great concern to us.
Having followed very carefully the discussions on
Iran's nuclear activities, Nigeria, like other countries,
has been unable to fully understand whether Iran's
nuclear programme is entirely and strictly for peaceful
purposes. Therefore, it is incumbent on Iran dispel the
doubts that surround its nuclear activities. Specifically,
we are convinced that Iran, as a State party to the NPT,
has clearly violated its obligations under the Treaty.
Furthermore, Nigeria does not understand Iran's failure
to cooperate with the IAEA. We are also troubled by
Iran's failure to fully implement its safeguards
agreement, including the additional protocol.

These worrisome failures have been compounded
by the lack of clarity on the sudden spike in the
building of nuclear sites, some of which were shrouded
in secrecy. Moreover, the decision by Iran to enrich
uranium to a higher level of 20 per cent and its
insistence on continuing its enrichment programme
raise genuine doubt about the real direction of its
nuclear activities.

Notwithstanding our misgivings, we believe that
a dual-track approach that combines pressure with
intense political and diplomatic activities is the best
way to resolve the Iranian nuclear conundrum. We are
satisfied that the resolution that we have just adopted
recognizes this and commits all countries to pursue a
dual-track approach regarding Iran. We welcome the
explicit reaffirmation that outstanding issues can best
be resolved and confidence built in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme by Iran
responding positively to all the calls that the Council
and the IAEA Board of Governors have made on Iran.

The emphasis on the importance of political and
diplomatic efforts to find a negotiated solution
guaranteeing that Iran's nuclear programme is
exclusively for peaceful purposes gives hope that all
the doors are not closed on Iran. In that regard, we
applaud Brazil and Turkey for their exemplary
initiative in signing with Iran at the highest political
levels the joint Tehran declaration of 17 May 2010. We
hope that it will still be possible to follow through on
the joint declaration as a concrete confidence-building
measure. Cooperation with the IAEA and the
resumption of early dialogue with Baroness Ashton
will give further impetus to a political settlement of the
dispute.

Finally, I would like to echo the accent placed in
the resolution on the fact that nothing compels States to
take measures or actions exceeding the scope of the
resolution, including the use of force or the threat of
use of force in responding to Iran. Satisfied with the
intent of the resolution and the recognition of the need
for continued political and diplomatic efforts, Nigeria
voted in favour of resolution 1929 (2010).

