The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Costa Rica.

I would like to begin by welcoming the
Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization and thanking him for the briefing he has
given us. I also thank Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Zenenga, the
representative of Somalia and the observer of the
African Union.

Like other Council members, and Ambassador
Sawers in particular, I believe that the Council is
facing an important decision. We trust that we will be
given the information, and we will conduct the analysis
and debate necessary to define the nature of our
intervention in Somalia. This is crucial; it is something
that we will be discussing in the future.

We welcomed the signing of the Addis Ababa
agreement, as well as the significant progress in the
discussions between the Transitional Federal
Government and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of
Somalia on the implementation of the Djibouti
agreement, in particular with respect to the
implementation of the mandates of the Joint Security
Committee and the High-Level Committee. We believe
it is important that the groups that have not yet done so
should join this agreement, which remains open; in that
way, they would become a constructive part of the
peace process in Somalia.

For Costa Rica, as well as for other delegations, it
is particularly disturbing to see the deterioration in the
security situation during the period under review. We
deplore in particular the fact that United Nations
personnel, including local staff, the personnel of
organizations that provide humanitarian assistance and
other international personnel have been the direct
targets of killings, kidnappings and extortion by armed
groups. We consider this to be unacceptable. Also, we
are concerned that past United Nations efforts have not
yielded results owing to extraneous circumstances,
such as the failure to pay police salaries, which have
hampered the achievement of the objectives we all
seek.

We believe that progress in the political and
security situation is necessary for the effective delivery
of humanitarian assistance to the population of
Somalia. We all know that if the security situation does
not improve, more people require humanitarian
assistance. For Costa Rica, it is crucial to protect and
facilitate the delivery of such assistance. My delegation
welcomed the inclusion of wording along those lines in
resolution 1816 (2008), and we hope that that
dimension will also be included in the preparations for
a future intervention in Somalia.

08-6107]

We agree, moreover, with the Secretary-General
that one of the first objectives in Somalia will be to
secure the airport and seaport of Mogadishu, even
though we understand that this will only be the
beginning of the task of providing security and
ensuring delivery of humanitarian assistance.

With respect to piracy off the coast of Somalia,
my delegation expresses concern over the increasing
number of cases of armed robbery and kidnappings on
the sea. We note and are grateful for the efforts made
by the countries that have come forward to comply
with the provisions of resolution 1816 (2008) and to
ensure a coordinated international effort to combat acts
of piracy.

We agree with the Secretary-General that it is
crucial to maintain coherence in international efforts in
Somalia in order to address the various aspects of this
conflict. Thus, the establishment of links between the
African Union Mission in Somalia, the current anti-
piracy operation and future interventions should make
it possible to effectively respond to the causes and
consequences of lawlessness in Somalia, which now
poses a threat to international peace and security.

Finally my delegation has carefully studied the
observations made by the Secretary-General. As I said
earlier, we need further analysis and more information
in order to take part in a discussion on the nature of an
intervention. We hope that the countries and
organizations that have the capacity to provide
personnel and resources necessary to take part in those
efforts will respond to the call of the Secretary-General.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

I invite Council members to informal
consultations on this item at 3 pm. today.
The meeting rose at I p.m.
