Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I should like to thank
Special Representative Jacques Klein for what I found
to be a very thought-provoking presentation, in terms
of both the immediate challenges and the long-term
strategic options for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It was an
intervention that, I think, will bear careful re-reading.

The representative of Sweden will shortly make
an intervention on behalf of the European Union, to
which we fully subscribe, so I will limit my remarks to
one or two particular points.

On the basis of the Secretary-General's report, we
agree that the democratization and development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina are essential to the overall
stability of the Balkans. It is important to bear in mind,
however, that the challenge is to establish not just a
multi-ethnic society, but a multi-ethnic society that
recognizes and accommodates cultural and ethnic
identities which transcend international borders. In this
task, we are in many ways breaking new ground. It is
the key to reconciliation and long-term peace in the
Balkans and a task that simply has to be completed. A
regional approach is essential and there is a
responsibility on all States of the region to strengthen
their inter-State relations.

We condemn the recent actions of nationalist
parties, which have heightened ethnic tensions, and we
urge all parties to work within the legal institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to promote their legitimate
interests. We are pleased that the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is
monitoring police investigations into the violence in
Banja Luka and Trebinje. I should like to ask Mr. Klein
to what extent he believes that this political incitement
has been generated by those who have drawn economic
profit from past political instability.

UNMIBH has certainly made significant progress
in restructuring the law enforcement agencies in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, particularly the police. Nevertheless,
problems linked to low salaries, housing, judicial
follow-up and low minority representation are
worrying. Again, I should like to ask Mr. Klein if this
is something that is common throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina or that is more marked in certain areas.

We welcome very much the reported progress on
illegal migration and trafficking. We do remain
concerned, however, about the situation of refugees
and internally displaced persons. We recognize that
significant progress has been achieved and urge the
authorities in the country and elsewhere to make
further progress on this issue and on implementing
property-rights laws, both of which are essential to the
normalization and stability of the region.
We note Mr. Klein's comments on the bringing to
justice of the perpetrators of crimes committed under
previous regimes. We would encourage all parties in
the region to make further progress on this extremely
important issue and to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We support, in this context, the efforts of
the Stabilization Force in apprehending indicted war
criminals.

Finally, we would like to support the extension of
the UNMIBH mandate until June 2002.

