Mr. Schumacher (Germany): We very much
welcome the initiative of the Mexican presidency to
discuss questions related to Chapter VIII of the
Charter. I would like to remind colleagues that this is in
the tradition of the founding Conference of the United
Nations in San Francisco in 1945, where Mexico and
the other Latin American States played a vital role in
drafting that particular Chapter of the Charter, based on
the Act of Chapultepec which, only a month before -
March 1945 - had been adopted in Mexico City. So
you, Sir, are acting in a very good tradition.

It goes without saying that I fully associate
myself with, and argue along the lines of, the statement
of the European Union, which will be made later. This
is clearly not only an automatic place holder. It is in
particular the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe which have
significantly developed their capabilities in the past in
the areas of conflict-prevention and cooperation with
the United Nations.

The remarkably promising development of
relationships between the United Nations and regional
organizations can be followed in the annual reports of
the Secretary-General since 1997-98, and I believe that
we owe it in particular to the initiatives of the
incumbent Secretary-General that the potential of
Chapter VIII now seems to be unfolding in a very
positive manner.

I will try to limit myself to a few points in an
attempt to contribute positively to this ongoing debate,
which is part of an overall process of reform of the
United Nations - a process which has developed in
particular since the Millennium Assembly and which
has underlined how relevant this Organization remains
today as the vital cornerstone of multilateral
cooperation.

My first point is that, while the United Nations
has been extending and strengthening continuously its
instruments for conflict management over the past
decade - from early warning to prevention, and from
peacekeeping to, in particular, post-conflict peace-
building - expectations directed towards the
Organization have risen dramatically.

The Secretary-General has just mentioned the fact
that many of the challenges we are facing are global,
with the potential to threaten not only our stability but
our very survival. The United Nations is simply not
capable of coping alone with challenges of this
dimension - either logistically or financially. A
supportive and increasingly complementary
interchange between the United Nations and regional
organizations becomes ever more important.

The second point is that, however, the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security lies with the United Nations. The
Security Council is the central forum for international
conflict management. If the primacy of the Council
with respect to the maintenance of international peace
and security is rejected, the very foundations of
international law, as represented by the Charter, will be
brought into question. No other universally accepted
legal basis for constraining wanton acts of violence
ex1sts.

It is imperative that regional security operations
remain mandated by the Council if the legal basis of
the international security system is to be maintained.

Thirdly, to bring this primacy of the United
Nations and the Security Council and the
complementarity of regional organizations into synch
with one another, we strongly suggest that the dialogue
between the Council and the regional organizations be
put on a regular and substantive basis. We might be
able to do it already, within the framework of the Arria
formula.

We might even use this important issue as a
starting point to do away with antiquated practices and
customs of the Council, such as the Arria and other
formulas, that do not help to increase the transparency
and efficiency of the Council's work.

Having heard nine years of debate in the General
Assembly in the Open-ended Working Group on
Council reform, I think that today we need to bring
some fresh air into the work of this body.

Fourthly, for many, many reasons, the Security
Council needs to improve and strengthen its channel of
dialogue with the General Assembly. As far as this is
concerned, we are already on a good track. As far as
regional organizations are concerned, the Charter itself
reflects a link between Article 52 - the main Article
of Chapter VIII - and the responsibilities of the
General Assembly, through the reference to Article 35
in paragraph 4 of Article 52.

The General Assembly is currently involved in an
important process aimed at discussing and further
developing a draft resolution on conflict prevention. A
dialogue between the Council and the General
Assembly could be of help to both bodies and might
serve as an early-warning mechanism for regional
powers, and vice-versa for the Security Council, as a
source of information for openings and limits regions
might have in influencing and mastering emerging
crises.

As a last point, let me say something about
Africa. We will have important speakers from Africa
later, in particular from the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), which is already
playing such an important role in the conflict-
prevention and peacekeeping operations and activities
of the Security Council.

I should like to welcome once again the efforts
that have been made to establish and strengthen the
African security architecture through the pan-African
Peace and Security Council. We are aware of our
commitment emanating from the Millennium
Declaration and remain committed to strengthening
African capabilities in the field of conflict prevention
and to enhancing technical and financial assistance, so
that by 2010 African countries and regional and
subregional organizations will be able to engage more
efficiently to prevent and resolve violent conflicts on
the continent, as laid down in the African Action Plan
by the G-8 leaders at Kananaskis.

