Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of all, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important meeting on Sierra Leone in these particularly
grave circumstances. On behalf of the current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and on my own
behalf, I should like to congratulate you warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I should also
like to wish you well in your difficult and noble mission.
I congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Robert Fowler
of Canada, on having so ably presided over the work of this
Council last month.

I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute on this
solemn occasion to those countries that have contributed
troops to the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and to convey the sincere condolences of
Algeria and the OAU for the lives lost during the tragic
events that have taken place recently in Sierra Leone.

Today, our Organization faces an extremely grave
challenge. It is threatened as never before, in body and in
soul, in its role as the last bulwark against injustice and
arbitrary action, and in its action and will to preserve peace
and security and to ensure that reason prevails.

Over the past few days, we have witnessed an
unprecedented explosion of violence in Sierra Leone caused
by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels, whose
principal target was the United Nations Mission in that
country. Today, according to the information we have
received, more than 230 UNAMSIL troops are still detained
by the rebel movement, and an equal number are still
missing. The people of Sierra Leone, who have undergone
the worst of horrors and suffered enormously over the past
eight years, are once again faced with the murderous
madness of the men of Mr. Sankoh, whose commitment
under the Lome Agreement was supposed to make him into
a positive actor in the rebuilding of a new Sierra Leone.

Faced with this unacceptable challenge, the United
Nations must be extremely firm and act with all the
determination that the seriousness of the situation requires.
Clearly, it must demand and obtain the unconditional
release of all UNAMSIL personnel currently in the hands
of the RUF, and it must hold that movement responsible
for their safety and well-being.

It must also, as soon as possible, regain its prestige
and credibility and restore its image, which has been so
seriously damaged by the criminal acts of a band of
outlaws.

In Africa, we see these indescribable actions by the
RUF as a serious setback to the cause of peace - which,
thanks to work of our pan-African organization, had seen
significant progress in past months - and as an
unacceptable affront to the United Nations and an even
more serious affront to the very concept of the
maintenance of peace in the world in general and on our
continent in particular.

Faced with this challenge, our Secretary-General has
actively sought to find ways and means of ensuring an
appropriate reaction by the international community so as
to establish a rapid reaction force that could reverse the
events in Sierra Leone, and I pay him special tribute for
doing so. We also know that he has constantly been in
touch with African leaders, in particular the current
Chairman of the OAU, in an attempt to find a way out of
the crisis. President Bouteflika has, for his part, spared no
effort since the beginning of the crisis, maintaining
frequent contact with the leaders in the region, particular
the leaders of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), in order to cope with the challenge of
the actions of the RUF.

In this context, in a message to the summit meeting
of countries members of the ECOWAS follow-up
committee, which met in Abuja on 9 May, he condemned
the acts of violence and hostage taking against United
Nations personnel, calling them intolerable attacks against
UNAMSIL and against the commendable efforts of the
international community to promote the implementation
of the Lome Peace Agreement.

What is happening today in Sierra Leone is one of
the most serious crises ever to face the United Nations, at
a time when it is just beginning to find its feet in a
constantly evolving world in which it is called upon to
become increasingly involved in the continent.

Our Organization's credibility is being seriously
challenged, and it is in danger of having its authority
reduced and its role in conflict settlement and the

 

maintenance of international peace and security challenged.

After the tragedies of Rwanda and Bosnia, the United
Nations cannot afford another failure today. Images of Blue
Helmets taken hostage, used as human shields or stripped
of their weapons and uniforms by gangs of bandits are not
acceptable. They are the very negation of all of the values
that this world Organization personifies and a signal to the
enemies of peace that the United Nations is not an
institution that must always be respected or, if necessary,
feared, but that it is a mere scarecrow, unable to make itself
felt and to command respect.

Less than a year ago, after much effort, ECOWAS
was able, thanks to Togolese mediation and the spirit of
compromise demonstrated by the legitimate Government of
Sierra Leone, to see the Lome Peace Agreement concluded.
This welcome development was to put an end to years of
devastating civil war, a cycle of particularly brutal violence
that reached its nadir in January 1999, when rebels attacked
Freetown. Sacrifices made by the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) force allowed it, at a difficult moment,
to repel the attackers and protect people who had already
been so sorely tried against further horror. Here, I would
pay a well-deserved tribute to that force, whose work was
a decisive factor in making the RUF rebels and Johnny
Paul Koroma's partisans sit at the negotiating table and
conclude the Lorne Agreement on 7 July 1999.

Need I recall here that the many appeals by ECOWAS
for significant international logistic and financial assistance
for ECOMOG went unanswered? Troop contributors to
ECOMOG, particularly Nigeria, had to finance out of their
own national resources a very burdensome operation
without the strong material support they were entitled to
expect from the international community.

This test of UNAMSIL shows very clearly that the
mandate and resources available to it are not and never
were adequate to the situation. We must all recognize here
that, with the mandate and pathetically small resources at
its disposal, that force is unable to preserve the peace in
Sierra Leone or even to protect itself against provocation
and acts of violence. We would therefore solemnly appeal
to the Council to review urgently the UNAMSIL mandate
and then adopt a new resolution placing UN AMSIL action
within the context of Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter, making it a peace-enforcement mission.

What we ask of the United Nations is, of course, not
to wage war against the rebellion, but rather that the
Mission have the mandate, troops and weapons necessary
to defend itself against attack by the enemies of peace.
The United Nations soldiers have become the targets of
rebel attacks. The force must also be able to discharge its
mission to ensure and monitor compliance with the
provisions of the Peace Agreement of 7 July 1999 and to
protect the people against further outbreaks of violence.
Increasing UNAMSIL's troop strength and giving it the
weapons it needs is an essential imperative today.

I should like to inform the Council of the
willingness of certain members of ECOWAS, clearly
stated at their 9 May summit in Abuja, to make the
necessary troops available to the United Nations to
strengthen its Mission in Sierra Leone. Countries with the
necessary resources should, for their part, offer an
appropriate logistic and financial contribution to
UNAMSIL so that it can best discharge its revised
mandate.

This is a matter of urgency. There is danger in
delay. Africa is willing to shoulder its share of the
responsibility. It expects the Security Council to react
firmly and resolutely, commensurate with the grave
situation in Sierra Leone and its challenges. The Council
must assume its responsibilities, all its responsibilities,
and the sooner the better.

