The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the represenatative of the
Russian Federation.

We are grateful to Ambassador Gary Quinlan for
his briefing on the work of the Committee he leads.
During the reporting period, the experts submitted a
final report (S/2014/394, annex) and three reports of
incidents. We would should like to share our preliminary
impressions thereon.

With regard to the incident reports, the Russian
delegation has already expressed its position at the
Committee's meetings. With regard to our position
on the conclusions and the proposal to develop an
implementation note with regard to the incident
concerning the interdiction in the Red Sea of the vessel
Klos C, we will make those views known later following
a thorough review of the documents. For now, I should
like to say that any external activity by the Committee
at this extremely sensitive stage of the negotiation
process on the Iranian nuclear programme seems to us
not to be very timely, especially given that this involves
such a difficult matter as arms smuggling, where the
accusations against the Iranian side are based largely
on circumstantial evidence.

With regard to the final report, we would once
again note that the experts should be very careful in
their conclusions and assessments. Any information
not supported by concrete facts with regard to possible
violations of the sanctions regime could have a negative
impact on the conduct of the negotiations between the
group of six and Iran and the latter's cooperation with
the International Atomic Energy Agency, and should
not be included in the report.

We also have some questions about the
recommendations of the Group of Experts, in particular
about more active cooperation with the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) when it comes to the implementation
of the Iran sanctions regime. The Security Council
should not impose on countries the establishment of
this mechanism or determine the modalities of its work.
The provision by States of additional information not
mandated by the Council's resolutions, whether to the
Committee, the Panel of Experts or other international
organizations or mechanisms or on a bilateral basis, can
be done only on a voluntary basis. All accountability
requirements are set out in the resolutions of the
Security Council. We have repeatedly drawn attention
to the fact that the practice of clarifications to seek to
interpret is unacceptable.

I would also like to touch on the issue of
certain initiatives put forward in furtherance of the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in the final
report. First, we would like to emphasize that it is
unacceptable to use the conclusions until they have
been substantively discussed in the Committee. That
applies first and foremost to contacts between members
of the Panel and other bodies referred to in the report,
such as the FATF.

Secondly, we do not support considering the
possibility ofjoint meetings between the Committees
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
1737 (2006) and 1718 (2006). While it is very important
to have an exchange of experiences among the Council's
subsidiary bodies, we believe that the Council's
sanctions regimes on Iran and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea differ both in nature and political
background.
As to the considerations of the experts on the
future of the sanctions regime once a comprehensive
settlement of the situation concerning the Iranian
nuclear programme has been reached, this is an
issue beyond the Panel's mandate. The Panel should
not interfere in this extremely sensitive process. In
particular, it is unacceptable to prejudge its outcome.

For many years, Russian diplomacy has actively
worked in the interests of achieving a just settlement on
Iran's nuclear programme on the basis of the principles
of reciprocity and a step-by-step approach set out by
Russian Russia's Foreign Minister, Sergey Lavrov. In
that regard, we welcome the holding in Vienna from
16 to 20 June of another full round of negotiations
between the group of six and Iran. The talks were very
useful and confirmed the overall readiness to continue
cooperating in a constructive vein and to hold detailed
discussions. The sides began to work work directly on
the text of the future agreement, which will continue
during the the next round of negotiations in Vienna
from 2 to 15 July.

We will continue to do everything we can to achieve
a final comprehensive resolution of all issues related to
the Iranian nuclear programme and for the lifting of the
sanctions against Tehran put in place by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.
