Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): While Zimbabwe is
encouraged that peace in Angola remains within sight and
within reach, and that the Government and UNITA continue
to express their willingness to fulfil their remaining
obligations, we are seriously concerned at the persistent
delays in the actual and full implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. We agree entirely with the Secretary-General
that there is an urgent need, particularly on the part of
UNITA, to display a greater sense of urgency in
implementing the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and
of the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In this regard, we welcome as a new ray of hope the
lO-point agreement reached on 9 January 1998 on the
new implementation timetable, which envisages that major
progress should be achieved by the end of February 1998,
when the UNITA leadership is expected to install itself in
Luanda and to transfer its two strongholds to the control
of State administration. In our View, the new
implementation timetable addresses the remaining aspects
of the peace process, which are: full normalization of
State administration throughout the country, including the
areas of Andulo and Bailundo; demobilization of UNITA
troops; and the transformation of the UNITA radio into a
non-partisan facility.

We wish quickly to point out, however, that whereas
the latest agreement reaffirms the commitment of the
Government and of UNITA to the peace process, its
implementation without further prevarication or
procrastination would actually give the people of Angola
an unprecedented opportunity to stand, firmly and
irrevocably, on the very threshold of peace in their
country. We therefore appeal to the Government of
Angola and to UNITA, in the interest of peace and
progress in their own country, to adhere to and make
good on their commitments - commitments that they
voluntarily entered into. We also welcome and encourage
the ongoing contacts to facilitate the meeting, inside
Angola, of President Dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi.

Zimbabwe has contributed some of its very scarce
resources in support of the peace process in Angola.
Although we will soon be withdrawing the battalion
which is now stationed in Angola, Zimbabwean military
observers will stay on and remain available to the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA). We are
deeply convinced that the continued presence of the
United Nations in Angola is much needed in order to
facilitate the full implementation of the remaining
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and to enhance the
peace process. We therefore fully support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
mandate of MONUA be extended for three months, until
30 April 1998, as outlined in his report. I happen to know

 

also that this extension accords fully with the wishes of the
Organization of African Unity.

