Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council created the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda by resolution 955 (1994) of 8
November 1994. The fundamental aim of the Tribunal was
to bring to justice those persons presumed responsible for
the genocide and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law committed in Rwanda in 1994.

The genocide perpetrated in that country is appalling.
In our opinion, no one will forget the images that were
transmitted by all the media, showing citizens roaming the
countryside, having left their homes for fear of suffering the
cruel fate of the rest of their families. We will not forget
the spectacle of the corpses piled up after the various
massacres.

The persons presumed responsible for these criminal
acts must be tried as an example to others. There is
overwhelming proof of who the real perpetrators of these
calculated and systematic acts are. These acts represent a
violation of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 1948.

Concerned not to let the perpetrators of these crimes
evade justice, the Security Council decided to establish the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The competence
of the Tribunal and its temporal and geographic limits were
defined: it is competent to try persons responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
perpetrated on the territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
citizens responsible for such violations on the territories
of neighbouring States. The competence of the Tribunal
is thus extra-territorial, extending beyond Rwanda to
neighbouring countries, because atrocious massacres were
also committed in Rwandan refugee camps in these
countries.

The International Criminal Tribunal must continue
its work of trying the accused and fulfil its responsibility
to bring these people to trial without delay. The citizens
of Rwanda and the world are waiting for justice to be
done and for the criminals to be punished.

This is why my delegation Wishes to facilitate the
judicial procedures and today supports the establishment
of a third Trial Chamber so that the Tribunal can actively
pursue its efforts to improve the effectiveness of its work,
strengthen its working methods and procedures, and try
the accused promptly. Therefore, Bahrain will vote in
favour of the draft resolution that we have before us.

