Mr. Djinnit: We are gratified that, at the
initiative of the United Republic of Tanzania, the
Security Council has decided to hold an open debate on
peace, security and development in the Great Lakes
region. Madam President, your initiative comes as no
surprise to us at the African Union as we are fully
aware of the long-standing commitment of your
country to the issue of peace and security on the
continent as a whole and of the laudable efforts it
continues to invest in the promotion of peace,
understanding and cooperation, in the Great Lakes
region in particular.

I wish to pay special tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Jakaya Kikwete who, as Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Tanzania, played a leading role in the efforts
which culminated in the convening in Dar es-Salaam,
on 20 November 2004, of the first Summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. I
cannot but seize this opportunity to renew to the United
Republic of Tanzania our heartfelt congratulations on
the recently concluded peaceful elections held in that
country resulting in the election of former Foreign
Minister Kikwete as President of the United Republic
of Tanzania.

Today's meeting provides us with an opportunity
to take stock of the progress so far made in the
initiative since the Dar es-Salaam Summit and to
deliberate on the best ways and means to create the
most propitious conditions for the convening of the
second Summit, which is scheduled to be held in
Nairobi in the course of this year.

It was in the same spirit of building momentum
for the initiative that the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union held, in Addis Ababa on 17 June
2005, its first-ever open session, which discussed the
process of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. On that occasion, the Peace and
Security Council adopted a declaration in which it
reiterated its strong support for the initiative and
endorsed the decision of the Dar es-Salaam Summit
declaring the region a special reconstruction and
development zone accompanied by a special
reconstruction fund.

It is encouraging to note that all the draft
programmes of action, projects and protocols, and the
document on the follow-up mechanism, have been
prepared and are expected to be finalized during the
forthcoming regional ministerial meeting scheduled to
be held in Bangui in mid-February, thus paving the
way for the adoption of the proposed Security, Stability
and Development Pact at the second Summit.

In addition to the progress in the preparation of
the relevant documents, it is also encouraging to note
that the regional political environment has improved
since the last Summit, in Dar es-Salaam, as a result of
the significant progress achieved in peace processes in
the region on the one hand, and through existing
verification and confidence-building mechanisms on
the other. With respect to the progress in the peace
processes, we welcome in particular the establishment
of the post-transition Government in Burundi, the
progress in the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement signed between the Government of
the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) in January 2005 and, the successful
holding of the referendum on the Constitution in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, laying the basis for
general elections by the end of June 2006 to conclude
the transitional period.

For its part, the African Union, which is strongly
backing the peace processes in the region, also
undertook to contribute to the stabilization of the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo through the neutralization and disarmament of
the various armed groups operating in the area, in
particular, the members of the ex-Forces armees
rwandaises (FAR) and Interahamwe. A reconnaissance
mission was recently dispatched to the region and
neighbouring countries; it consulted extensively with
all stakeholders on the best ways to assist the
Democratic Republic of the Congo armed forces, in
cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), in neutralizing and disarming the armed
groups. The outcome of the mission will be examined
soon by the Peace and Security Council, which is
expected to authorize our Commission to undertake the
preparatory work that is necessary for the deployment
of an African Union force, including the development
of a concept of operation and the definition of the
logistic and financial requirements.

At this juncture, it is worth recalling that the
Organization of African Unity, which was closely
associated with the development of the idea of
convening an international conference on the Great
Lakes region, endorsed the initiative in 1994. Since
then, it has been working hand in hand with the United
Nations in promoting the initiative. In the process,
sustained efforts have been made to generate the
necessary regional political support that was
subsequently solemnly stated in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration.

In Dar es-Salaam, the leaders of the region also
affirmed their ownership of the process, while the
international community, and in particular the Group of
Friends, pledged continued support. For its part, the
African Union remains committed to supporting the
countries of the region as they prepare for the second
Summit, to be held in Nairobi, and during the
implementation phase of the Pact. While expressing the
African Union's appreciation to the Group of Friends
for supporting the preparatory process of the
Conference, I would like to call on its members to
remain committed to the process beyond the Nairobi
Summit.

Although the initial concept of the Conference
was developed from a purely security perspective, it
has since evolved to include democracy, good
governance, economic development and regional
integration, as well as humanitarian and social issues.
That notwithstanding, security issues remain at the
core of the underlying concerns of the initiative. In that
respect, I believe that the initiative provides us with a
unique opportunity to address a significant security
challenge for the continent. Indeed, restoring peace and
stability in a pivotal area of the continent, including
three vast and wealthy countries, Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, will
undoubtedly have an important and positive impact on
peace, security and economic development throughout
the continent.

I would also like to underline that the Great
Lakes initiative is a clear illustration of the new vision
of the African Union as embodied in its Constitutive
Act, the New Partnership for Africa's Development,
and the Declaration of the Conference on Security,
Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa,
recognizing the interlinkages between peace, security,
democracy and development and calling for unity that
is based not only on geography and common borders,
but also on political will and common values.

On the basis of that vision, and inspired by the
progress being made in promoting peaceful solutions to
the various conflicts afflicting our continent, the
African Union has recently embarked on the
elaboration of a strategic framework for post-conflict
reconstruction and development in Africa. Similarly,
the recent establishment by the United Nations of the
Peacebuilding Commission is a most welcome
development, as it provides the international
community with a unique instrument to assist countries
emerging from conflict in their transition to
reconstruction and development.

Finally, through the Great Lakes initiative, the
countries of the region have recognized the value-
added that such an initiative would bring to their
individual efforts aimed at promoting peace, security,
stability and development. They have committed
themselves to owning the process and to mobilizing
their resources to sustain the initiative.

In the same vein, the continued political and
financial support of the international community will
be required so as to enable the countries of the region
to implement the Security, Stability and Development
Pact, to be adopted in Nairobi, in the spirit of
partnership, which, together with the principle of
ownership, has been guiding the process. I am
confident that this Security Council meeting will send
a strong and unequivocal message of encouragement
and support for the initiative, given the important tasks
and formidable challenges that lie ahead in the post-
Nairobi phase of the initiative.

