Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): In aligning ourselves with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union, we would like to thank you, Madam,
for organizing this open debate under your presidency.
Croatia deeply appreciates the personal presence today
of the Secretary-General's two key representatives for
Haiti, as well as the Prime Minister of Haiti, Her
Excellency Ms. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, and is
grateful for their valuable insights for the Council's
consideration.

Croatia would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Secretary-General's new Special
Envoy for Haiti, former President Clinton, on his
appointment. We welcome his Vision and look to his
leadership to mobilize much needed international
investment to help create a better future for millions of
Haitians.

Furthermore, Croatia commends and reiterates its
support for the tremendous work carried out by Special
Representative Annabi, the civil and military
components of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the United Nations
country team. Alongside the Secretary-General, their
steadfast dedication and efforts are a strong
reaffirmation of the commitment of the international
community to help Haiti lay strong foundations for its
future political and economic stability.

While we are encouraged that some progress has
been made on a number of fronts, the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/439) once again indicates that
meaningful progress remains elusive for many in Haiti,
especially in the socio-economic field. The interlinked
challenges Haiti still faces today require sustained and
integrated assistance from the broad-based membership
of the international community, in line with Haitian
priorities.

Indeed, we have watched closely as improved
stability has paved the way for increased international
assistance and investment, which are vital for
significant changes in Haiti. To this end, Croatia
welcomes the outcome of the international donors
conference in April, along with Haiti's subsequent debt
exoneration and loans earmarked for poverty reduction
and pro-growth expenditures, as important signals of
growing confidence by the international community
that Haiti is on the right track. To this end, we hope
that the envisaged trade mission to be led by the
Special Envoy, Mr. Clinton, in October this year will
further contribute to this growing momentum of
international political commitment towards helping the
Haitian people create a sustainable environment in
which to foster better livelihoods. Despite all the
challenges, at this moment of historic opportunity for
progress in Haiti, it is imperative that the international
donor community honour pledges made earlier.

Simultaneously, the Haitian Government must
match this international goodwill and support by
consolidating its hard-won gains with continued
political momentum to translate commitments into real
action on the ground. This will entail further
strengthening of the improved, yet tenuous, internal
political cooperation and political dialogue achieved
over the past few months. Only a fully inclusive
political process will ensure timely elections and
necessary constitutional reforms. In this respect, the
Senatorial elections in April served as an important
litmus test for Haiti, from which important lessons
should be learned. A strong and effective response is
required to address the incidents of voting
inconsistencies and subsequent incidents of violence, if
public confidence in the electoral system is to be
restored.

Croatia is encouraged to learn that during the
reporting period key legislation was enacted, including
the approval of the national budget and the
establishment of a minimum wage. We note also that
advancements have been made by some of the
presidential commissions in tackling issues of national
priority. These are important steps which we hope will
have a positive impact on the daily lives of many in
Haiti. However, we remain concerned over continued
procrastination on the implementation of the joint
legislative agenda from 2008.

Croatia welcomes the continued progress made in
the security environment despite increasing tensions
over the prevailing socio-economic challenges.
Maintaining stability in Haiti requires the constant
engagement of the Haitian authorities to strengthen key
State institutions and to complete constitutional
reforms. Strong foundations for a politically and
economically secure Haiti cannot be created without
bolstering the rule of law. An improved legislative
framework and the creation of a fully functioning,
independent, credible justice apparatus and penal
system, in adherence to international standards, is a
critical prerequisite for curbing the current
environment of impunity for both violence and
corruption and in winning greater domestic confidence
in State institutions. This in turn calls for continued
international funding to allow for further
professionalization and capacity-building, especially
with regard to the national police force and the justice
sector.

Cognizant of the fact that long-term sustainable
economic development is underpinned by security and
stability, Croatia too recognizes the vital role the
United Nations Stabilization Mission has to play in
assisting the Haitian authorities in addressing the
remaining cross-cutting challenges in the country.
Notwithstanding this, the future of Haiti lies with the
Haitian people, who have primary responsibility for
ensuring progress.

We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
for a further 12-month extension of the mission's
mandate, accompanied by some readjustment of the
force capacity, as outlined in the report, as clear
recognition of the positive evolution of circumstances
under the stabilization process. In Croatia's view, a
strong United Nations presence on the ground via
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team is
needed for the foreseeable future to help lock in
progress to date and to reduce the susceptibility to
reversal, through further consolidation of political and
economic reforms.

We hope too that any future reconfiguration of
MINUSTAH will include greater participation by
female officers in any proposed increase of its police
capabilities. Croatia is of the view that female officers
would not only be integral to assisting victims of
gender-based and sexual violence, but would also serve
as important role models for their counterparts in the
emerging national police force.

