Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
for her briefing on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo following the elections held on
30 December 2018. We also thank Mr. Joseph Malanji,
Minister for Foreign Affairs onambia; Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations; Mr. Corneille
Nangaa Yobeluo, President of the Commission electorale
nationale independante; and Monseigneur Utembi,
President of the Conference episcopale nationale du
Congo, for their insightful briefings.

Cote d'lvoire welcomes the generally calm and
peaceful environment in which the presidential,
legislative and provincial elections of 30 December
2018 were held. It appreciates the many efforts made
by the Congolese Government and the Commission
electorale nationale independante to meet the technical,
logistical and security challenges that arose during the
elections. My delegation takes note of the provisional
results of the presidential election, announced by the
Commission on 10 January. It urges all stakeholders to
preserve the overall peaceful atmosphere that prevailed
during the elections and in the waiting period before the
results were announced and encourages them to employ
institutional and legal channels to contest them. In that
regard, we echo the call made by the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.

The political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must not divert the attention of our Council
from the security and humanitarian challenges in the
country. The recurrence of destabilizing activities by
armed groups and the persistent Ebola epidemic have
had an adverse impact on the humanitarian situation
in several provinces, in particular North Kivu, South
Kivu, Tanganyika and certain regions of the West,
including Kasai, and remain a source of concern. In
an environment marked by ongoing attacks by armed
groups against civilians, peacekeepers and members
of the Forces armees de la Republique Democratique
du Congo, my delegation encourages the Congolese
authorities to continue and strengthen cooperation with
MONUSCO to end the activities of armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

C6te d'Ivoire welcomes the continued engagement
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all MONUSCO personnel, as well
as the staff of United Nations agencies, in the process
of ending the crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It also welcomes the multifaceted support
that regional and international organizations and all
partners continue to provide to the country.

