Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to thank the German presidency as well as
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for the efforts he is making
regarding the peace process in the Middle East and to
preserve the parameters of the process. I thank him as
well for his tireless efforts to contain the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and for his
efforts to achieve inter-Palestinian reconciliation. I
also thank the representatives of Eco-Peace for their
comprehensive briefings.
The occupation of the Arab territories since 1967
is one of the issues that have been discussed by the
Council for decades. One generation after another has
listened to briefings and presentations that are similar,
sometimes identical, to one another. We have been
patient, hoping that a day will come when the rights
will be restored and peace, security and stability will
prevail in the region.

We remain certain that the Security Council and
the Organization as a whole, including the Secretary-
General, will remain the legitimate guarantors of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian and Syrian
peoples. However, we must consider the negative
developments concerning the Palestinian question
and the occupied Syrian Golan. We had not thought
that it would be possible to add even more injustice to
the historical injustice suffered by the Arab people,
meaning additional injustice after half a century of the
injustice already done to them. That is why I would
like to reaffirm the content of the communique issued
by the Arab Kings and Presidents during their summit
in Tunisia.

On the issue of the recent United States decision
regarding the occupied Syrian Golan, we affirm that in
no way will it alter the legal status of the Syrian Golan,
which has been occupied by Israel since 1967. It also
has no bearing on resolution 497 (1981), which does not
recognize Israeli's annexation of the Syrian Golan.

I will not discuss the suffering of the Palestinian
people here, as we all know just how much they
are suffering. We heard a briefing on that issue
earlier today. Nonetheless, I would like to take this
opportunity to draw the Council's attention to the fact
that we are facing a new development in the Palestinian
question, particularly with regard to the fate of the
two-State solution, which has been adopted by both the
Palestinian and the Israeli people, as well as endorsed
by the international community, and which benefits and
responds to the aspirations of both parties.

The next stage requires us to fully understand
that there can be no viable solution to the Palestinian
question based on the status quo, which we consider
a step backwards that will have serious consequences.
Solutions cannot be based on the illegal annexation of
occupied territory or on giving Palestinians economic
incentives while ignoring the fact that the real issue
is a political one. We are talking about a people who
have lost their homeland and generations of whom have
been born and have lived under occupation. No one
will emerge victorious if the legitimate international
terms of reference and norms are violated, because the
fact is that the Palestinian and Israeli peoples share a
common fate.

The two parties must decide their destinies,
especially as we are now at a historic crossroads. They
can either live in peace in two States living side by
side, through negotiations based on the 4 June 1967
borders, including Jerusalem and under the terms of
the Arab Peace Initiative, or they can adopt temporary
measures in the hope of achieving political victory
under the spectre ofa single State, which can only bring
enormous challenges for both peoples. There is no third
option. Neither party can emerge victorious or realize
its aspirations at the expense of the other, whichever
road they decide to take.

In conclusion, 40 years have elapsed since the peace
treaty between Egypt and Israel was signed. It remains
an example for all to follow, as it laid the groundwork for
achieving a fair and comprehensive peace in the region.
True peace, which serves the people, is based uniquely
on the acknowledgement by the parties concerned of the
importance of restoring people's rights and ending the
occupation. We are confident that both the Palestinian
and Israeli parties are capable of arriving at such a
peace, as long as they prioritize the genuine interests
and security of their peoples.

