Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely and
important debate, as well as for circulating a very
useful background paper on the subject of peace-
building. I, like my colleagues, would like to welcome
the Secretary-General, who by his presence here
demonstrates the importance of the subject that we are
discussing.

Just 10 years ago, if we had tried to hold such an
open debate, the members of the United Nations
community would have been puzzled. The concept of
peace-building had not fully surfaced at that time. But
in the past decade, after major United Nations
operations in Cambodia, Mozambique, East Timor and
Kosovo, we do seem to know what peace-building
refers to.

In our View, the best single definition of the term
was provided by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, in his 1997 report (A/Sl/950) entitled
"Renewing the United Nations: a programme for
reform". Paragraph 120 of that report states:

"Peace-building may involve the creation or
strengthening of national institutions; the
monitoring of elections; the promotion of human
rights; the provision of reintegration and
rehabilitation programmes; and the creation of
conditions for resumed development. Peace-
building does not replace ongoing humanitarian
and development activities in countries emerging
from crises. Rather it aims to build on them and
introduce further activities or reorientation of
existing ones which reduce the risk of a
resumption of conflict and contribute to creating
conditions most conducive to reconciliation,
reconstruction and recovery. "

Today, the best active examples are the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). In these
large peacekeeping operations, the United Nations
provides an interim civil administration, in addition to
a comprehensive peace-building package, which
involves establishing entire social systems and
governmental institutions from scratch. These are no
easy tasks. The best historical precedent for such large-
scale operations may have been the work carried out
under the Marshall Plan after the Second World War.

Despite the Vivid examples of East Timor and
Kosovo, there continues to be confusion about the term
"peace-building". To obtain some conceptual clarity, it
may be useful to make a distinction between what we
have called three distinct stages of work.

During the first stage, after a conflict has torn
apart a territory or country and there is a desire to re-
establish peace with the help of the international
community, the United Nations gets a mandate to set
up a peacekeeping operation. During the second stage,
to ensure that the peace takes permanent root, a peace-
building component is inserted. Here again, while East
Timor and Kosovo are relatively large operations, we
should not rule out the possibility of small-scale
operations. For example, the current peace-building
work being done in the Central African Republic
continues to be important. During the third and final
stage, the country or territory can - if the first two
stages have been successful - return to nation-
building on its own two feet, with the usual help of the
development community. Here again, Cambodia and
Mozambique provide the best examples of relatively
successful nation-building after the end of United
Nations peace-building.

One clear reason for introducing such conceptual
clarity is to remove the misconception, which surfaced
in some recent debates, that the United Nations is
overstepping its mandate when it goes into peace-
building.

At the conceptual level, we may be able to
introduce some clarity to the term "peace-building". At
the operational level, however, peace-building can be
both messy and difficult. Building a lasting peace after
a sustained and painful conflict is an inherently
difficult exercise. We are human; we find it difficult to
forgive and to live in peace once again with neighbours
who may have brought pain and tragedy into our lives.
Here again I believe that the Secretary-General also
referred to the difficulties of healing the scars of wars
when he spoke earlier today.

Given the difficulty of such work, Singapore tried
to make a modest contribution in this field by
organizing a conference in Singapore in November
1999 called "The Nexus Between Peacekeeping and
Peace-building". This conference was organized by the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the
Institute of Policy Studies of Singapore and the Japan
Institute ofInternational Affairs.

All the speeches and papers presented at the
conference, a summary of the discussions and the
conference co-chairpersons' recommendations have
been compiled in a book. I am happy to demonstrate
this here. Some of you may remember that we actually
launched this book at the Singapore Mission last
October. We commend this book to those researching
and working on peace-building, as it contains many
interesting historical descriptions and reflections that
could guide us. Indeed, in the rest of my remarks this
morning, I plan to cite a few from this book.

For example, when the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Jacques
Forster, spoke, he stressed that the aim of peace-
building was to bring about a sustainable long-term
peace. To accomplish this, he said that we had to
address the root causes of conflict to set in motion "a
virtuous and eventually self-sustaining cycle of peace-

building".

The United Nations University Vice-Rector,
Ramesh Thakur, warned against quick-fix solutions. He
said that "the requirements for sustainable peace are
different from those of band-aid or fire-fighting
responses", and he stressed that "a peace agreement is
no solution if it does not last the distance".

Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi also attended the
conference, and I am glad that he is here with us this
morning. I believe that when he spoke in Singapore he
emphasized the need for the international community
to provide the considerable resources, human and
material, that are essential for peace-building.

The main theme in all their remarks was that for
the United Nations to be successful in its peace-
building efforts, it has to put into place the conditions
for both peace and development. Only then can it exit
the scene knowing that the job was done and done well.
It cannot be overemphasized that if a peacekeeping
mission is pulled out too early, there is a real danger
that the conflict it was deployed to resolve could flare
up again and become worse than before the
peacekeeping operation was established. This would
not only put back any potential solution to the problem;
it would also damage the credibility of the United
Nations itself. It is therefore important that the Security
Council, the United Nations, the international
community and all other actors involved in peace-
building stay the course. Here again I am glad that
other speakers have also made this point in their
remarks earlier today.

Several other speakers at the conference
emphasized the need for all members of the United
Nations family involved in peace-building to work
together. For example, Professor Jonathan Moore from
Harvard University warned that

"the culture and climate of cooperation and
collaboration, mutual respect and reinforcement,
among the various parts of the United Nations
family which converge in complex crises, is not
yet" and I repeat, "is not yet sufficient to ensure a
fruitful relationship between peacekeepers and
peace-builders".

Mr. David Malone, the President of the
International Peace Academy - Ambassador
Greenstock also referred to him- echoed the same
concerns and noted that the world of peace-building is
increasingly characterized by "a multiplicity of actors
with overlapping and sometimes contradictory
mandates, all competing for scarce resources and each
seeking a central role and profile". He added that:

"The result is that it is increasingly difficult for
the United Nations or other international actors to
develop a coherent strategy, let alone implement
it, for consolidating what has been achieved
during negotiations."

Other speakers stressed the need for the United
Nations to work closely with the Bretton Woods
institutions to ensure that peace-building remains
sustainable over the long run.

Hence, when the co-chairpersons of the
conference gave their conclusions, one of the key
points that they stressed was the need to develop

"an integrative approach to the design and
architecture of the United Nations mission,
including both peacekeeping and peace-building
components; for all participating agencies to have
a common Vision of the mission's objectives, so
that unnecessary duplication of effort could be
avoided; to ensure that there is a reconciliation
component in the peace-building process, where
peace can continuously be facilitated between
belligerent parties; and for the Security Council,
Bretton Woods institutions and the donor
community to give the United Nations mission
the necessary resources of money, skill and time
for it to complete its mandate".

It is clear from all the remarks that we have cited
that if the international community is to succeed in the
major responsibilities of peace-building, all the major
multilateral institutions must learn to work together as
a team under the leadership of the United Nations.
Here again I am glad that several speakers have already
made the point; I am especially glad that Ambassador
Greenstock emphasized this point in his remarks today.
Indeed, we believe this requirement is also true when
we go from peace-building to nation-building, which is
the third stage. As my Prime Minister said at the
Millennium Summit,

"The United Nations should provide the
leadership within the community of multilateral
organizations to help the poorer nations develop
the capacity to profit from globalization and the
knowledge revolution. The United Nations, the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and
several other international organizations were
created in a different era to deal with different
challenges. They need to be updated.
Furthermore, these institutions work separately,
and not as a team. Today, however, there is an
imperative for them to coordinate their efforts.
They need to get together to assess what
competencies the poorer nations need to develop
in this new era. They should then put in place
coordinated programmes to build capacity for
globalization and the knowledge revolution. I call
upon the Secretary-General to institute regular
dialogues among the multilateral organizations to
bring about such coordination." (A/55/PV5, 19.30)

We hope that the high-level meeting that will take
place tomorrow and in which the President of the
Security Council will participate will address some of
these points. We believe that if all these agencies can
learn to cooperate in the difficult area of peace-
building, this may lay the foundations for closer and
broader cooperation in other areas, too.
