Mr. Nitzan (Israel): I would like to take this
opportunity to respond to comments made by certain
delegations during the course of today's meeting. First
of all, it comes as quite a surprise that the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), with members such as Zimbabwe,
Cuba, Indonesia and Malaysia, has the audacity to
hypocritically lecture Israel on international law and
human rights while many of its leading members,
such as Iran, Saudi Arabia and Syria, are the world's
worst human rights abusers and oppressive regimes.
I was particularly surprised to hear the Indonesian
representative, who so conveniently did not mention
the barbaric beheading of two Indonesian nationals
by Saudi legal authorities only this week. I would
like to remind the Indonesian representative that such
brutality on the part of the Saudi State is one of the
central aspects ofthe situation in the Middle East today,
and that hypocrisy is a central character in NAM's
statements in this institution.

With respect to the Syrian statement, I would
like to mention two things. The first is a fact - the
responsibility of that representative's regime for the
death of more than 220,000 Syrians. No inflammatory
statements or lies can cover that truth. Blaming Israel
for the evacuation of United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) troops from the area of
separation is nothing more than revisionist history. The
truth of the matter is that the Syrian army fled in the
face of advancing Jabhat Al-Nusrah terrorists, leaving
UNDOF troops unprotected and at risk. Recognizing
that danger, Israel opened its gates and provided
UNDOF safe harbour, where they remain to this day.
Syrian lies cannot cover that truth.

I found it interesting to hear an Iranian
representative speaking about Israeli occupation of
Lebanese territory. I believe it is well known that, today,
Iran is the main occupier in the Middle East, including
in Lebanon. The Iranian Revolutionary Guard is a
Security Council-designated entity responsible for the
murder of tens of thousands of civilians in the Middle
East and terror attacks around the world. Iran is the
occupier of Arab territories and Arab capitals in our
region, in Lebanon, in Syria, in Iraq and in Yemen. In
Lebanon, Iran is the chief sponsor and supplier of illicit
advanced weapons to Hezbollah, a designated terrorist
organization. In blatant violation of resolutions 1559
(2004), 1701 (2006) and sanctions resolution 1747
(2007), Iran and its proxies, be it the Al-Assad regime,
Hizbullah, Hamas or the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, are
a threat to international peace and security. It is time to
address that threat.

