Ms. Flores (Honduras): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today's debate. Honduras ascribes to the
Lima declaration, adopted in Bogota on 25 February.

Our hearts go out to the people of Venezuela in
their yearning for liberty, democracy and peace. We
express our solidarity with President Juan Guaido,
interim caretaker of the Venezuelan Republic by virtue
of its Constitution, in the outstanding effort to make
available humanitarian relief to all who are suffering
and to form a transitional Government, in order to
commence the process of calling and organizing free
and fair elections. It is not an easy task under the
prevailing conditions, but a necessary one if Venezuela
is to recover its sovereignty and to fulfil its duties and
obligations as a Member of the Organization.

The population of Venezuela has been deprived for
far too long of fundamental human rights and has been
subjected to barbarous acts under a cruel dictatorship.
Many people have lost their lives and many others
their voice and freedom, and millions have fled to
escape the infernal situation. Yet many brave and
heroic individuals have remained, enduring terrible
hardships. A country rich in all forms of resources is
today devastated and desecrated.

The Organization of American States is a regional
agency and a key strategic partner of the United
Nations, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The Organization
of American States Permanent Council, at its special
meeting of 10 January, adopted a resolution in which
it resolved "to not recognize the legitimacy of Nicolas
Maduro's new term as of the 10th of January of 2019"
and

"[t]o urge all Members States and invite
Permanent Observers of the Organization of
American States to adopt, in accordance with
international law and their national legislation,
diplomatic, political, economic and financial
measures that they consider appropriate, to
contribute to the prompt restoration of the
democratic order of Venezuela".

The constitutional legacy in Latin America is one
that protects citizens from tyrannical rule. Nevertheless,
former President Nicolas Maduro Moros continues to
usurp the powers of the executive branch, undermining
the rule of law and all independent institutions. The
blocking, burning and depriving Venezuelans of
humanitarian aid in the form of food and medicine on
23 February will be accounted for in the list of crimes
against humanity upon investigation and review by the
International Criminal Court.

Honduras supports a peaceful solution whereby
elections are called without delay. Nevertheless, we
recognize and respect the authority and faculties of
the National Assembly and the mechanisms outlined in
the Venezuelan Constitution, pursuant to the diligent
restoration of democracy. The many acts of aggression
committed by Nicolas Maduro and his supporters
against the rule of law, including breaking with the
principles of equality in the General Assembly and the
United Nations, have a great impact beyond our region.
Venezuela's internal dynamics are a matter of concern
in the context of the maintenance of international peace
and security, where there is an urgent responsibility
to protect the innocent a civilian population amid an
impending conflict.

Finally, this house was created to ensure world
peace and must work to prevent all actions that call
into question the credibility of the United Nations
or undermine the critical role of the Organization
of American States, which is the most important
regional organization of the Americas. Rebuilding
a thriving and prosperous Venezuela in the hands of
Venezuelans is possible with the timely restoration of
a functional democracy and strong, independent and
complementary institutions.

