Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalfoins Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Taher Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to wish you every
success. I would also like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her seventeenth report and for her briefing today.

We have reviewed the report of the Prosecutor, in
which Ms. Bensouda presents some ofthe cases that are
before the Court in accordance with the mandate granted
to the ICC in resolution 1970 (2011). In paragraph 4 of
that resolution, the situation in Libya since 15 February
2011 was referred to the Prosecutor of the ICC. In that
regard, the Government of National Accord sent a
letter, on 10 April, addressed to the President of the
Security Council from the President of the Presidential
Council requesting an investigation into the violations
and crimes perpetrated against civilians and civilian
infrastructure in Tripoli and its suburbs. The President
of the Presidential Council stressed the importance of
holding the perpetrators of those crimes accountable
without impunity. He also stressed the importance of
investigating the involvement of certain countries in
assisting Haftar in his aggression against the capital.
Once again, we call upon the international community,
especially the United Nations and its various organs,
including the ICC, to hold the countries involved in the
aggression accountable.

The President of the Presidential Council sent
another letter, on 17 April, addressed to the Prosecutor
of the ICC. In that letter, he clarified the most recent
events in Tripoli resulting from the aggression launched
by Haftar and his forces, which is still under way, and
the resulting crimes against humanity, as he targeted
civilians, schools, hospitals and civilian airports, in
addition to recruiting children. All those responsible for
those criminal acts must be held accountable without
impunity. The perpetrators are defying resolution 2434
(2018) and all the international efforts mentioned in
that resolution. They are also disregarding the United
Nations road map that was adopted on 20 September
2017 to achieve peace in Libya.

The resolution referred as well to individuals and
entities that participate in acts that threaten peace,
stability and security or provide assistance to those
responsible for carrying out such acts. Those entities
and individuals can be subject to targeted sanctions,
according to resolution 2238 (2015), which stresses
that all parties in Libya must engage constructively
with the United Nations and refrain from any acts that
could undermine the United Nations-mediated political
dialogue. The resolution also emphasizes that there can
be no military solution to the conflict in Libya.

My question to all States Members of the United
Nations is the following: are they committed to
implementing Security Council resolutions on the
situation in Libya, which threatens international peace
and security? The Security Council acts in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
meaning that Member States are committed to
implementing Security Council resolutions, according
to Article 25 of the Charter.

Administering justice in all Libyan territories is a
responsibility that falls within Libyan sovereignty and
national jurisdiction. That does not mean that we do not
cooperate with the ICC. On the contrary, the Libyan
judiciary works with the ICC as a partner in a spirit of
cooperation and complementarity between the national
judiciary and the ICC. The Prosecutor has underscored
that cooperation on a number of occasions and in her
various reports.

My country's Government notes the reference in
Ms. Bensouda's recent report to the delay in prosecuting
some of the accused. That is attributed to the security
situation in Libya and the military clashes, which stop
and start in a never-ending cycle of violence.
We would also like to recall that, among those who
are wanted by the national judiciary and the ICC are
persons who do not reside on Libyan territory; they
live outside of Libya. Also, resolution 1970 (2011) did
not oblige the countries where those wanted people
live to extradite them to the Libyan authorities or the
ICC. Paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) states:
"recognizing that States not party to the Rome Statute
have no obligation under the Statute". Some countries
have interpreted that paragraph as encouragement to
cooperate, but not as an obligation.

Resolution 1970 (2011) defines the mandate of the
ICC concerning the situation in Libya. The mandate is
not limited to prosecuting certain individuals, but rather
includes monitoring the situation since 15 February
2011 as a whole. Legally speaking, the situation was
referred by the Council to the ICC, which has the right
to work on cases regardless of whether countries are
cooperating with the Court or not.

From a procedural point of view, the mandate
has now been operationalized. The ICC is mandated
to present periodic briefings, and the Office of the
Prosecutor is ready to consider the cases before it.
The memorandum on burden-sharing between the ICC
Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities
consolidates the cooperation between bothjurisdictions.

From a legal point of View, we stress that the
Libyan judiciary is capable of prosecuting those who
have committed crimes on Libyan territory since
2011. Those crimes are not subject to the statute of
limitations. However, we must take into account the
current security situation in Libya, which significantly
contributes to the perpetration of crimes against
civilians. We emphasize that the Libyan judiciary is
monitoring all those violations.

The Prosecutor, in her recent report, expressed
her concern over the situation of illegal migrants. The
Government of National Accord confirms that it has
taken swift measures to protect those migrants. In
cooperation with the International Organization for
Migration, they were relocated and moved away from
areas of fighting. The Government of National Accord
Wishes to underscore that it is monitoring all violations
targeting hospitals, public facilities and civilian
infrastructure. It has taken all the necessary measures
to protect civilians and keep them away from the
dangers posed by fighting. My Government even asked
the Security Council to dispatch a fact-finding mission
to investigate the crimes perpetrated against civilians
who were often targeted with rockets by Haftar and his
troops during the latest clashes around Tripoli. Those
who committed these crimes must be identified.

In conclusion, the Government of National Accord
stresses its full commitment to resolution 1970 (2011),
especially the mandate of the International Criminal
Court, as set out therein. The Government of National
Accord, which is the only legitimate Government
established under the Skhirat Agreement, hopes that the
Council will consider the situation in Libya as one of its
priorities, without neglecting it. This could be done by
engaging in continuous coordination with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan
Salame, to achieve peace and security and overcome
the current impasse. All Council members must make
concerted efforts to reconcile their differences in order
to adopt a binding resolution that ends the ongoing
hostilities and force those troops that launched the
aggression to go back immediately to where they
came from.

The meeting rose at 4.40 pm.
