Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
convening of this second open debate on terrorism, in
line with the one held under the Chinese presidency (see S/PV.7670) in April, constitutes - ifthere ever was such
a need - eloquent proof of the special attention that
our Council devotes to the scourge afflicting modern
times, namely, violent extremism and its corollary,
terrorism.

That is why, Mr. Minister, the Senegalese
delegation is gratified to see you preside personally
over this meeting and wishes to convey its sincere
gratitude to Egypt for the opportunity afforded us to
engage in an in-depth exercise in considering ways and
means to more effectively tackle that pernicious threat
to international peace and security.

We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and our briefers, Mr. Modi El-Din Afifi, Secretary-
General of the Al-Azhar Islamic Research Academy
and Mr. Steven Crown, Vice President and Deputy
General Counsel of the Microsoft Corporation for their
statements. The delegation of Senegal also associates
itself with the statement that will be made by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

With the development of information and
communication technologies, terrorist groups have
become masters of using the Internet and the social
media to defy States and international organizations,
incite people to violence, recruit adherents and to
fund and plan their heinous terrorist acts. However,
as effective as their strategies have been, violent
extremism and its discourse are based on an erroneous
interpretation of religion and on its instrumentalization
for purely criminal and material purposes. That is
why we have to act together to shatter that perverse
discourse, as was said so eloquently by the Secretary-
General of the Al-Azhar Islamic Research Academy.

In a world that is marked by strong socioeconomic
disparities within States and among them, the terrorist
discourse is being manipulated by skilful propagandists
claiming to embody a vision of the world based on
the precepts of religion with the intent of providing
the illusion, to more than just a few individuals, that
they are the harbingers of hope and the providers of
solutions against oppression, injustice, cultural and
religious aggression.

Unfortunately, that biased narrative enables the
so-called Islamic State and other extremist groups to
recruit foreign terrorists fighters from nearly a hundred
countries. In fact, the current estimate is that there
are 30,000 such fighters. To stem that flow of foreign
terrorist fighters requires of us, Member States, that
we be more diligent in implementing the relevant
provisions of Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2253 (2015).

Senegal is part ofthe Sahel-Saharan region. That is a
region faced with the development of violent extremism
that is fuelled by ignorance, poverty and exploits the
foibles and weaknesses of the international system.
Terrorist groups are attempting to take hold of whole
swaths of territory and undermine existing States.
That calls for the urgent adoption of preventive and
repressive measures to counter such violent extremism
of a religious nature and its corollary, terrorism.

For its part, Senegal has adopted an approach that is
based on prevention, cooperation and rapid response. As
part of our preventive strategy, my country gives pride
of place to education, information and communication
and focuses on raising the awareness ofthe population,
as well as on dialogue with opinion leaders, notably
religious leaders, whose role is essential when it comes
to countering the extremist discourse. That policy is
based on sociological data and secular values, such as
tolerance and respect for diversity. Senegal is a secular
State that attaches great importance to dialogue between
cultures and religions, which can ensure cohesion and
perfect harmony between ethnicities and faiths.

However, in a globalized world and given the scale
of the threats, no country alone can confront the threat
of terrorism in a sustainable manner, especially given
its increasingly sophisticated and violent attacks. Aware
of that fact, the Ministers responsible for domestic
security of Cote d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Mali and
Senegal, following the wave of bloody terrorist attacks
that struck the West African subregion, including
the Radisson Hotel in Bamako on 20 November, the
Splendide Hotel in Ouagadougou on 15 January, and
in Grand-Bassam in C6te d'Ivoire on 13 March, met
in Abidjan on 24 March with the goal of coordinating
their actions in order to devise an appropriate response
to that scourge. They agreed to pool their efforts to
strengthen the relations between the national security
services in order to establish unity of action and
cooperation between security forces and to hold regular
meetings to update the information that they have
regarding terrorism in their respective States and to
publish a monthly bulletin regarding criminal acts of
a terrorist nature. A meeting will be held in the near
future on fighting Boko Haram. Next week in Dakar,
we will organize a subregional seminar for the West
African, Central African and the Sahel and Saharan
regions on the fight against religious extremism and on
border monitoring and control.

In order to ensure its effectiveness, any action
aimed at countering terrorism and violent extremism
must address both the cultural and the structural causes.
Those causes are numerous and include marginalization,
discrimination, poor governance and the absence of
socioeconomic prospects. Repressive measures must,
therefore, include a number of preventive and dissuasive
measures, including ones that will have a strong social
impact aimed at reducing exclusion, marginalization
and discrimination. The policies adopted, if they are to
be sustainable, must be coupled with good governance,
the respect for human rights, improving the conditions
of life of the population, and the building of peaceful
and inclusive societies.

It is in that spirit that a number of actions seem
pertinent to us in the fight against the extremist
discourse and Violence ofterrorist groups. We need to set
up religious-training establishments that are in keeping
with our perceptions and religious practice and that are
marked by tolerance and solidarity. We need to educate,
train and inform the citizens and the communities, so
as to enable them to resist fallacious ideologies. We
need to stress the real nature of terrorist groups, which
are nothing more than mafia-like organizations, with
a view to exposing their lack of credibility. We need
to respond to the rhetoric of terrorists and extremist
groups by underscoring the illegitimate nature of their
discourse in religious terms.

However, in addition to such good practices, which
are not in themselves enough to block the violent and
extremist discourse of terrorist groups, we must give
people, especially young people, good reasons as well as
the means to remain with their families and in their own
country rather than to seek adventure outside, beyond
our borders, which often has very tragic consequences.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which will be reviewed next month, as well
as the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism (A/70/674), are, in our view,
appropriate frameworks, as they contain the necessary
elements to counter the discourse and odious ideology
of terrorists. Those frameworks will, however, have to
be interpreted in terms of partnership and cooperation
at the subregional, regional and international levels. At
a national level, it is important for Member States to be
inspired by the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to adopt, in full
exercise of their sovereignty, national plans of action
and national strategies inspired by local specificities
and better tailored to their socioeconomic and security
needs. The assistance of the international community
and the United Nations will, of course, be necessary in
that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to indicate that the
Senegalese delegation has worked with the Egyptian
delegation to ensure the elaboration and adoption this
morning of the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/6).

