Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: Let me begin by thanking
the Security Council for the opportunity to present the
final report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL), contained in document S/20l4/l92,
dated 17 March 2014. As members ofthe Council know,
the report before the Council takes stock of the overall
implementation of the mandate of UNIPSIL since its
establishment in 2008. It also presents an assessment
of the remaining challenges facing Sierra Leone after

UNIPSIL'S drawdown by 31 March, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2097 (2013).

UNIPSIL is indeed in the final stages of its
drawdown and, as the Council is aware, the Secretary-
General marked the formal closure of the Mission on
5 March 2014 during his visit to Sierra Leone. As the
Council is also aware, the country has made remarkable
strides in post-conflict recovery, democratic transition
and peace consolidation. Indeed, the general atmosphere
of peace that now prevails is the culmination of more
than 15 years of successive Security Council-mandated
peace operations in the country. As the report indicates,
the progress achieved is attributable first and foremost
to the determination of the people and Government of
Sierra Leone to break with the past and work towards
a peaceful, democratic and prosperous nation. It is also
the result of a remarkable level of steady engagement
by the United Nations and international partners,
demonstrating that concerted international action can
yield positive results.

Though Sierra Leone is continuing on the right
path, it still faces a number of challenges linked to the
root causes of the war that require sustained attention
and support. Allow me to emphasize some of those key
remaining challenges, as outlined in the Secretary-
General's report. They are, first, pervasive poverty
and unemployment, especially among young people;
secondly, endemic corruption; thirdly, upholding the
rule of law; and fourthly, the need for the authorities to
broaden the political space. The ongoing constitutional
review process and the implementation of the Agenda
for Prosperity are important opportunities in that
regard.

Addressing the remaining Challenges will require
the joint efforts of all Sierra Leoneans to work together
and place the national interest above all other interests.
During the Secretary-General's visit to Sierra Leone
earlier this month, it was heartening to hear all the
major political parties speaking with one voice in ajoint
statement in which they committed to work towards a
peaceful future for Sierra Leone.

During its last year, UNIPSIL focused on its
remaining mandate, as outlined in resolution 2097
(2013) and the transfer of residual tasks to the United
Nations country team. In that regard, I am pleased
to note that the United Nations will continue to
provide support through the Peacebuilding Fund to
constitutional review, security sector reform, promotion
of human rights and conflict prevention. Just last week,
the Minister of Finance and I signed the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2015-2018,
which will serve as the United Nations strategy in
Sierra Leone in support of the Government's Agenda
for Prosperity.

I believe that national authorities and institutions
are ready and willing to assume responsibility for their
country's peacebuilding and development agenda.
Nevertheless, the continued assistance of Sierra Leone's
international partners will remain critical. I urge Sierra
Leone's development partners to remain engaged
and to consolidate the many investments made over
the years, including through support for the Agenda
for Prosperity and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework.

Increasing State revenue will also be crucial. I
commend President Koroma for his zero-tolerance
approach to corruption; it is an important step towards
improving the business Climate and attracting investors
with strong, responsible business practices.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Djinnit and I have worked closely together over the
past month regarding the role of the United Nations
Office for West Africa in Sierra Leone after UNIPSIL's
drawdown, including through the good offices of the
Secretary-General, as needed. I am pleased to hear that
the Peacebuilding Commission, with which I will be
meeting later today, intends to continue to monitor Sierra
Leone with a view towards engaging on an as-needed
basis. I would also like to underscore the importance of
the Security Council's support for regional peace and
security efforts of the African Union, the Economic
Community of West Africa States and the Mano River
Union. The Council's support for implementation of the
strategy for cross-border security in the Mano River
Union presents an opportunity in that regard.

In concluding, I would take this opportunity to
thank the people and Government of Sierra Leone,
in particular His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma, for their support for the efforts of the United
Nations, including the seamless and timely completion
of UNIPSIL's drawdown and exit. I would also like
to reiterate our appreciation to the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and all bilateral
donors for the fruitful partnership for peacebuilding
in Sierra Leone. Finally, I thank the Council for its
commitment to success in Sierra Leone through the
United Nations peace operations during the past 15
years, and particularly during UNIPSIL's mandate.

