The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Pakistan.

Pakistan adds its condemnation of the act of
terrorism in Grozny and conveys its deepest
condolences to the Russian Federation and to the
families of the victims.

I would like to thank Ambassador Kamalesh
Sharma for introducing the Secretary-General's report
and for updating us on the situation in Timor-Leste.
Pakistan has extended full support for the success of
the new State of Timor-Leste - a State that emerged in
an exemplary exercise of the right of self-
determination, a Charter principle to which Pakistan is
deeply committed.

Timor-Leste has made remarkable progress since
its independence two years ago. Credit for that must go
first and foremost to the people and Government of
Timor-Leste. We appreciate in particular the bold
efforts of the Timorese leadership to encourage
national reconciliation. We hope that it will continue to
strive to heal the deep wounds of the past, both internal
and external, and to build the foundations for
sustainable peace and progress.

Pakistan supports the efforts of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
to consolidate peace and assist international
development in Timor-Leste. We support the extension
of its mandate for a further year, as recommended by
the Secretary-General. We believe that that is necessary
to allow the Mission to fulfil its mandate. We also note
the report's recommendations for a new composition of
the Mission's downsized force structure, which
includes both military and police units.

The outstanding tasks for UNMISET include
providing support to Timor-Leste in key areas: public
administration and justice, development of law
enforcement and the maintenance of security and
stability.

We must bear in mind the observation in the
Secretary-General's report

"that the provision of support through
peacekeeping can only meet the most urgent of
the country's requirements. It must be
complemented and built upon by bilateral and
multilateral support, if real progress is to take
place." (5/2004/333, para. 72)

In our view, the most imposing long-term
challenge confronting Timor-Leste remains the
promotion of economic prosperity. International
assistance will continue to be indispensable for that
purpose. The international community must also
continue to assist the new country even after
UNMISET's departure. The continued support of
Timor-Leste's neighbours is vital in that context.

Pakistan believes that the development of close
and friendly relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia is of utmost importance and is in the best
interest of both neighbours. We are confident that both
sides will continue to work together to resolve their
outstanding issues, in particular the arrangements for
the demarcation and management of their common
border as well as strengthening mutual support and
cooperation.

We hope that Timor-Leste's other neighbours,
including Australia, will make every endeavour to
resolve their bilateral issues with Timor-Leste in order
to allow the new country to attain its full economic
potential.

Timor-Leste is widely considered a success story
for United Nations peacekeeping. However, as
Kamalesh Sharma said today, success is a retrospective
judgement. The real success of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste will be measured in years and perhaps
decades. Timor-Leste will continue to need the support
of the international community in the remaining phases
of UNMISET's presence and beyond. All efforts must
be made to ensure that the gains so painstakingly
achieved are consolidated and are not lost, and that
Timor-Leste is remembered in history as a model of
collaboration between a committed national leadership
and a responsive and generous international
community.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time, and in order to allow as many delegations to take
the floor as possible, I will not individually invite
speakers to take seats at the table and to resume their
seats on the side. When a speaker is taking the floor,
the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on
the list at the table. I thank the non-members for their
cooperation and understanding.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Ana Pessoa Pinto,
Senior Minister and Minister in the Presidency of the
Council of Ministers of Timor-Leste.

