Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by expressing my gratitude for the
briefings made by Ambassador Liden, Ambassador
Nsanze and Minister Charles Nqakula and by thanking
the Secretary-General for his report on Burundi. My
delegation supports the observations and
recommendations contained in the report, including the
proposal to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB). We would like
to underscore a number of points that are of particular
importance for our delegation.

First of all, Costa Rica would like to commend
the parties for achieving an agreement this past week
08-64243

on a number of the most sensitive issues of the peace
process. We hope that both parties will be able to meet
their commitments in such a way as to ensure a
successful conclusion to this last stage of the peace
process. We also acknowledge and express our
gratitude for the significant efforts deployed by the
Regional Peace Initiative and for South Africa's
facilitation in this regard.

We are gravely concerned by the fact that there
are still child soldiers among the forces of the
Palipehutu-Forces Nationales de Liberation (Palipehutu- FNL), and we forcefully call upon that group to
unconditionally release all children associated with its
movement.

Finally, in the light of having just yesterday
celebrated the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, my country would like
to express its concern at the arrests of members of the
political opposition, members of the communications
media and representatives of civil society. Costa Rica
considers such behaviour unacceptable. It is as
unacceptable in this case as it would be in any other
case in any other region of the world.

We welcome the news just shared with us by the
Ambassador of Burundi with regard to the
establishment of an independent human rights
commission, and we hope that further steps will be
taken in this direction. However, listening to the
speakers and considering the contents of the report of
the Secretary-General, our concerns remain.

We call on the authorities of Burundi to respect
the rights to the freedom of expression and of
association and to ensure the due procedural rights and
the fair trial of all detainees.

