President Ivanov (spoke in Macedonian; interpretation provided by the delegation): The
countries of South-Eastern Europe are facing a serious
threat. The Balkan region is the first part of Europe
on the bloody map of the so-called Islamic caliphate. I
have to say with concern that the Balkans are already
becoming a base for the recruitment and radicalization
of new foreign fighters for global jihad. The foreign
fighters from the Balkans in the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant and Jabhat Al-Nusra are grouped into
ethno-national platoons to export jihadist ideology
back to their home countries and thus serve the wider
goals of jihadism. No one can tell with certainty the
exact number of foreign fighters from the Balkans
involved in military operations in Iraq and Syria. Their
number is constantly increasing and we can no longer
count them. Among them are jihadists ready to carry
out military operations for defensive and offensive
jihad. Their interaction with foreign fighters creates
a multinational structure that poses risks and danger.
They have an external network of supporters in the
West. They have the capability to plan, support and
carry out attacks against the West ands its interests.
Some have been there for three years; others are joining
them now. Some are there to stay, but some are likely
to return to the Balkans. When they come back, they
will bring along their hatred of diversity and their
devastating ideology, which will infect our vulnerable
societies and States.

For the time being, the Balkan region is not an
operational base for international terrorist networks.
However, we should be aware that this is not a temporary
but a permanent threat we must be prepared for. We
must not rule out as impossible the sick scenarios and
verbal threats from foreign fighters for the creation of
a so-called Balkan caliphate. We are under a constant
threat for which neither our region nor our countries are
prepared. This is the diagnosis of the disease we face,
but is there a remedy? I am confident that the remedy
consists of three essential steps.

First, the legal blockade of the Republic of
Macedonia's rightfully deserved membership in NATO
is also a serious blockade against peace, security and
stability in the Balkans. At the beginning, we were
blocked in the United Nations because of the name of
our country. We are now blocked out of NATO and the
European Union not just because of our name but also
because of the identity and language of our citizens.
The blockade is a result of a breach of resolutions 817
(1993) and 845 (1993); a Violation of the 1995 Interim
Accord that was deposited with the United Nations; and
a violation of the 5 December 2011 judgment handed
down by the International Court of Justice, one of the
principal organs of the United Nations. It is for those
reasons that we have not been able to find a mutually
acceptable solution in the past 21 years. But it is also
for those reasons that there exists an atmosphere of
insecurity and instability in our region. The Security
Council can and must contribute to peace, security and
stability in the Balkans. I urge and expect the Council to
be persistent in demanding unconditional respect for its
resolutions. I expect the Council to be involved in View
of ensuring respect for the verdict of the International
Court of Justice in the Macedonia case.

Secondly, we should accelerate the integration of the
Republic of Macedonia and the other Balkan countries
into the European Union. By postponing enlargement,
the Union is creating a vacuum in what historically has
been the poorest geopolitical space. And we all know
that such vacuums are eventually filled. The European
Union must not forget that the Balkans is part of
Europe and that by postponing enlargement it creates
a problem on its own territory. It is necessary that all
of the Western Balkan countries be integrated into the
European Union as soon as possible.

Thirdly, we believe it is necessary to establish a
regional counter-terrorism centre in the countries
of the Western Balkans to work on identifying and
assessing terrorism threats and to ensure operational
coordination with a single centre that would monitor
terrorist threats and targets at the regional level. The
centre would also ensure operational cooperation
on intelligence on terrorist groups, their networks,
locations, capacities and intentions. That would serve
to provide early warning, prevention and coordination
of activities among law enforcement and intelligence
services.

There is no longer any excuse for blocking the

initiative on European Union and Euro-Atlantic
integration. Our region is vulnerable, and so is
Europe. It is necessary to strengthen institutions in all
Western Balkan countries by funding programmes for
deradicalization and counter-radicalization in order to
ensure early prevention and the deployment of counter
measures through programmes and action plans. We do
not have the capacity to respond and address this threat
by ourselves. We have limited financial capacity. We
therefore need partners to build capacity and to counter
violent extremism. We can deprive terrorist groups of
the one resource that is most precious to them - new
recruits - by reducing sympathy and support for
extremism. We must be responsible. We must help each
other. The stability and security of each State is an
important link in the whole region.

