Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security and for
the concept note setting out the terms of the discussion
(S/20l4/75, annex). We thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his report, entitled "Measuring
the effectiveness of the support provided by the United
Nations system for the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations" (S/2013/341). We
also support the issuance of a presidential statement
by the Council on this item, as well as the inclusion of
a reference in it to the International Criminal Court,
believing that for us not to do so, especially under this
item, will only be farcical.

Before my delegation offers some observations
on the Secretary-General's report, I wish to conduct a
short retrospective on this item in general terms.

I start by returning to the inaugural debate that
we had on this item in the Security Council on 24 and
30 September 2003 (see S/PV.4833 and S/PV.4835), three
years after the submission of the report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809), chaired
by Lakhdar Brahimi, in August 2000, and 11 years
after the United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia had relaunched the United Nations into more
complex peacekeeping operations. Those 11 years were
characterized by much trial and error, for that decade
provided the United Nations with recurring and painful
examples of what happens when the rule of law is not
positioned high enough on the ladder of immediate
priorities. Each transitional administration established
in that period came to realize, perhaps what remains
the harshest and saddest lesson of war, that in war there
is a clear winner. It is, as it always has been, of course,
the war profiteer, namely, often transnational criminal
networks wielding immense power inside and beyond
post-conflict theatres once the cessation of hostilities
has taken effect.

Brahimi's chief proposal in 2000, which triggered
our first rule-of-law discussion at the United
Nations (see S/PV.4220), centred on the need for
an interim or model criminal code in a transitional
administration - an idea that was not accepted at the
time in the General Assembly not because there was
insufficient appreciation by members over the need for
it, but because there was no agreement about whether
the Security Council or the General Assembly should
be the guide on such issues. Instead, the Secretariat,
acting on the General Assembly's instruction, began
the slow march towards building some capacity within
it by creating the Criminal Law and Judiciary Advisory
Unit, staffed by two people, within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

At that point, we had the first debate in the
Chamber, at the initiative of the United Kingdom. At
the time, I noted in our statement on 30 September
2003 (see S/PV.4835) that, ultimately, not only should
the Criminal Law and Judiciary Advisory Unit be
expanded but that, eventually, it should itself be a part
ofajustice and rule of law division.

Where are we today? Reading the Secretary-
General's report, it is clear that the rule of law, no
matter how exquisite the language of our presidential
statements or whatever we say in our declarations, is still
being underserved by us, the Member States. Because
we have long departed from the controlled discussion
over the rule of law that we once had and, instead,
have chosen to expand it over 13 years to the extent
that it now covers every aspect of the legal universe,
the United Nations is left with no real clarity or any
strategic direction over it, let alone any thorough ability
to create baseline data and precise measurements of the
overall effectiveness. That is all evident from the report
itself.

It is true that we can celebrate joint visits by the
global focal point arrangement to five mission areas and
note that 336 Judicial Affairs Officers are deployed by
the Office of the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule
of Law and Security Institutions in 18 field operations,
acknowledging that many of them are outstanding
professionals. However, those Judicial Affairs
Officers are, in aggregate, still only less than 1 per
cent ~ actually far less than 1 per cent, 0.28 per cent
to be precise - of the total number of field personnel
deployed in the field operations led by DPKO and the
Department of Political Affairs. Because of us Member
States, their work is often haphazard and is not linear or
sequenced. And it falls well within the shadow of their
host country's needs, which are, by contrast, vast and
almost beyond comprehension.

What we must therefore do, if we are indeed
serious about the rule of law, is to return to basics. We
need to once again ask ourselves: what are the top two
preconditions for the recovery of a war-torn society
given its realities? And what does the United Nations
need to do to realize those preconditions effectively?

We would submit, in answer to that, that when it
comes to post-conflict environments, the two most
fundamental preconditions for any international
endeavour to succeed in rehabilitating a largely
destroyed country or region are, first, the provision
of security, which we must undertake, and, secondly,
together with humanitarian support, the administration
of justice. All other development activity can wait for
subsequent stages, or best be left to others.

What we need immediately, therefore, in a post-
conflict environment are effective and fair criminal
and financial courts, which, given the often devastated
infrastructure of the host State, leaves us with no
realistic option, if we are to admit it openly, but for
the international community to manage the courts
themselves, with the United Nations itself imposing,
at the request of the host country, an adapted model
criminal code until the country in question can
regain its footing and itself take over the running and
management of such courts. The United Nations would
therefore need substantial capabilities and much greater
support than it has now.

Yet, almost 11 years after our first debate here,
notwithstanding the tremendous efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Secretary-General
to promote the rule of law - and we applaud them for
that - we still have no rule-of-law department or a
structure of a size that reflects the crucial importance
of this subject matter.

The global focal point, while a welcome attempt
to fuse the United Nations Development Programme
with DPKO, remains very small and not what we had
in mind many years ago. Incidentally, we are puzzled
as to why the Peacebuilding Support Office was never
included in that, at least insofar as the countries on its
agenda are concerned.

The Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group,
notwithstanding the outstanding leadership provided by
the Deputy Secretary-General in that regard, cannot, in
our opinion, be the best way to deal with the issue. The
very idea of first scattering the rule-of-law functions
among all the various funds, agencies and programmes,
which the United Nations consented to many years ago,
only for it to now feel crushed by the need to coordinate
all of that at the top, is unfortunate.

In essence, the United Nations created a problem
for itself so impossibly complicated that it had no prayer
of ever solving it. Better for us, therefore, to admit now
that the scattered approach, however brilliantly it may
be coordinated now, is a doomed proposition in the long
term.

I therefore conclude by repeating what Council
members said at the first debate here in 2003, namely,
that there has to be one address for the rule of law
in the form of a stand-alone department, of a size
commensurate with its overriding importance, where
all of the expertise and knowledge on the issue can
be housed under one United Nations roof, where we
will find not only experts in the promulgation of draft
constitutions and model criminal codes but also former
practitioners steeped in every aspect of the major
legal traditions, including common law, civil law and
mixed systems of law, as well as sharia law; experts in
criminal procedure and in the conduct of trials; experts
and investigators who have worked in financial courts;
experts in court management systems, in particular in
their design; experts in legal aid; and experts injudicial
and prosecutorial reform - and all of that in addition
to all of the relevant expertise required in policing and
prison administration.

Only then will the United Nations have a capability
that can meet both the demands ofthe Council in respect
of the rule of law and the expectations of the host and
requesting countries, which so desperately need it.

