Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I first thank you,
Mr. Minister, as other colleagues have, for presiding
over our meeting and thank Singapore for convening
this important meeting of the Council on Africa. It is
important, because, following our earlier meeting in
January, a discussion such as this offers to Council
members, to the wider United Nations membership,
and to the United Nations family of institutions,
including the Economic and Social Council, the
opportunity to stand back from day-to-day
consideration of issues and engage in a genuine
dialogue and exchange of views on Wider issues and
give a strategic focus to the policies we have both in
the Council and within the United Nations.

First, before responding to some of the points
made in the course of our discussion, I want to warmly
thank on behalf of my delegation Ambassador Koonjul
for his work in establishing the Council's ad hoc
Working Group - a theme picked up by most speakers
so far. We have made a very good start in the Working
Group. We have a very good programme of work. Over
the coming period, I think that the Working Group can
bring both focus and richness to the work of the
Council in terms of the way we approach issues, but
also in terms of a wider sense of engagement with
institutions within the United Nations, with African
organizations, with the non-governmental organization
community and with other actors involved.

I would also like to welcome Ambassador
Simonovic', the President of the Economic and Social
Council, since it is important that the Security Council,
given the extent to which its engagement with African
issues is critical to its work, have the chance for
partnership and dialogue with the Economic and Social
Council.

Therefore, the establishment by the Council of
the ad hoc Working Group on conflict prevention and
resolution and the envisaged Economic and Social
Council advisory group on African countries emerging
from conflict can play a very important role in
partnership with each other. This will be important in
bringing an extra dimension to the work of both the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council.
The establishment of both groups will, one hopes,
strengthen not just the level of United Nations
engagement on African issues but also international
engagement.

These themes are important for a number of
reasons. I think they came from many speakers this
morning because of the critical need for the United
Nations, the Council and the international community
generally to focus on Africa and the challenges facing
it.

There is a phrase in the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD) on the need for bold
and imaginative thinking. This is something on which
we in the United Nations, after many years, need to
adjust our thinking as we approach issues in Africa. In
the context of NEPAD and of new thinking in the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and throughout
Africa, we need to look again at the way we approach
issues of conflict, peacemaking and peace-building to
see how we can bring strength and coordination, but
also new thinking.

Several speakers have rightly made the point this
morning that each situation in Africa is different. The
situations in Ethiopia-Eritrea, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as we saw during the Council
mission to the Great Lakes region, and Madagascar all
have their own particular circumstances, and each
therefore calls for a strong emphasis on regional
cooperation, not just in the context of the OAU but the
subregional organizations.

The Council Working Group - and the same is
true, I think, of the Economic and Social Council
group- can, in dialogue with the OAU and the
regional organizations in Africa, bring an extra
dimension of reflective thinking to the situation as we
approach it.

Ambassador Dauth of Australia made the point
earlier not only that peace and development are two
sides of one coin, but also that there is much new
thinking. It is reflected in the OAU. It is reflected in
the Cotonou Agreement between the European Union
and our African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) partners.
They have helped bring together security, economic,
humanitarian and military issues. We approach the
different requirements of regional conflicts in a way
that brings together the different dimensions that are
needed in addressing the conflict and also the
instruments of development cooperation that are later
needed to help resolve it and ease tension.

I think there were three or four themes that I did
want to look at briefly, because they came out very
strongly in the contributions made this morning.

The first is institutional issues. It is clear that one
of the weaknesses in the United Nations approach over
recent years has been that there has been a failure of
partnership at times between the United Nations and
the OAU and regional organizations. There is blame on
all sides for that, but there is now a very real
opportunity in terms of the OAU structures and the
new ideas that will be going to Durban that we heard of
this morning to look at ways in which we can seriously
engage, jointly, in approaching both pre-conflict and
conflict situations in Africa. There are various ideas
put forward on how to do this: joint missions between
the Council and the OAU, the sharing of information
and documents, special briefings, joint special envoys,
and bringing in subregional organizations such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Southern African Development Community into this
framework.

What is certainly true is that there is very
substantial room for working together, and this is an
area where the new Council Working Group will be
able to play a major role in a way that has not been
possible up to now. So when the Council does look at
different situations it will do so with deep knowledge
of where African countries themselves are coming
from and where, as Ambassador Kanu of Sierra Leone
just said, we have a serious knowledge of the regional
implications and what this means.

The Mano River countries are a very good
example where, as several speakers have emphasized,
it is very difficult to consider one country - Sierra
Leone, for example - in isolation from what is
happening in the neighbouring countries. This is true of
many of the countries in Africa where conflict or the
potential for conflict may exist.

The second point on the institutions is to look at
ways of strengthening the mediation capacity of the
United Nations, including fact-finding missions and
special representatives. We can look at various new
mechanisms for doing this, but there is an important
requirement to look at new possibilities to add to the
range of instruments that the Council and the United
Nations have at their disposal.

The point on the Economic and Social Council
has already been made strongly by several speakers and
is absolutely true. Up to now, over the past 5 to 15
years, as the Council has become increasingly engaged
in African issues, it has at times appeared to lack a
serious partner and interlocutor on the economic and
development side. There were always, of course, the
funds and programmes and specialized agencies, but
the importance of the Economic and Social Council in
this is to bring that extra dimension of pulling threads
together and providing a concept of partnership both to
the Council and to the OAU and regional organizations
in Africa as to what is possible and the range of actions
that can be jointly undertaken.

One point that did come up this morning, raised
by Assistant Secretary-General Fall and which I also
wanted to mention, is the issue of sanctions. That is an
important issue for the Council at the moment, partly
because of the number of countries in Africa where
there are targeted sanctions in operation through
Council action. The point on this, which I think has
been made by several speakers this morning, is, first,
the need for sanctions not only to be targeted but to be
focused so that their humanitarian impact is limited,
but also, as Assistant Secretary-General Fall said, so
that there is the possibility of an exit strategy when
circumstances are appropriate. There is a phrase to the
effect that when change is not necessary, it is not
necessary to change. That conservative dynamic can
sometimes apply to institutions as well.

It is therefore important to remember that when,
for political reasons - in terms of the impact of
sanctions regionally and on particular countries - and
for reasons ofjustice, a decision has to be taken about
sanctions, it should be remembered that, even when
applied in a very limited way, sanctions can sometimes
be a blunt instrument. There I think the partnership and
dialogue that the Working Group and the Economic and
Social Council can advance with the OAU and regional
organizations would be important.

The New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) makes the point on development issues that
the challenge facing Africa in this area is enormous. It
is not simply the inability to harness globalization. It is
not simply the technology gap that has developed. But,
as several speakers have said in our discussion, it is the
range of problems such as lack of trade access and,
despite the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative,
the problem of debt. These are two sides of one coin. It
is very difficult to address underlying causes of
conflict without offering people the opportunity for
economic and social development.

Therefore, as is emphasized in NEPAD and has
been emphasized by most speakers today, the issue of
development, while it is not a direct responsibility of
the Council, is of critical importance to Council action
in terms of pre-conflict or conflict situations or of
peacemaking operations. There the dialogue with the
Economic and Social Council will be of critical
importance to the work of the Working Group in
looking at implications of Council actions on
development and vice versa.

The issue is especially important, I think, because
one of the themes that struck me during the Council
mission to the Great Lakes region was the disconnect
between what happens in development and the actions
undertaken by the Council. For example, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where we had a
briefing on the economic and social situation, we heard
about the results of the Consolidated Appeals by the
United Nations agencies. I think that something like
one-sixth of what is required has been provided so far
for the current year. That makes it extraordinarily
difficult.

On the one hand, you have the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the prospects for
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration, and you have the role of the Council in
fostering and encouraging peace and dialogue, while on
the other hand you have enormous problems of
economic and social development. Logically, in terms
of action by the United Nations family, these have to be
considered as two sides of one coin.

There are two final points that I also want briefly
to pick up on. One is arms, which has been emphasized
by several speakers. Clearly, in Sierra Leone there is a
very good example of this. We need to continue to
highlight the importance of disarmament and arms
control initiatives in conflict prevention. This is
something that in the Working Group we can seriously
look at in the period ahead.

The final point is the role of NEPAD, which of
course will be considered at the G-9 Summit, at the
World Economic Forum in Durban and beyond. The
issues at stake with NEPAD are, without exaggeration,
of fundamental importance to the future of Africa.
They will affect every aspect of policy, of
development, of conflict prevention. They will require
the closest cooperation and coordination by the
international community. They will require the
engagement of all United Nations institutions,
including the Council in terms of its own role. It will
also require a sense of focus and clarity so that, as
African countries themselves put in place structures of
cooperation that advance good governance, economic
policies in terms of trade, and new codes of action, the
international community will respond in a reciprocal
way so that the challenge that is now being undertaken
by African countries is met fully and adequately by the
international community. If it is not, as NEPAD
emphasizes, it would be extremely difficult for the
people of Africa or African countries to do this on their
own.

In conclusion, I think that all the points made this
morning emphasize the need for greater focus on
partnership and cooperation among the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and African
regional and subregional organizations, African
countries and civil society. But it is also a critical point
that in advancing this goal we also need to ensure that,
with respect to the development component, the United
Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions and the
international donor community are brought together so
that, as we tackle challenges in one critical area, we
provide the people of Africa and African organizations
with the resources to advance both goals at the same
time.

