Mr. Williamson (United States of America): We
appreciate the progress achieved in the first six months
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) and the good work
done by Ambassador Sharma and his staff. We
welcome Ambassador Sharma's assessment that the
mission phase-out remains on target for June 2004.

Over the next 18 months we hope that the relationship
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia will continue to
flourish. We encourage both sides to continue their
cooperation to delineate their mutual border by June of
next year.

The United States agrees with the Secretary-
General's report that the functioning of the Timor-
Leste justice system is of central importance for the
stability and development of the State. Therefore, we
are concerned about the shortcomings of the judicial
system highlighted in the report: a lack of clarity
regarding the separation of powers among the
judiciary, the legislature and the executive; the
members of the Superior Counsel of the Judiciary have
not been appointed, thereby delaying the filling of
judicial and prosecutorial vacancies; there is a need for
capacity-building for the administrative staff of the
Minister's office; there is a need to train prosecutors;
and so on.

The report said the majority of the prison
population is being held for prolonged periods without
trial and that on 16 August during prison disturbances
nearly 193 prisoners forced their way out of the prison.
That is also troubling. We hope and expect that the
Government of Timor-Leste, working with UNMISET,
will seriously tackle these areas of concern in the
judicial sector.

We note that the downsizing of the military
component is on track. The United States is pleased
that the United Nations is committed to terminating the
Mission in the summer of 2004, provided that no
significant challenges occur. Indonesia no longer
presents a significant threat to Timor-Leste. There have
been no recent United Nations military engagements
with the militia, or even sightings of them in Timor-
Leste. The United Nations has demonstrated its ability
to adapt UNMISET'S downsizing plan to an unforeseen
delay in the normalization of the border with West
Timor. The evolving situation in Timor-Leste -
continued reduction of the militia threat but delays in
the border normalization - highlights the need for
constant review and reassessment of United Nations
downsizing plans for UNMISET.

The United Nations reassessment of the changing
situation in Timor-Leste can be a model for the United
Nations to follow with the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). In the case of UNMISET,
the United Nations assessment found a solution that
permitted a continuation of its original projected
downsizing rate, whereas if additional challenges had
been presented the United Nations might have been
forced to recommend a decrease in the rate of
withdrawal and perhaps to extend the projected mission
termination date. The United States commends
UNMISET and the Government of Timor-Leste for
their agility and for this progress.

The Security Council is united in its commitment
to a Timor-Leste with both political independence and
the infrastructure of a stable, just and efficiently
governed State. The progress has been remarkable.
While, as I have noted, there is more that needs to be
accomplished, overall Timor-Leste is a great success
story, and there are lessons to be learned from this
progress. Therefore, six months into UNMISET, we
think it is constructive to reflect on the factors behind
the good news we have heard today. Why have the
United Nations efforts in Timor been a success? A
number of reasons come to mind.

First and foremost, the brave people of Timor-
Leste deserve credit for their dedication and hard work,
and for their commitment to achieving independence,
to letting democracy take root and to building
institutions in the economy necessary for a better future
for themselves and their children. The Timor-Leste
leaders should be acknowledged for their good work.
Any sustainable progress must be constructed on the
hopes of the people coupled to their dedication to
translate those hopes into reality.

Second, however, there was overwhelming
consensus and support in the international community
and among the Timorese for the initial intervention and
the United Nations assumption of administrative
powers.

Third, both peacekeeping missions - the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and UMISET - have had a clear end
game. For UNTAET it was political independence. For
UNMISET it has been to provide the training wheels to
help the Timorese build their own functioning
administration, civil service, police and security force.

Fourth, after the initial intervention there were no
major armed groups for the peacekeepers to disarm.

Fifth, the peacekeeping force was highly
professional and operated under robust rules of
engagement. There was no prospect of Blue Helmets
becoming human shields.

Sixth, the relatively small size of Timor-Leste,
with a population of under 1 million and a land border
with only one neighbour made the logistics of
establishing security and administration more
manageable. Compare this to a vast country like
Afghanistan, with its 20 million people, and the point
becomes clearer.

Seventh, the local population always has had a
strong cohesive sense of national identity less driven
by ethnic and religious strife than elsewhere.

And eighth, the lack of lust for revenge and
reprisal among the Timorese has enabled a smooth
return and reintegration of the vast majority of refugees
who fled the violence in 1999.

While the combination of those circumstances
may be unique, collectively they set a standard of
success that future United Nations operations should
seek to follow. Over the next 18 months we look
forward to UNMISET continuing to be a success, a
success with lessons upon which we should draw and,
most important, a success that will bring a better life to
the people of Timor-Leste.

