Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Since the fall of former President Siad Barre in
January 1991, chaos - even anarchy - has reigned in
Somalia, leading to the destruction of all political and
administrative structures indispensable for the functioning
of the State. Deadly clan warfare ravaged the country, one
of the world's poorest. An unprecedented famine afflicted
a large segment of the population, compelling millions of
people to live in subhuman conditions. The international
community could not have failed to react. The course of
subsequent events is too well known for us to dwell on.

But it is certainly difficult to refer to the present
situation in Somalia without recalling the tragedy and
painful circumstances that led the United Nations, despite
its positive and beneficial work on behalf of the Somali
people, to leave the country in 1994. How many pictures
of desolation, misery and atrocity still live in our
memories! Many, too many, Blue Helmets lost their lives
in a mission whose lofty purpose cannot be
overemphasized, because it reflected our humanitarian
instinct and our moral responsibility to rush to the aid of
people in distress. No, we cannot forget.

But it is to the Security Council's honour that it has
today devoted an open debate to Somalia, whose people
have fallen victim to a situation over which they have no
control and do not deserve to be abandoned to their sad
fate. Somalia continues to distinguish itself by the
existence in its territory of so many political factions and
armed groups - clans that refuse to stop fighting and
destroying each other in attempt to reign unopposed in a
galaxy characterized by a constellation of tribes. Each of
the forces that has been formed to overthrow the
established regime is seeking to impose its authority. The
unbridled power struggle is thus nourished by rivalries
among the leaders of various clans and by their
unquenchable thirst for political power commensurate
with their moral and religious domination of the members
of their respective communities.

The leaders of the Somali factions bear complete and
inescapable responsibility for the misfortune that has been
visited upon their people and the destruction of their
country. They must break the cycle of violence they have
put in motion and admit without delay that no faction can
long impose itself through force, despite the nature and
size of the allegiances and alliances it may have. Those
who fight today for claims of ethnic supremacy must
understand that the future of Somalia depends first and
foremost on their capacity to assume their responsibility
to ensure the national unity and territorial integrity of
their country. A divided country has no future. It is
indispensable for the leaders of the Somali factions to
show greater interest in the destinies of their people. They

 

should take a careful look at the rest of the world -
particularly at the countries and political leaders who have
been able to overcome internal conflicts and strife so as to
restore social peace and promote national reconciliation.
Ethnic pluralism must become the cement to build a strong
and unified nation.

The Somali people look to the Security Council today,
following with interest and emotion our deliberations. They
wait impatiently for hands to reach out and extricate
themselves from the vice in which they have been trapped
for years. Of course, our television screens no longer
confront us with the horrible pictures to which we were
accustomed. The international press has left, and no one
remains to bear immediate, direct witness. And yet, is it
possible not to hear the cries of distress of those who
continue to suffer?

In this connection my delegation welcomes the
decision of the Secretary-General to reactivate the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, the role of which is
vital in the coordination of the international community's
assistance. Contacts already established between the
representatives of the United Nations and the leaders of the
Somali factions must be continued, because they offer an
encouraging sign for the re-establishment of the climate of
confidence necessary for fruitful cooperation. We support
the idea of the Secretary-General's dispatching a Special
Envoy on a fact-finding mission to expand our knowledge
of the situation. In fact, it would be useful to create a
situation that would lead all parties to accept an effective
presence in Mogadishu of the United Nations that could
give appropriate consideration to the recommendations that
the Secretary-General made in his report of last 17
February.

We must also commend the initiatives of the regional
leaders, in particular that of President Arap Moi of Kenya.
They have long shown strong and determined interest in
achieving a solution to the Somalia crisis. The persistent
efforts of the Italian Government are praiseworthy because
they contribute to a continuation of dialogue and the
establishment of a climate of confidence among the Somalis
and the rest of the international community. We hope that
the recent initiatives undertaken by the Egyptian
Government, under the aegis of the League of Arab States,
will result in the organization of a framework of
cooperation with the participation of all the Somali parties.

The results achieved at the 3 January 1997 meeting in
Sodere must be consolidated so as to make possible the
convening of a National Reconciliation Conference on an
expanded basis in Somali territory.

Certainly no one can take the place of the leaders of
the Somali factions in deciding the destiny of their nation
and their people. But it is important for us to emphasize
the role of the international community in the pursuit and
implementation of the objectives of the peace process in
Somalia. This role cannot be played effectively unless the
embargo on the delivery of weapons is strictly applied,
and unless a clear decision to put an end to hostilities is
taken by those who are fomenting strife and who persist
in warfare. We expect to see a positive attitude from the
clan leaders vis-a-vis the humanitarian organizations, for
which they have the obligation to ensure both free access
to the needy population and security. The reopening of
the Mogadishu airport and seaport in this connection is,
we think, a prerequisite and a litmus test.

At a time when a part of the country is stricken by
drought and a cholera epidemic has joined the already
numerous horrors afflicting the population, Somalia needs
humanitarian assistance, which should be sent as quickly
as possible, without any impediment or restriction. The
city of Mogadishu must be reunified in order to make
possible a broad and equitable distribution of food and
medical supplies.

We, as Africans, are devoted to Somalia and are thus
determined to participate in all endeavours to restore
peace to that country. We encourage the international
community to explore ways and means to set up an
appropriate mechanism which would respond to the most
urgent needs of the Somali people. That people must not
be held responsible for the vile acts committed by the
faction leaders. We could never understand their being
abandoned or left to fend for themselves, for it is our
moral duty to continue to deal with their fate and to try
to mitigate their suffering. We hope that it will be
possible to surmount the difficulties of the past, to
overcome the effects of the Somali syndrome so as to
make it possible for the Somali leaders to be rehabilitated
publicly by striving and succeeding in restoring peace and
in taking charge of the destiny of their people in a
reunified Somalia, for it is their primary responsibility to
secure the well-being of their people.

