Mr. Hallergard: I thank New Zealand, and in
particular the Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand, for convening and presiding over this meeting.
I also thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing and
hard and good work on this difficult theme.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Association
country and member of the European Economic Area
Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine, align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union remains committed to a just
and comprehensive resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. There is no alternative to a negotiated two-
State solution, whose viability is, however, constantly
being eroded by new facts on the ground. We urge
both parties to demonstrate their stated commitment
to a two-State solution through concrete actions. The
European Union will actively support them to create an
environment oftrust necessary to engage in meaningful
negotiations as soon as possible.

An immediate priority must be to address the grave
situation in Gaza. All international community pledges
should be honoured. We are also concerned over the
severe lack of funds being faced by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East's, and call on all concerned donors to step up
their funding.

The European Union believes that compliance
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law by States and non-State actors,
including accountability, is a cornerstone for peace and
security in the region.

We welcome recent steps taken by Israel to ease
restrictions in Gaza. Further positive measures are
now needed for the full delivery of humanitarian
aid, reconstruction and economic recovery on a
permanent basis. We call for a fundamental change in
the political, security and economic situation in Gaza,
including the end of the closure and a full opening
of the crossing points, while still addressing Israel's
legitimate security concerns. Recent rocket fire by
militant groups is unacceptable and underlines again
the danger of escalation. All stakeholders must commit
to non-violence and peace. We call on all parties to
agree on a durable ceasefire that prevents a return
to conflict, strengthens Gaza as an integral part of a
future Palestinian State and reinforces the link between
Gaza and the West Bank.

The European Union urges all Palestinian factions
to find common ground, based on non-violence and
reconciliation, and to work together to address the
needs of the Palestinian population. We call on the
Palestinian factions to make reconciliation and the
return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza a top
priority. The Authority must take greater responsibility
in that regard and assume all Government functions
in Gaza. The European Union is ready to provide full
support to those efforts.

We are committed to working with all sides so
as to allow the socioeconomic development of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and empower
Palestinian institutions in preparation for statehood.
We stress that actions such as the easing of restrictions
must be part of a fundamental change of policy with
regard to the occupied Palestinian territory. We call on
Israel to enable accelerated Palestinian construction, as
well as social and economic development in Area C.
We furthermore call on the Israeli authorities to halt
plans for the forced transfer of the population and the
demolition of Palestinian housing and infrastructure in
the Susiya and Abu Nwar communities.

The preservation of the viability of a two-State
solution is at the core of EU policy. In that regard,
while recalling that the settlements are illegal under
international law, the European Union reiterates its
strong opposition to Israel's settlement policy and
the actions taken in that context, such as building the
separation barrier beyond the 1967 line, demolitions

and confiscation 4 including of EU-funded
projects 4 evictions, forced transfers 4 including
of Bedouins 4 illegal outposts, settler violence and

restrictions on movement and access. Those actions
seriously threaten the two-State solution. Settlement
activity in East Jerusalem seriously jeopardizes the
possibility of Jerusalem serving as the future capital
of both States. We will continue to closely monitor
developments on the ground and their broader
implications, and we remain ready to take further
action in order to protect the viability of the two-
State solution. The EU and its member States reaffirm
their commitment to ensuring the continued, full and
effective implementation of existing EU legislation
and bilateral arrangements applicable to settlement
products. We express our commitment to ensure that,
in line with international law, all agreements between
the State of Israel and the EU must unequivocally and
explicitly indicate their inapplicability to the territories
occupied by Israel in 1967.

Securing a just and lasting peace will require an
increased common international effort. The European
Union will work actively on a renewed multilateral
approach to the peace process in consultation with
all relevant stakeholders. The establishment of an
international support group is a possible way to
contribute to that goal. The EU's position on parameters,
as set out in its Foreign Affairs Council conclusions of
July 2014, provides a basis for achieving consensus
on the way forward. The European Union is ready to
engage in joint work with regional partners on the basis
of the Arab Peace Initiative, and welcomes the ongoing
efforts of the Quartet in that regard.

A lasting solution to the conflict in Syria is urgently
required. We fully support the efforts of United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura to revive a political
process. We hope the Geneva consultations will help
launch a Syrian-led inclusive political process leading
to a transition, based on the Geneva communique of
30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and in line with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Our ultimate
objective is to help build a democratic and pluralistic
Syria. That political approach is at the heart of the EU
regional strategy for Syria, Iraq and the threat of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), or Daesh.
In Iraq, the EU will continue to work closely with the
Government, supporting it as much as we can in its
efforts to restore inclusive governance and stability.
In Syria, an inclusive political transition is crucial to
sustainable peace and stability. All Member States,
in accordance with resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014), should take decisive action to stop the flow of
foreign fighters and to counter ISIL/Daesh financing
and combat its incitement. The Al-Assad regime's
brutal war against its own people, massive human
rights violations, and systematic obstruction against
democratic reforms have contributed to the flourishing
ofISIL/Daesh in Syria. As a consequence of its policies
and actions, the Al-Assad regime cannot be a partner in
the fight against Daesh.

More than 220,000 Syrians have been killed and
more than half of the population is displaced. Peace
will remain elusive in Syria as long as impunity reigns.
The perpetrators of violations and abuses must be held
to account. In a letter dated 18 June, 71 countries,
including all EU member States, expressed their
outrage at the never-ending state of unchecked brutality
in Syria, in particular through the systematic use of
barrel bombs. The Arria Formula meeting convened
by France and Spain on 26 June clearly showed the
Council the terrible toll exacted on civilians by the
Al-Assad regime's widespread use of barrel bombs.
We strongly condemn those indiscriminate attacks, as
well as the continued besieging of civilian areas, the
use of the starvation of civilians as a combat method
and the arbitrary detention and torture of thousands of
Syrians. We believe it is high time for the Council to
follow up on its own resolutions, including resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), and to take
decisive action to put an end to these ongoing violations
of international law and the Council's resolutions.

We are equally concerned about the frequent
reports that toxic chemicals such as chlorine have
been used as weapons in Syria. The use of chlorine gas
as a weapon is a violation of the Chemical Weapons
Convention as well as of resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2209 (2015). Both resolutions foresaw further measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
in case of non-compliance. We strongly support the
initiative being discussed in the Council to establish
an attribution mechanism through a joint investigative
mechanism of the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
I would like to conclude by stressing the EU's
determination to continue supporting the Syrians and
the refugee-hosting countries in the region affected by
the crisis, particularly Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey.
Overall, the European Union has mobilized more than
€3.7 billion since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis. At
the third Kuwait pledging conference, on 31 March, the
European Union and its member States pledged close to
€1.1 billion.

