Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, which provides an opportunity for world
public opinion and United Nations Member States to
become familiar with the gravity of the situation in the
Middle East in general and of the question of Palestine
in particular. We are pleased to see Mr. Alvaro de Soto
in the Council for the first time in his capacity as
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.
We wish him every success in his endeavours.

Every day that Israel continues its illegal
occupation of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and the
Syrian Golan, the anguish of millions of Arab citizens
increases as they suffer under the scourge of the
occupation and its catastrophic economic, social and
humanitarian effects. The latest Israeli escalation
forges yet another link in the endless chain of Israel's
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law.

A few days ago, we marked the passing of an
entire year since the International Court of Justice
issued its historic advisory opinion on the colonialist
wall built by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Instead of fully complying with the advisory
opinion of the world's highest judicial body, Israel, the
occupying Power, has continued building the wall as an
expression of its contempt for the advisory opinion and
for the will of the international community as
expressed by the General Assembly in its resolution
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004.

When we consider that the Court demanded that
Israel end its violations of international law, halt the
construction of the wall, dismantle the sections already
built and provide the Palestinians with reparations for
the damage caused by its construction, we cannot fail
to note the contradiction between the Court's position
and what the representative of Israel said in his
statement, which was an attempt to mislead the
Council and international public opinion.

Israel has turned a deaf ear to the international
community's condemnation of its policies and its
expansionist wall. Proof of that can be seen in the fact
that only a few days ago, the Israeli Cabinet took the
decision to continue building the wall in the heart of
occupied Palestine, including East Jerusalem, and to
complete it by September. The Israeli plan will result
in the isolation of more than 65,000 Palestinians from
their families, property, hospitals, schools and
universities. We must also look closely at recent Israeli
statements in the context of Israel's other plans to build
a number of settlements to isolate East Jerusalem from
its Palestinian environment and, in practice, to annex it
to Israel. In that way, Israel will have drawn new
borders that are very different from those of 1967.

The wall, which is three times higher than and
nearly twice as long as the notorious Berlin wall, has
become yet another symbol of oppression, suppression
and the arrogance of power. We are confident that the
wall's fate will be no better than that of its predecessor,
which has passed into history.

In addition to all their other illegal actions, the
Israeli occupation forces have escalated their acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people. In recent
days, they have destroyed a great number of
Palestinian homes, and, in clear violation of
international law and humanitarian law, they have
assassinated a number of Palestinians and continue to
do so.

Through its recent decisions, the Israeli Cabinet
has established a large number of settlements and
approved the expansion of existing settlements, to the
detriment of the Palestinian people's property and
rights. The fact that Israel seeks to establish
settlements in the occupied Palestinian and Syrian
territories reveals the falseness of the claims of
successive Israeli Governments, including the current
Government, that they wish to achieve peace. If the
Israeli Government's actions against settlers in the
Gaza Strip are genuine, why is the Government
planning to establish more settlements? Israelis know
full well that those settlements cannot remain, because
they present an insurmountable obstacle to the
achievement of peace in the region.

More than 8,000 Palestinians, including 259
children, are being held in Israeli prisons. Over the past
year alone, Israel has killed more than 859
Palestinians. In total, more than 3,670 Palestinians
have been killed by Israel since 2000. Is that not a war
crime? It is shocking that 41 employees of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East have been deliberately killed
by Israel, without any notable reaction from the
international community, including the Security
Council.

The Palestinian detainees and their brethren
detained in the Golan Heights live in unacceptable
prisons that fail to meet the most basic sanitary
conditions. Approximately a week ago, Hayel Abu
Zaid, a Syrian citizen from the occupied Syrian Golan,
died, a few days after his release from prison as a
result of inhuman treatment, torture and deliberate
neglect at the hands of the Israeli authorities during his
more than 18 years in prison.

The Israeli withdrawal from Gaza must be
complete and comprehensive. Israel must also fully
withdraw from the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. The international community must be
vigilant and must call for full Israeli withdrawal from
Gaza - including its land, sea and air spaces in order
to make the withdrawal complete. Israel must not be
allowed to use the withdrawal as a cover for its
continued occupation of the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem.

Israel uses many flimsy arguments in its war
against the Palestinians; the Council heard some of
them from the representative of Israel earlier in today's
meeting. However, the essence of the conflict is one
people's military occupation of another people and
their land for more than four decades. It is about the
occupying Power's relentless aggression against the
peoples and the lands of Syria and Palestine. It is about
Israel's refusal to end that occupation because it is
attempting to acquire more territory by force and to
displace large numbers of Palestinians from their
homes and lands, using death, destruction and misery
as tools to carry out its expansionist schemes.

Unimpeded, Israel continues to carry out its
illegal and unjust practices and policies in full view of
the international community and, unfortunately, in full
view of the Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council must make bold and
courageous decisions to ensure full compliance with its
relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and to ensure the achievement
of a just and comprehensive peace in the region on all
tracks. The Council must ensure the rule of
international law and put an end to the cycle of
violence and bloodshed that for so many decades has
prevented the attainment of comprehensive and just
peace, security and freedom in that important part of
the world.

The delegation of the United States of America
has described the situation between Syria and Lebanon
in an artificial and thoroughly false manner. That
constitutes unacceptable interference in the relations
between two brotherly countries. The tone of
incitement of the United States statement does not bode
well for Lebanon or its relations with Syria. We do not
think that the question of movements between our two
countries was worthy of being raised in the Security
Council, especially because the recent controls at the
Syrian-Lebanese border are temporary and dictated by
security requirements. I wish to remind the United
States delegation that the two sides, without mediation
or interference from the United States, are cooperating
and are well on the way to settling the issue. It is very
strange that the United States should call upon Syria to
take stringent measures along its border with one
neighbouring country and, at the same time, express
concern that the same measures are being taken on
Syria's other border, with Lebanon.

