Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Let me begin by
commending your initiative, Mr. President, in
convening this important and timely debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Allow me to
express my gratitude to Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs; Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
Mr. Daccord, Director General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their informative
briefings.

We welcome the Secretary-General's progress
report (S/2010/579) and commend its analytical depth
and consultative observations. Judging from the wide-
ranging perspectives shared with us today, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is an important
yet daunting global challenge. Therefore, the efforts to
build consensus on the subject and the progressive
development of normative frameworks to address
civilian protection challenges, including resolutions
1894 (2009), 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009), are
encouraging developments.

We also recognize the contribution of some
individual Member States and regional organizations to
these developments. At the regional level, Nigeria is a
signatory to the African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa - the Kampala Convention. Once
the Convention enters into force, it will be the first
legally binding regional instrument to impose an
obligation on State parties to protect and assist
internally displaced persons (IDPs).

At the international level, we commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Department of Field Support and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for keeping the Security
Council sharply focused on this issue. The 2009 joint
study, the operational concept on the protection of
civilians, and the newly updated aide-memoire are
important tools that the Council should continue to use
to systematize our approach to protecting the rights and
persons of civilians in armed conflict.

Despite those notable developments, the grim
reality of today is that civilians are still casualties of
conflicts and the direct targets of abduction, sexual
violence and the denial of humanitarian access. Recent
developments underscore the increasing difficulty that
we face in addressing the five core challenges
articulated in the Secretary-General's report, contained
in document S/2009/277.

The acts of rape perpetrated by rebels in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in August
and the recent assault on civilians in Western Sahara
illustrate the magnitude of the task of civilian
protection. Difficult protection challenges remain in
Afghanistan and Somalia. Indeed, the impending
referendums in the Sudan may present serious
protection challenges for which the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and all United
Nations actors on the ground must be prepared.

Protection requires early intervention and the
swift deployment of humanitarian assistance by the
international community. It also requires coordination
and the pulling together of the capacities of the various
multilateral agencies involved in efforts to bring relief
to IDPs and refugees. I must stress that our growing
understanding of the needs and vulnerabilities of
civilians in armed conflict must be marked by the
ability and capacity to protect. In the same vein, while
the trend towards mandating peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians is a positive step, it is essential to
support such aspirations with adequate resources.
As a major troop-contributing country, Nigeria is
aware of the acute resource constraints that United
Nations peacekeepers face in the field daily. Such
constraints limit their ability to effectively protect
civilians, guarantee safe passage for IDPs, facilitate the
movement of humanitarian actors and, crucially,
establish assessment and early-warning mechanisms to
prevent a crisis. Indeed, better resourcing would make
the exercise of benchmarking the outcomes of
peacekeeping missions more accurate and effective.

As caretakers of international peace and security,
our efforts should be directed at addressing those and
other constraints that militate against the effective
protection of civilians. We therefore echo the
Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive,
consistent and accountable approach to protecting
civilians in hostilities. In our View, the three additional
actions suggested by the Secretary-General in his
report will fundamentally enhance the protection of
civilians.

In that respect, we firmly support the
recommendation that the Council should avoid a
selective approach to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. All cases requiring protection should be
given equal emphasis, whether in Southern Sudan,
Darfur, Somalia, Afghanistan or Western Sahara. When
an issue requiring civilian protection is not on the
Council's agenda, the United Nations should give its
full support to the regional or subregional organization
already addressing such issues.

It is evident that composite measures are required
to protect civilians, prevent conflicts and deal with
their consequences. There is the need for States to
ratify and implement existing conventions and
protocols on armed conflict. Efforts should be
intensified to strengthen legal frameworks and
mechanisms for monitoring and reporting attacks
against civilians by State and non-State actors alike. In
West Africa, the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons is a threat to the protection of civilians. We
would therefore like to reiterate our call for the
elaboration of an arms trade treaty.

Conflict prevention is fundamental to the
protection of civilians. Practice has shown that it costs
less to prevent than to control conflicts. That is why
Nigeria fully supports region and subregional conflict
prevention initiatives, and we encourage the Council to
do the same.
Post-conflict peacebuilding efforts through the
Peacebuilding Commission should also be intensified.
Such peacebuilding strategies should not only address
immediate challenges, but also lay the foundation for
long-term development. We agree with the Secretary-
General's recommendation concerning the need to
develop a set of indicators for the systematic
monitoring of and reporting on protection of civilians
in armed conflicts.

Nigeria believes that the responsibility to protect
civilians in armed conflict situations is a shared one,
although the primary burden rests with national
Governments. The cooperative engagement of all
actors on the ground and of policymakers is necessary
to support national Governments in securing and
protecting their civilian populations.

The international community should remain
vigilant and bear its fair share of our collective
responsibility to protect civilians. If we act
purposefully and in concert, we can better shield
civilians from the ravages of armed conflict.

Mr. President, we support the presidential
statement adopted earlier that was prepared under your
guidance (S/PRST/2010/25).

