Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I have the honour
to inform the Council today about my recent visit to
Burundi, which I undertook in my capacity as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) from 5 to 9 November. As per
established practice, for this statement I have consulted
with and received the approval of the 54 members of
the PBC configuration, including Burundi, the country
concerned. Based on those consultations, I focused on
the following issues during my visit: socioeconomic
cooperation on the new national development plan, the
political situation in the aftermath of the fifth round
of the dialogue led by the East African Community
(EAC), the path to the elections in 2020 and the return
of refugees.

In Burundi, I met with the Second Vice-President
of the Republic, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the
Minister of Finance, Budget and Privatization and the
President of the National Assembly, as well as former
President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, Mr. Evariste
Ndayishimiye, Secretary-General of the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratie-Forces
pour la defense de la democratie ruling party, and
representatives of the Sahwanya-Front pour la
democratie du Burundi and Amizero y'Abarundi
opposition parties. I also met with His Excellency
Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the United
Nations, Mr. Basile Ikouebe, Special Representative of
the African Union for the Great Lakes Region, and with
representatives of the private sector and civil society, as
well as numerous bilateral and multilateral donors and,
of course, the United Nations country team. Owing to
a last-minute change in his schedule, the meeting with
President Pierre Nkurunziza did not take place. From
Bujumbura, I travelled to Pretoria for meetings on 8 and
9 November with representatives of the Government of
South Africa and several think tanks. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank United Nations Resident
Coordinator Garry Conille and Ambassador Albert
Shingiro, Permanent Representative of Burundi, for
the rich and insightful programme that they helped
organize.

During my stay in Bujumbura some of my
interlocutors informed me that the security situation in
the country remains calm and stable, and we encourage
all stakeholders to refrain from violence in order to
safeguard that state of affairs. President Nkurunziza's
announcement that he would not seek re-election in
2020 was one of the most significant developments
since my last trip to Burundi in March. When I met
with some of the leaders of the ruling party during
my visit, they confirmed the President's intention, and
some expressed the hope that the announcement would
help to ease the tensions among political actors ahead
of the 2020 elections.

When Burundi's Foreign Minister Nibigira met
the Secretary-General in late September in New York,
he raised the question of United Nations support for
the Burundian elections of 2020, and I brought up
that conversation when Mr. Nibigira received me in
Bujumbura, He emphasized that preparations for the
elections were already ongoing and indicated that the
international community couldplay arolein encouraging
those members of the opposition in exile who were not
involved in the coup attempt of May 2015 to return
home and participate in the elections. He mentioned
that in Kayanza in August the leaders of some political
parties had agreed on a road map for the elections. The
representatives of some opposition parties and various
civil-society actors reminded me, however, that not all
the political parties had subscribed to the Kayanza road
map, and expressed concern that the elections of 2020
would not be inclusive, as well as their hope that the
national independent electoral commission will be truly
impartial. Many interlocutors lamented the fact that the
Government had not participated in the fifth and last
round of the EAC-led talks in Arusha in late October,
while the Government, the ruling party and some
other political parties justified their absence based on
the fact that October is a month of national mourning
when Burundi commemorates the anniversary of the
assassinations of Prince Louis Rwagasore, the father
of Burundian independence, and Melchior Ndadaye,
Burundi's first democratically elected President.

My recent visit also offered the opportunity to
pursue the dialogue on the socioeconomic situation
with the Government and Burundi's international
partners that I initiated two years ago with the then-
United Nations Resident Coordinator. On 22 August,
the Government launched a new national development
plan for the period from 2018 to 2027. Its objective is
to transform Burundi's economy structurally in order
to achieve "strong, sustainable, resilient and inclusive
growth capable of creating decent employment for all
and improving social well-being". Over the next 10
years, that plan will be a key reference document for
Burundi's development partners. I therefore encourage
the Government and donors to use it as an entry point for
a substantive discussion on development cooperation,
and specifically on the implementation of the national
development plan.

On 6 November, the Government organized a
presentation and round-table discussion on the new
development plan between its authors, the Resident
Coordinator and myself and our teams. I also held
two separate meetings on the plan with bilateral and
multilateral donors, who expressed their readiness
to support it and reiterated their commitment to
remaining engaged in Burundi. At the same time, they
emphasized their desire to have a substantive dialogue
with the Government on the plan's implementation and
on its expectations of donors. They expressed a desire
to engage more intensively with the Government with
regard to the sectoral implementation of the plan, both
strategically and on a more technical level. They remain
interested in participating in ajoint retreat or workshop
with the Government focusing on the main objectives
of the plan and on opportunities for support. The
Government informed me that it is currently preparing
a road map for the plan's implementation and will reach
out to donors in that regard.

The recent suspension of the work of international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Burundi
was a major subject of many conversations. Government
representatives informed me that about 25 international
NGOs had already adapted to the new regulations
and will be able to resume their work soon, while
the relevant authorities are currently considering the
requests of another 60 organizations, which should be
able to resume their operations shortly. Progress has
been made on funding the humanitarian response plan,
which is currently covered to a level of 58 per cent,
compared to just 2 per cent during my visit in March.

Representatives of the Government and the Heads
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) drew my attention
once again to the issue of the return of refugees, mainly
from Tanzania, which is taking place on the basis of
a tripartite agreement between Burundi, Tanzania and
UNHCR. More than 52,000 refugees have been helped
by UNHCR and partners to voluntarily repatriate to
Burundi since August 2017, the vast majority of them
from Tanzania but with some also returning from
Kenya and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Government noted that assistance aimed at supporting
the return and reintegration of refugees was particularly
welcome. The international partners of UNHCR and
Burundi stressed that the voluntary nature of the returns
is essential. In cooperation with Burundi's authorities,
UNHCR - together with partner organizations such as
the IOM, the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Food Programme, UNICEF, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Population Fund and
the International Rescue Committee - is offering
assistance to people who decide to return to Burundi,
taking into account the needs of both the returnees
and their communities of origin. Although various
actors, including the Peacebuilding Fund, are financing
international assistance for returns, the programme
remains severely underfunded. Among the challenges
people are facing are food insecurity, difficulties
with enrolment in schools and a lack of means for
rehabilitating shelters.

I also met with the new Head of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) in Bujumbura, who reported allegations
of continuing human rights violations and abuses.
In my meetings with Government officials, I urged
them to conclude the outstanding memorandum of
understanding with OHCHR as soon as possible and to
engage with the Office and other parts of the United
Nations country team on the entire range of human
rights, civil and political as well as social, economic
and cultural. Based on all my recent conversations,
these are my conclusions and recommendations.
First, the 2020 elections are already very much
at the centre of political attention in Burundi. It is
crucial to the country's future to ensure that they are
free, inclusive, democratic and peaceful and that their
results are widely seen to be legitimate, primarily in
Burundi itself but also internationally. I encourage the
Government of Burundi and its international partners
to pursue their discussions about possible forms of
assistance that the country may need in order to ensure
the conduct of successful elections.

Secondly, the upcoming elections should not
distract from the fact that the country's socioeconomic
development still requires more attention and additional
efforts. Burundi's international partners in Bujumbura
unanimously welcomed the fact that the Government
had issued a new national development plan, which
has the potential to contribute to the well-being of the
people of Burundi and enable increased cooperation
between the Government and its international partners.
I encourage the Government and its partners to engage
in open and substantive strategic dialogue on the
plan's implementation, followed by sector-specific
discussions on concrete projects. I also encourage
bilateral and multilateral partners and the Government
of Burundi to continue their dialogue with a view to
creating conditions conducive to the resumption of
assistance that has been suspended.

Thirdly, the orderly and voluntary return of
Burundian refugees is another element that can
contribute to inclusive and therefore successful elections.
UNHCR and its partners offer crucial assistance for
the voluntary return of refugees by ensuring respect
for international standards and thereby enabling the
sustainable reintegration of returnees. They require
additional resources, accompaniment and support from
the international community for those efforts.

Fourthly and finally, I encourage the Government
and its partners at the United Nations to work in a
constructive and practical manner, based on mutual
trust and respect, towards the full realization of all
human rights - civil and political as well as social,
economic and cultural - and to swiftly conclude the
outstanding memorandum of understanding between
the Government of Burundi and OHCHR. The
Peacebuilding Commission Burundi configuration
remains committed to facilitating the dialogue between
the Government of Burundi and its international
partners on all the issues I have mentioned, as they
are all essential to peacebuilding. Meanwhile, the
configuration's focus will remain on the socioeconomic
arena. A more comprehensive report on my latest visit
will be presented to the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on Monday 26 November.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members of
the Security Council for their continuing support to the
configuration and for their interest.

