Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): First, I would like to thank the United Kingdom, as penholder, for proposing resolution 2510 (2020), which was just adopted. However, I want to note that we are disappointed that today's vote did not garner unanimous support among the members of the Security Council, despite commitments agreed to by leaders in Berlin, including the Russian Federation. It is also very unfortunate that foreign mercenaries, including from the Kremlin-linked Wagner Group, are making an inclusive political solution harder to achieve. Such actions undermine the achievement of a political solution facilitated by the United Nations and are not helping the Libyan parties to come together, as was stated was necessary. However, through the resolution just adopted, the Security Council answers the call of the Libyan people for the international community to stop using their country to wage conflict; to stop driving Libyans from their homes; to help foster respect for international humanitarian law and the need for unhindered life-saving humanitarian access; to support their desire for democratic governance; and to let schools reopen and health centres restock. By voting to adopt this resolution, the United States emphasizes the need for additional accountability for those Member States that continue to violate the arms embargo in spite of the explicit commitments made in Berlin - violations that continued immediately following the Berlin Conference. External actors must stop fuelling the conflict. Countries that participated in the Berlin Conference committed to respect the arms embargo in promises made by those at the highest levels of Government. Resolution 2510 (2020) makes it clear that now is the time for all Member States to comply with the United Nations arms embargo. The United States also reiterates its call for de-escalation and the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces, including foreign mercenaries and fighters. It is deeply regrettable that, despite commitments made at the Berlin Conference, again, some countries - including from around this table and others mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2019/914) - continue to send military equipment and personnel to Libya. We remain concerned about reports that forces affiliated with both the Libyan National Army (LNA) and the Government of National Accord (GNA) are contemplating significant military action in the near future. Whether offensive or pre-emptive in nature, such actions would violate the understandings reached in Berlin. Resolution 2510 (2020) clearly supports the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in its important work to have both the LNA and the GNA agree to de-escalate and take active steps to establish a lasting ceasefire through ongoing 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks. Those talks should continue unimpeded.The United States also condemns the grave threat to Libya's unity and to the well-being of the Libyan people posed by the shutdown of Libyan oil and gas facilities by the Libyan National Army. Libya's energy resources belong to its people and underlie Libya's economic well-being. The Council previously made it clear that no party should use those resources as a political bargaining chip. The facilities must be reopened without preconditions. Economic issues are core drivers of the ongoing conflict, and Libya's resources and revenues must also be distributed transparently and equitably for the benefit of all Libyan people.
