Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines): Allow me to extend
to you, Sir, my congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya, for
his successful term.

The Philippines expresses its deep concern about the
Israeli Government's decision to proceed with
construction in the eastern part of Jerusalem/Al-Quds.

This action, sadly, is not in conformity with the
spirit of dialogue and reconciliation which has otherwise
characterized the tenor of relations between the
Governments of Israel and Palestine as they engage
themselves in the Middle East peace process, Let us recall
the great progress made between Israel and Palestine in
the peace process, with the joint Declaration of Principles
signed in 1993, the Interim Agreement of 1995 and, more
recently, the Hebron protocol, concluded just two months
ago. We are most anxious that this recent development
may and will pose a serious obstacle to the final status
negotiations scheduled to commence in the next few
weeks.

The Philippines has long held that the Holy City of
Jerusalem is the sacred treasure of the faithful of
Christianity, Islam and Judaism. Thus, there is no room
for unilateral action with respect to the administration and
deveIOpment of the city. We reiterate our view that
further settlement in the occupied territories in Jerusalem
is contrary to the spirit and intent of the agreements
concluded between the Israeli and Palestinian authorities.

For its part, the Philippines has learned from its own
experience that parties to a peace process must at all
times have mutual consideration for each other's interests,
as well as a sincere willingness to make sacrifices for the
greater good. There certainly can be no greater good than
a secure and lasting peace.
Security Council 3745111 meeting (Resumption 2)
Fifty~second year 6 March 1997

 

The Philippines joins the Secretary-General and the
global community, which has spoken with unanimity in this
Chamber, in urging the Israeli Government to reconsider its
decision in the interest of peace for all peoples in the
region. The Philippines reiterates its unwavering support for
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, as expressed
in our consistently voting in favour of all resolutions
pertaining to Palestine in the General Assembly.

The Philippines also renews its call for the
implementation of the resolutions on the Middle East
situation and the occupied territories enacted in this very
Chamber, particularly Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), and for the successful
conclusion of the peace process bravely embarked upon by
the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and their neighbours.
Though the path may be arduous, let us continue to move
forward.

