Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
briefing on behalf of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). Through him, I would like
also to thank the entire Mission and express the
gratitude of Panama for the work it has been doing. We
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of the United States, Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad, who spoke
on behalf of the Multinational Force, for his briefing.
Finally, we would like to welcome the Ambassador of
Iraq, Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, and to thank him for his
important statement to the Council.

We are pleased to see that, in spite of the serious
security situation that persists in Iraq, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/688) gives some signs of
justified optimism. Those signs of optimism are based,
first and foremost, on a drop in acts of violence
throughout Iraq. That is due in no small measure to the
political agreements and understandings achieved
among the parties in conflict, with the necessary
participation of UNAMI and the leadership of the
multinational forces.

The holding of provincial elections in Iraq has
been a pending topic for many months, due to a lack of
the necessary political agreement on establishing laws
and on a suitable institutional framework in which to
hold the elections. This is why we note with
satisfaction the national voter registration update by
the Government of Iraq, as well as the adoption of the
provincial elections law, which includes the
fundamental issue of the representation of minorities.
My delegation recognizes the importance of those
achievements for the establishment of democracy in
Iraq. It is essential to continue to pay particular
attention to those issues.

In spite of those advances, thousands of Iraqis
continue living in very adverse humanitarian
circumstances. An increase in the presence of
humanitarian personnel on the ground is crucial for
progress.

That is why we recognize the importance of the
fact that the United Nations staff have begun to
broaden their presence and activities and that different
offices, agencies and programmes involved in this
matter have got together to establish a permanent
international presence in Baghdad. We believe that that
initiative will contribute to the implementation of the
goals established in the United Nations Assistance
Strategy for Iraq 2008-2010.

On the other hand, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons continues to be cause for concern.
We recognize the incentives provided by the
Government of Iraq for the return of thousands of
displaced persons, as well as the measures so that those
individuals can recover their property. We urge the
Government of Iraq to continue those measures.

No less important is that, as mentioned in the
UNAMI report, human rights in Iraq continue to be
violated regularly. In that context, we should make
special mention of the thousands of people in various
detention centres who continue to call for the
application of international human rights standards,
while they suffer ill treatment and humiliation and
while basic procedural guarantees are denied them.
That is why the Council should pay more attention to
that serious situation and support the efforts of the
United Nations bodies that are involved in this matter.

Finally, the main goal of the efforts of this
Organization must be to achieve an Iraq that can live in
prosperity and peace, both with itself and with its
neighbours, an Iraq where human rights are promoted
and respected, an Iraq that is free of occupation by
multinational forces.

