Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Let me start by
associating my delegation with the expression of
condolences and sympathy to the delegation of the
Russian Federation on the tragic loss of lives,
including President Kadyrov, and the many injured in
the bombing in Grozny.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
Senior Minister Ana Pessoa Pinto and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh
Sharma, whom I thank for his important statement.

My delegation is always pleased to participate in
the Security Council's discussions on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET), the
present mandate of which ends in 10 days.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2004/333), in which he observes that
the relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia
has continued to benefit from the commitment to
cooperation at the highest political levels. From the
very beginning, the leadership of both nations agreed
to cooperate on the basis of forward-looking and
reconciliatory policies - a visionary and realistic
approach that has served both nations well. It has led to
peace in the area and has enabled both Timor-Leste and
Indonesia to focus on development and on the best
interests of their peoples.

My delegation is of the view that the strong
commitment of the national leaders of both countries to
the forward-looking approach to which they have
pledged themselves will be extremely useful in
resolving whatever problems we face now or may face
in the future. That was restated and reaffirmed by the
Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Timor-Leste at
their meeting in Bali just a couple of days ago.

In his report, the Secretary-General recommends
to the Security Council the extension of UNMISET for
a further one-year period, described as a consolidation
phase, to enable the Mission to sustain, strengthen and
build upon the gains made so far in Timor-Leste. My
delegation has no objection whatsoever to this
recommendation to the Council. Indeed, as has been
the case in the past, we are delighted to offer our
support to policies that will enable Timor-Leste to
make the greatest possible progress in the shortest
possible time.

Indonesia, within its limited capacity as a
developing country, has in a modest way contributed
concretely to the economic development of Timor-
Leste in various ways. Indonesia would like to urge the
members of the international community, especially the
developed nations, to redouble their efforts and
increase their assistance to help Timor-Leste in its
current economic development activities.
There are some other issues in the report on
which we would like to comment. With regard to the
border issue, in paragraph 11, the report, while
acknowledging the significant technical work that has
been accomplished, also alluded to the fact that
finalization of a border agreement, for which further
input is expected from Indonesia, has remained elusive.
We see that as an inaccurate and one-sided view that
reflects a lack of understanding with regard to the
issue.

For the Council's information, the Technical Sub-
Committee of Border Demarcation and Regulation, as
part of the Joint Border Committee, since December
2001 has held meetings 11 times, and each meeting
was preceded by a joint field survey. Indonesia has
always been supportive of all activities aimed at
finding a solution on the determination of borders
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste and of all kinds of
community activities along the border.

With regard to paragraph 12, on the issue of
management of the border and the regulation of
economic activities, I wish to further inform the
Council that there are two agreements in place: the
Arrangement on Traditional Border Crossings and
Regulated Markets and the Technical Arrangements on
the Coordination of Measures to Facilitate the
Movement of People and Their Personal Effects
between the Enclave of Oecussi and Other Parts of
Timor-Leste. At this stage, Indonesia is awaiting the
readiness of its partner to start implementing the
agreements.

With regard to paragraph 13, on the problem of
the so-called former refugees, I would like first of all
to restate that there have been no more Timor-Leste
refugees in Indonesia since December 2002, when
more than 200,000 refugees returned voluntarily to
Timor-Leste. From the registration process conducted
by the Government of Indonesia from August until
November 2003, it is clear that there are about 125,000
East Timorese living in nine provinces and 61
regencies throughout Indonesia. Of that figure, 113
people opted to return to Timor-Leste, and the
Government will render its help to them. In addition,
out of the 125,000 others who live in Indonesia, 28,000
live in East Nusa Tenggara province, West Timor, but
not in camps, as the report suggested. They opted to
stay in Indonesia as citizens and are being offered
relocation within Indonesia. However, the Government
will always be ready to render its help should they
voluntarily decide to return to Timor-Leste at any time.
In relation to that issue, I also need to draw the
Council's attention to the fact that the continued use of
the term East Timorese "former refugees" is giving the
wrong impression - that there are still problems
related to security. They do not pose security threats. In
that regard, it should be noted that the Government of
Indonesia has taken some important measures to
address security matters, including the Indonesian
police and armed forces sweeping for and confiscating
weapons in the border area; these in turn have been
destroyed by the authorities, as witnessed by
UNMISET representatives. Continuous checking is
conducted by the security apparatus in West Timor.

I wish also to bring to the Council's attention the
fact that the outdated and unnecessary retention of the
Phase 5 security situation rating in West Timor,
unilaterally imposed since 2000, has prevented access
by and the operations of international agencies and
non-governmental agencies in this process and has
hampered their humanitarian programmes. As a matter
of fact, there have not been any reports of border
incidents since 2001. That clearly shows that security
has been improved along the border.

On the issue of separated Timorese children, the
Governments of Indonesia and Timor-Leste, in the
absence of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, are taking full charge
through their continued cooperation in order to see the
issue successfully concluded in the best interests of the
affected children.

Finally, my delegation is confident that the
Council will take into account the continued progress
in the bilateral relations between Indonesia and Timor-
Leste, as well as in the stable security situation along
our borders, in view of the fact that since 2001 there
have been no problems whatsoever in the area. As the
Timor-Leste Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ramos
Horta, correctly stated in his statement to the Council
on 20 February 2004, "Obviously, we do not anticipate
any external threat" (S/PV.49]3, p. 21).

