Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
too wish to thank you, Mr. President, for arranging
today's open Council debate on this important issue.

In this regard, the delegation of Egypt wishes to
make a number of observations. First, we note the
ongoing development of the nature of armed conflicts,
whether domestic or international. The main features of
today's conflicts are the targeting of civilians, the
obstruction of humanitarian assistance and an increase
in the number of factions, parties and other elements in
conflicts. In armed conflicts, the presence of armed
groups, militias, military contractors and terrorist
organizations obliges the international community to
closely study the situation and to consider mechanisms
to provide and strengthen the protection of civilians.
The international community should give priority
consideration to agreeing on an international approach
to dealing with these developments.

Secondly, it is our View that an important reason
for increased civilian suffering in conflict situations is
the parties' lack of compliance with the provisions of
international humanitarian law, most important the
Geneva Conventions and their two Additional
Protocols. These are an integral part of international
humanitarian law, since they define the internationally
agreed framework for dealing with civilians in armed
conflict and under occupation. We agree with the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/43l),
which states that during the last 18 months, the very
fundamentals of international humanitarian law and
human rights have been under great pressure. We also
share his concern that counter-terrorism measures have
not always complied with human rights obligations.
Obviously, this reflects negatively not only on the
counter-terrorism strategy, but also on the situation of
international humanitarian law and human rights. This
poses a great threat to the international ethical system.

Thirdly, we call on the international community
to give special attention to what the Secretary-
General's report calls a culture of impunity, which only
encourages increased violence and crime and
contributes to the intensification of conflicts and the
destabilization of international peace and security. The
ongoing change in the nature of armed conflicts must
not promote impunity for armed groups and other
parties, such as mercenaries and military or civilian
contractors, who cannot be allowed to evade
responsibility before the competent courts.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General's report
addresses, inter alia, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. A closer look into the situation
there reveals it to be a very vivid and glaring example
of the suffering of civilians in one of the world's most
protracted armed conflicts. Three and a half million
people are there subject almost daily to military
operations targeting civilians, inflicting extreme
violence and murder and denying them basic
humanitarian assistance. Their needs have become
even more acute since construction began on the
separation wall inside the occupied West Bank, as the
Secretary-General's report notes, with

"a profound humanitarian impact on civilians by

separating Palestinian communities from their

land, jobs and markets and severely limiting their
access to food, water and power supplies and
essential social services, including schools and

hospitals". (5/2004/431, para. 18)

We must acknowledge that, despite the United
Nations previous successful demonstrations of its
competence effectively to intervene to protect civilians
in the Balkans, Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone and
elsewhere, daily life for the Palestinian people is clear
evidence of the incompetence and inability of the
international community and the Organization to
protect civilians under military occupation.

Fifthly, we concur with the Secretary-General's
vision, laid out in the concluding observations of his
report, emphasizing the need for the international
community to

"recommit itself to the principles of international
law based on justice, peaceful settlement of
disputes and respect for human dignity. These
principles impose necessary limits on violence
and on permissible behaviour in conflicts and set
minimum standards for treatment to which people
are entitled as human beings. It is from these agreed
standards that the United Nations framework for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict has
arisen and evolved". (ibid., para. 61)

