Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): At the outset, let me join
my colleagues in expressing our appreciation for the
accomplishments of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) under Mr. Oshima's
leadership. As we bid him farewell, we wish him every
success in the future.

We are also sad to see Ambassador Traore leaving
us. We recall his able handling of the Council's
deliberations during the Guinean presidency in March.
We greatly value his friendship. As Ambassador Akram
is not with us today, I should like, on his behalf and on
behalf of the delegation of Pakistan, to express to
Mr. Traore our best wishes for every success in his
future endeavours.

In view of the proliferation of armed conflicts
around the world, and in the light of the Security
Council's resolutions based on the reports of the
Secretary-General relating to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, one can hardly overemphasize the
importance of the activities undertaken by OCHA.
Since more than 75 per cent of the casualties that occur
in such conflicts happen to be those of civilians, it is
essential that concrete measures be taken to reduce to a
minimum the threat to the lives and property of
civilians, particularly of the most vulnerable groups:
children, women and the elderly.

In that context, the training and awareness
activities undertaken by OCHA are commendable. We
feel that, in order to further strengthen those activities,
more tenacious efforts are needed, particularly to
implement the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General. For action in the near future, the
Council could consider a few suggestions.

First, it would be worthwhile to conduct an
analytical study of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in order to identify reasons for the
delay in their implementation and measures that need
to be taken for their speedy and effective
implementation.

Secondly, the workshops organized by OCHA in
various parts of the world should be transformed from
individual, ad hoc projects into a well-defined global
programme of action in terms of capacity-building and
awareness-raising.

Thirdly, the coverage of such a programme
should be global, with a special emphasis on coverage
of countries that have suffered from armed conflicts
and of regions that remain crisis-prone. Once those
countries and regions have been covered, the
programme could continue elsewhere, according to the
wishes of the interested countries.

Fourthly, the training and awareness workshops
should have concrete follow-up, and measures should
be taken to enable countries to have their own national
programmes for continuation of the process of
capacity-building so that the number of civilian
casualties can be reduced. In fact, we should recognize
that, just as we help build the capacity of countries to
face the challenge of natural disasters, so should we
also face the challenge posed by man-made disasters.

Most important, there is a need for strict
application of, and adherence to, international
humanitarian law in armed conflicts. That has been
pointed out by other speakers too. In that context, I
would like to draw the Council's attention to our part
of the world. In Jammu and Kashmir, documented
blatant disregard for international humanitarian law
and massive violations of human rights by the
occupying Power have greatly exacerbated the
suffering of the Kashmiri people and have rendered the
need for an urgent solution imperative. Addressing
concerns related to international humanitarian law in
armed conflicts can be a positive first step towards the
peaceful solution of such conflicts and disputes.

Finally, it goes without saying that OCHA needs
to be provided the financial and human resources
necessary to carry out the functions that are clearly part
of its mandate, which has been decided by the
Secretary-General and recognized by the Security
Council.

