Mr. Arcia Vivas (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the New Zealandpresidency
for the convening oftoday's meeting today, and we thank

Foreign Minister Murray McCully for presiding over
it. New Zealand's effective leadership of the Security
Council and its willingness to address the initiatives
and proposals made in this organ are recognized and
welcomed by our delegation. We also welcome the
briefing by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, which is
a clear illustration of his interest and the importance he
attaches to the issue, as well as of his commitment so
that the United Nations, with the support of the United
Nations, can help find peace and stability in the region.

We reiterate our support for Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov.

The situation in the Middle East continues to give
rise to concerns, given the various pressing, diverse
and complicated situations in that tumultuous part of
the world. In that regard, we will focus our statement
on the Palestinian question, which is at the heart, or
has significant impact on, the recent problems and the
tensions in the region.

We continue to see, with disappointment and
indignation, how the intransigent attitude and heinous
practices of the Israeli occupying Power against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories and
against others who suffer from the unjust blockade
of the Gaza Strip. We are deeply concerned at seeing
how the two-State solution - the most appropriate
and broadly recognized to ensure the existence of a
free and sovereign Palestinian State living in peace
alongside Israel - appears to be fading further away
each day with the actions of the occupying Power
against international law, respect for peoples and the
very norms of coexistence and understanding between
communities and peoples.

The lives of Palestinians are being threatened by
the illegal, provocative and violent acts committed by
Israeli authorities and settlers against a defenceless
population. Palestinian living conditions have
deteriorated significantly as a result of this reprehensible
occupation, leading to a critical humanitarian
situation. The geographic continuity, the political and
administrative divisions, the demographic composition,
historical rights and the cultural and religious fabric of
Palestinian communities and land in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem have been significantly altered in
favour of the occupying Power, thereby imperilling the
viability of an independent Palestinian State.

All of us are aware that one of the main impediments
to dialogue and peace between Israelis and Palestinians,
as well as one of the greatest threats to the two-State
solution and the very existence of Palestine, is the
immoral settlement policy of the Israeli occupying
Power, which, arbitrarily and with full impunity,
has moved forward with establishing and expanding
settlements on Palestinian territory, using force or legal
and administrative subterfuge to take land from the
Palestinians and destroy their homes, infrastructure
and property to set up hundreds of illegal settlements,
mostly inhabited by extremist Israeli settlers, who
add to the tragedy of the confiscation of property that
legitimately belongs to Palestinians the worry rooted
in the acts of harassment, assault and violence against
displaced Palestinians, who stand up and fight back in
dignity to assert their right over their land.

Some 684 housing units have been demolished in
the West Bank in 2016, and so far this year we have
seen a 25 per cent increase in demolitions ofPalestinian
homes. Some of the demolitions have been punitive,
others have been due to the lack of building permits.
Sometimes they have been done in order for illegal
settlements to be built, in Violation of international
humanitarian law and the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. This represents a break with the
two-State solution concept and remorselessly affects
the viability of a free Palestine and its existence as an
equal State among the other nations of the Middle East.

In this atmosphere of tension and injustice,
Palestinians are living under the surveillance and
harassment of the Israeli military and security forces
which impedes the free movement of Palestinians.
Still worse, we are seeing adult men and women and
young Palestinians falling victim to indiscriminate and
disproportionate violence at the hands of the occupying
Power's military and security forces and hotheaded
settlers. They have been killed, injured, indefinitely
detained and imprisoned. They are the victims of
collective punishment due to real or alleged attacks that
could have been perpetrated by a single Palestinian or
a group of Palestinians against an Israeli or a group of
Israelis, which are acts that we have the obligation to
reject and condemn.

Entire Palestinian towns and communities are at
the mercy of the indiscriminate and criminal repression
of the occupying Power, whose actions have led to the
death of 218 Palestinians since October 2015. More
than 17,000 Palestinians have been wounded by live
ammunition - rubber bullets - or felled by tear gas. In
addition, more than 7,000 Palestinians, including more
than 500 minors, are languishing in Israeli prisons, and
more than 700 people are being held in administrative

detention. The harassment, violence and oppression
exercised against the Palestinian people are part of the
Israeli strategy to deprive them of their ancestral lands
and bring about the end of the idea of having their own
State. We therefore reject this erroneous and prejudicial
approach by Israel in its way of addressing the question
of Palestine.

We must draw attention to the critical humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories as a
result of the Israeli occupation. The vast majority of
Palestinian communities in Area C of the West Bank
are facing serious difficulties in gaining access to
distribution networks of drinking water, due to the
lack or destruction of that infrastructure or because the
Israeli authorities or the water companies themselves
have decided to restrict the pumping of water. Access to
the education for Palestinian children and young people
is affected by Israeli action, including the detention of
minors, military operations, incidents with settlers,
restrictions on school construction, and restrictions on
movement occasioned by the checkpoints.

It has been extremely difficult for Palestinians
health systems in the West Bank to meet the needs ofthe
population because of the occupation, restricted access
and the lack of medical equipment. The Palestinians
subjected to the unjust and brutal blockade of the Gaza
Strip are in a similar or worse humanitarian situation.
Nearly 2 million have seen their homes destroyed, with
little or no possibility of their being rebuilt, which
is also the case with hospitals, schools, workplaces,
property or service facilities. Beyond the closure of
border-crossing points and severe limitations on entry
and exit to and from the Gaza Strip, there is the terrible
legacy of explosive remnants of war, which continue
to pose a threat to civilians, as does shelling from the
Israeli side, motivated or not by attacks from some
quarters in Gaza, resulting in the people of Gaza being
subject to collective and undeserved punishment. We
welcome the progress made by the Gaza reconstruction
mechanism, but this progress should not make us
forget that the reason for the dire situation remains the
blockade.

We call on the United Nations to extend and step
up efforts to address this situation and support the
Palestinian people during this humanitarian crisis. In
addition to the direct action and the contribution of
United Nations agencies, it is appropriate and necessary
for the Security Council to continuously monitor the
humanitarian issue in the occupied territories and the
Gaza Strip, which is just as important as the Council's
dedication to the political negotiations aspects it
focuses on. We would encourage Council members of
the Council to ensure that humanitarian aspects are
included in its discussions in order to safeguard the
welfare of the Palestinians.

Given this bleak picture, the call for the occupying
Power to cease its aggressive, destructive and colonial
policies and bring to justice those responsible for
massacres and undignified acts against Palestinians is
all the more necessary. We call for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and an end to the blockade of the Gaza Strip. In all the
decades of their occupation of Palestinian territories,
the Israelis have done nothing but promote inequality,
injustice and impunity, which is a breeding ground for
despair and the rebellion of the Palestinians against the
unjust situation in which they find themselves.

The Security Council must cease its inaction,
stand firm in defence of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, make concrete efforts to bring the
parties to the negotiating table and decisively support
a political approach that will lead to a dialogue and
negotiation. From our critical position against the
intransigence and abusiveness of the occupying Power
that seems to be doing everything possible not to
achieve peace, we regard with optimism any act that
would facilitate Palestinian-Israeli rapprochement,
such as the recent steps taken to improve the electricity
situation.

We support the work of the Middle East Quartet and
we welcome all efforts by the international community
aimed at advancing political processes and talks with
Israeli and Palestinian with a View to achieving peace.
That should become the exclusive basis for the two-State
solution, taking into account the Arab Peace Initiative
and the right of Palestinians to live in their own State
within internationally recognized borders based on the
pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

