Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the holding of this
debate. We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his briefing.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Council's first discussion of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. For the past decade, the international
community has focused increasing attention on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and the
Council has adopted numerous resolutions and
presidential statements in this regard.

However, in today's world, there are still large
numbers of civilians who find themselves harmed and
affected by armed conflict. The international
community therefore still faces a long and arduous task
in protecting civilians. We are deeply concerned about
the threats posed by armed conflict to the lives and
property of civilians. We urge all parties to conflict to
respect international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions of the Council by protecting the lives,
property and legitimate interests of civilians.

The Council, as the nucleus of the United Nations
collective security mechanism bears the main
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The protection of civilians should
be addressed comprehensively within the larger
framework of a political process aimed at the peaceful
resolution of conflict. It is important to tackle this
problem upstream and to do everything we can to
prevent and reduce the number of conflicts in order to
eliminate the harm to civilians caused by armed conflict.

Responsibility for the protection of civilians falls
first and foremost on national Governments. The
international community and external organizations
may provide constructive assistance. However, while
doing so they must abide by the relevant provisions of
the United Nations Charter and fully respect the will of
the countries concerned and their sovereignty and
territorial integrity. They must do all they can to avoid
wilful intervention in that regard. When it comes to
fighting impunity and achieving justice, we are in
favour of granting an important role to national courts
and tribunals as the main avenue to achieving that goal.

The Council has an active role to play with regard
to advancing the call for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. However, China has never been in
favour of the Council resorting to the use of or
threatening the use of sanctions at every turn. Special
care must be taken in particular when addressing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. It must be
reemphasized that national Governments have the right
to take law enforcement action to fight terrorists,
extremists and separatists in their territory, in order to
safeguard their own and the region's security, peace
and stability.

Law enforcement action taken by national
Governments in the fight against terrorism has nothing
to do with armed conflict. Therefore, the international
community may not take steps to limit or intervene in
the legitimate law enforcement actions of national
Governments, based on the pretext of the protection of
civilians.

The majority of conflicts take place in the
underdeveloped regions of the world. One of the many
and varied causes of armed conflict is poverty and the
accumulated lack of progress in economic development.
The United Nations has an important role to play in
mobilizing international resources and providing
financial and technical assistance to the countries
concerned.

When it comes to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, we must not rely solely on the efforts
of the Council. The General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and regional organizations
should play their respective roles in helping to develop
national economies, resolving conflict and protecting
civilians. China also welcomes the active involvement
by non-governmental organizations in that regard.
China is ready to work together with other members of
the international community to achieve concrete results
on the protection of civilians through pragmatic and
effective efforts.

