Mr. Savva (Fiji): It is my honour to address the
Security Council on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum group that are Members of the
United Nations, namely Australia, Kiribati, the
Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and
my own country, Fiji.

This meeting provides a useful opportunity to
reflect on the work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) to combat terrorism and associated
transnational crime since it was established by the
now-landmark Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
nearly a year and half ago. That resolution brought a
new element to the existing multilateral counter-
terrorism framework and reflected a recognition of
terrorism as a global problem which, if it is to be
eliminated, requires cooperative action at the national,
regional and international levels. The subsequent
ministerial declaration adopted by the Security Council
in its resolution 1456 (2003) further underscored the
need for counter-terrorism actions to reflect
international best practices, including the need to
protect human rights.

There is no doubt that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee has played an important role in guiding and
assisting Member States in their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). In this task, the CTC has
assisted in prompting and focusing Government action.
It has served States in identifying and defining the
required standards for action. Furthermore, the CTC's
efforts in placing States in contact with available
sources of assistance have greatly contributed to the
critical task of enhancing capacity to take such action.
In that regard, we are grateful to the team of experts
assisting the CTC for facilitating the provision of
assistance as required. The clear identification of
assistance needs is a critical first step towards the
development of individual and regional capacity.

We also strongly support the CTC's recent
initiative to meet with relevant regional and
international organizations, and its subsequent action
plan to take forward the dialogue necessary to
coordinate counter-terrorism action. Effective regional
cooperation and coordination are vital to members of
our group to complement our national efforts and
capacities to implement resolution 1373 (2001).

At this point, the Pacific Islands Forum group
would like to record its gratitude and appreciation for
the leadership demonstrated by the inaugural Chairman
of the CTC, Sir Jeremy Greenstock. Sir Jeremy's vision
breathed life into the mandate of resolution 1373
(2001). He gained the confidence States Members of
the United Nations very early on in his chairmanship,
during the most tumultuous months for the
Organization. His efforts to ensure that the CTC at all
times worked in an open and transparent manner were
critical to the Committee's success to date, and were
greatly appreciated by the member States of the Pacific
Islands Forum Group. We were very much warmed by
Sir Jeremy's leadership, which encouraged members of
our group to rise to the challenges that resolution 1373
(2001) presented.

As the CTC now moves into a new phase, under
the chairmanship of Ambassador Arias, the Permanent
Representative of Spain, we are mindful that its
ongoing work will continue to flow from its role as a
monitoring body. Its task in monitoring implementation
of the specific obligations of resolution 1373 (2001)
places it in a unique position to act as a focal point for
States in relation to international counter-terrorism
activities. We look forward to continuing to work with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its new
Chairman.

