The President: I thank the representative of Lebanon
for the kind words he addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of the Lao
People's Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.

Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic)
(interpretation/ram French): My delegation wishes first to
thank you, Sir, and all the members of the Council for
having granted our request to speak before this body in
order to express our opinion on the item on the Council's
agenda today. The Laotian delegation also wishes to
congratulate you warmly on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month, as well as your
predecessor, my dear colleague and friend, the Ambassador
of Gabon, for the important work he accomplished as
President of the Council last month.

My statement will be brief and I strongly hope that,
despite its brevity, it will make a positive contribution to
the current debate on a question that is as delicate as it is
sensitive.

We have not come here to take sides. We understand
the reasons and arguments advanced by all parties,
particularly those directly involved in this matter. We
simply wish to invite those countries involved in this
complex problem to take into account the new development
or situation that recently emerged as a result of the decision
handed down by the International Court of Justice on 27
February 1988 to become seized of the matter now under
consideration here.

Once again, let me repeat that we are not here to plead
the case for any party. As we have already indicated, we
respect any argument adduced by the parties to the dispute.
However, our delegation feels it important to recognize the
enormous suffering that the Libyan people - and I
emphasize the Libyan people 7 is enduring under the
sanctions decided against them, as well as the wish
expressed by the families of the victims of the Lockerbie

tragedy that a trial should take place. and to draw the
conclusion that this matter must find a just solution,
acceptable to all, as speedily as possible.

 

As we all know. this matter has dragged on too long
and the Libyan people has suffered greatly and,
undoubtedly, too much. We cannot and will not ignore that
fact. How much longer must this people, which has
committed no crime, endure this suffering? For all these
reasons, we appeal to the parties concerned to open a
sincere and direct dialogue to resolve this matter as
expeditiously as possible.

In accordance with its policy of peace, independence.
friendship and cooperation with all countries of the world,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic believes in dialogue
and ardently aspires to see international conflicts. however
complex, resolved through negotiation. On that note, in this
new era of international cooperation, we highly hope to see
the parties concerned arrive speedily, through dialogue, at
a solution acceptable to them. This would contribute to
reducing tensions in the region and promoting intematioual
peace and security. That is the modest contribution which
my delegation wishes to make to this important debate
today.

The President: I thank the representative of the Lao
People's Democratic Republic for his kind words addressed
to me.

There are no further speakers on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 8.30 17.171.

