Mr. Savua (Fiji): My delegation joins others in
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the Security
Council presidency for May. We also thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Pleuger.

Fiji aligns itself with the statement that was
presented by New Zealand on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum.

The question of Bougainville is very close to Fiji,
both in the context of the regional peace process and
culturally. We are heartened by the steady progress of
the Bougainville peace process, as it has a direct
impact on the security of our region. A concern is the
possibility that the problems of Bougainville, if not
properly addressed, will spill over to neighbouring
countries. Conversely, stability and the settlement of
Bougainville's problems would augur well for its
neighbours.

The Papua New Guinea Ministerial Committee on
Bougainville was established to look beyond the
current stage of the Bougainville peace process and to
coordinate planning and implementation of the
National Government's responsibilities in Bougainville
for the medium and long term. That Papua New Guinea
initiative complements the exit strategy of the United
Nations in that it will continue the Bougainville peace
process when the United Nations mandate finally ends,
thus - to put it simply - adding value to the stability
achieved. Until the exit date finally arrives, the role of
the United Nations in promoting good governance and
sustainable peace-building is absolutely essential.

The Bougainville authorities - under the able
leadership of the Governor, the Honourable John
Momis, and ably supported by the newly appointed
Vice-President, James Tanis - are to be commended
for their support of the "from the bottom up" approach
of the peace process. That approach involves
representation in the process from all sectors and
proceeding through consultation and cooperation,
based on public awareness and commitment by all
parties to the orderly achievement of agreed outcomes
with all deliberate speed.

The continued support of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) for the
peace process has been a steadying influence, and the
firm direction proffered by its former Director,
Ambassador Noel Sinclair, is much appreciated by all
parties.

Fiji supports all efforts towards finding
sustainable peace for our region. While security from
conflict is a commendable first step, it has to be
accompanied by plans and programmes that address the
economic, social, cultural and humanitarian problems
afflicting the people. Issues such as water, sanitation,
human settlements and the exploitation of women,
youth and children are some of those that need to be
properly considered. Here, we commend Australia and
New Zealand for their efforts in the region towards that
end.

We lend our support to the efforts of Papua New
Guinea and to its request for United Nations assistance;
we trust that the Security Council will give it its
favourable consideration.

