Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2357
(2057), which extends for a year the authorization
granted by the Security Council to effectively and
efficiently implement the arms embargo on weapons
headed for Libya by sea. I would like to thank the
British penholder for its work and efforts.

The arms embargo on Libya is an absolute
priority for France. Military offensives on the ground
are a stumbling block to the inter-Libyan dialogue.
Observance of the embargo by all States is more
necessary than ever, as pointed out in the recently
issued report ofthe Panel of Experts on Libya. Requests
for exemptions must be made only by the Government
of National Accord of Prime Minister Serraj.

Through the European Union Military Operation in
the Southern Central the Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED) - Operation Sophia - the European Union is
currently the only actor actively contributing to the
implementation of the provisions under this resolution
on the high seas off the coast of Libya. Its efforts are
all the more important and useful in that they have not
just provided a greater understanding of arms flows
on the seas, to and from Libya, but also act as a major
deterrent to such trafficking. It has also carried out
many interdiction and inspections of vessels, leading to
the successful seizure ofweapons suspected of fuelling
terrorist cells in eastern Libya. The extraordinary
provisions put in place by the Council makes it possible
for Operation Sophia to respond in a timely manner
to interdict suspected vessels. France has been part of
these European operations by continuously providing
means to implement the arms embargo. We will
continue to do so.

Whatever the results achieved, the threat posed
by weapons headed to Libya nevertheless continues. It
therefore requires ongoing effort by the international
community - not just for the sake of security in that
country and the region, but more generally for the sake of
combating terrorism at the global level. As the conflict
in Libya in recent weeks has been characterized by an
unprecedented cycle of violence, it is more crucial than
ever to support the efforts of the Presidency Council
under Prime Minister Serraj aimed at stabilizing Libya,
as well as to cooperate actively in fighting weapons
trafficking.

We continue to reiterate that there is no military
solution in Libya and to call on all parties to exercise
restraint. We must encourage the efforts of Mr. Serraj
to make the institutions provided for under the Skhirat
Agreement more inclusive and effective, as well as to
support the development of unified national security
architecture under civilian control. Only a lasting
political solution will usher in the return of stability in
Libya.

We in the European Union are determined to
continue the work done by EUNAVFOR MED. The
renewal of the authorization established under resolution
2292 (2016) is an important element in continuing to
provide the necessary legitimacy and resources to act
effectively and efficiently. We welcome the inclusion in
today's resolution of an additional reporting modality
by way of the Secretary-General's annual transmission
of a report on the implantation of the resolution. The
report will enhance the existing notification system
under the relevant sanctions committee and will
further strengthen the transparency of Operation
Sophia vis-a-vis the Security Council, a development
we welcome.

