Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Obviously, it is an
honour to be once again before the Security Council in
a debate on United Nations peacekeeping operations at
this important juncture in their development. I will be
brief because I have had the opportunity twice in recent
months to present our thoughts on the future of
peacekeeping operations and since, as you said, Sir,
our non-paper on the New Horizon initiative was
issued on 17 July. Like you, I wish to highlight the
presence today of nearly all of our commanding
officers, who have been attending a seminar all this
week. I welcome them here with us today.

Next year will mark a decade since the
publication of the landmark report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations led by Ambassador
Brahimi (S/2000/809). This is clearly an important
moment for the Security Council and all Member
States to take stock of progress and the challenges
ahead.

Certainly, the Brahimi report and the subsequent
reform efforts have served us particularly well. United
Nations peacekeeping has become stronger and more
effective. Without these improvements, the United
Nations could not have kept up with the massive
growth in demand for peacekeeping. There have been
setbacks since the Brahimi report, such as in Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of Congo, but we
have managed to move beyond them relatively quickly.
We have built on lessons, good and bad, from the field.
Much of this progress has been the result of the
consistent support of the Member States, and the
guidance provided by the Security Council and the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has
been the basis for strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping.

Within the Secretariat, the "Peace Operations
2010" internal reform sought to further professionalize
our work. The restructuring of the Department of
09-44283
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the
establishment of the Department of Field Support
(DFS) in 2007 aimed to strengthen the organization
and management systems at Headquarters. In 2008, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations produced a
document entitled "United Nations peacekeeping
operations: principles and guidelines" - better known
as the Capstone Doctrine - which set out the elements
that DPKO considers key for the successful conduct of
peacekeeping operations. It reaffirms the basic
principles of United Nations peacekeeping - consent,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-
defence and defence of the mandate. It underscores the
importance for peacekeeping operations of having, by
definition, a peace to keep, a political process to
support and an integrated approach bringing together
the United Nations family on the ground.

Yet we are all aware that the current scale and
complexity of United Nations peacekeeping require us
to review where we stand and to reinvigorate our
partnership. The British-French initiative in the
Council, the work of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, which is chaired
by Japan, and the various initiatives of individual
Member States in 2009 reflect that collective
awareness. Our discussions have helped us to
collectively identify some of the most urgent of these
challenges.

First, it is increasingly tricky, as the Council
knows, to find sufficient the personnel, equipment,
senior leaders and even political leverage to meet the
scale of our activity.

Secondly, we need a shared vision on the use of
United Nations peacekeeping - on the conditions in
which peacekeeping operations are an effective tool
and the circumstances in which they are not. We face
the challenge of translating that shared vision on the
ground so as to protect civilians, defend against attacks
on peace, and assist countries and Governments to
recover from conflict.

Thirdly, we need effective transition strategies.
Once we have achieved early stabilization, we must
ensure that a strong and sustained collective recovery
effort follows so that peacekeeping missions can
transition and withdraw.

With that in mind, during the Security Council's
debate on 29 June (see S/PV.6153), Under-Secretary-
General Malcorra and I called for a renewed
3
partnership among peacekeeping stakeholders. The
President referred to this call in his earlier remarks.
Each and every one of us - the Security Council, the
General Assembly's Special Committee and Fifth
Committee, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and, of course, the Secretariat - has an
essential role to play. Each is indispensable, and we are
mutually responsible to one another to deliver on our
respective roles.

We look forward to pursuing our dialogue with
members of the Security Council and to continuing a
similarly rich dialogue with bodies of the General
Assembly, in particular the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.

(spoke in English)

To help facilitate this dialogue, DPKO and DFS,
as the President mentioned, issued the New Horizon
non-paper on 17 July. This non-paper is part of the
New Horizon process to reinvigorate the peacekeeping
partnership. It outlines a wide range of peacekeeping
challenges that can be met only through effective
partnership. Let me very quickly draw the Council's
attention to some of them.

First, the non-paper highlights the importance of
effective partnership for strengthening the planning of
peacekeeping operations. We need to improve the
quality of assessments and we can do so only through
enhanced information sharing.

The Secretariat must also present to the Council a
full range of options so as to enable the Council to
authorize achievable mandates. Here too, the non-paper
stresses the importance of enhanced consultation and
communication. Effective planning depends upon
peacekeeping partners clearly indicating, early on,
where and how they might be able to assist in the
preparation of an operation.

Secondly, the non-paper looks at some of the
ways in which a revitalized partnership can improve
the management and oversight of peacekeeping
operations. It highlights the need to strengthen
command-and-control systems at every level, including
through more robust accountability frameworks
between Headquarters and mission leaders. It also
proposes stronger consultation and interaction with
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) at all levels to
ensure a common understanding of what may be
demanded of personnel on the ground, particularly in
robust peacekeeping scenarios.

Thirdly, the non-paper identifies three policy
areas where the peacekeeping partnership is currently
not united, which is creating very real operational
dilemmas for our missions today. These are robust
peacekeeping, protection of civilians and critical
peacebuilding tasks for peacekeepers. We urgently
need to build a common view on the role of
peacekeepers in these areas, how they are translated on
the ground, and what tools we need to do that.

Fourthly, we need to shift from a focus on
numbers to ensuring that the necessary capability is in
place. Such a capability-driven approach would have
wide-ranging implications for how we source
equipment and compensate Member States for it, for
the standards we establish for personnel and tasks, for
training support for newer TCCs and for
inter-operability with regional organizations. This
focus on capabilities for delivery also underpins much
of the thinking behind the Support Strategy of the
Department for Field Support (DFS), which Under-
Secretary-General Malcorra will discuss shortly.

There is certainly a full agenda of issues which
will depend on mutual vision and effort. The
Secretariat, for its part, has sought through the New
Horizon to identify ways that we ourselves can better
deliver on our responsibilities. I would like to conclude
by focusing on several commitments highlighted in the
non-paper that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and DFS intend to hold ourselves
to.

With respect to the planning and monitoring of,
and reporting on, United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we are making several commitments.

First, we commit to provide the Security Council
with thorough assessments of situations into which a
new peacekeeping operation may be deployed and to
present proposals for the full range of support that
might be considered to assist with mission deployment.

We commit to consult with the Security Council
and contributing countries in advance of the
deployment of technical assessment missions and to
debrief on their findings.
We are committed to enhancing meaningful
dialogue with troop and police contributors in the
planning for new and ongoing missions and to ensuring
that the Security Council receives, through the reports
of the Secretary-General, a clear assessment of the
views received by the Secretariat from those
contributing countries in advance of mandate renewal.

We will review, improve and streamline our
reporting procedures to ensure that priority information
requirements of the Security Council and troop
contributors can be met within the resources we have
available, and we will explore options for mutual
information-sharing in support of peacekeeping
missions.

We will continue our work to produce appropriate
and high-quality benchmarks for missions, driven by a
comprehensive understanding of conditions on the
ground, and to research best practices in
benchmarking, in close cooperation with all parts of
the United Nations family that contribute to building
peace after conflict.

The issues that I have highlighted are only some
elements of a broader dialogue we hope to develop and
sustain with members of the Security Council, with
troop- and police-contributing countries and with our
regional and United Nations partners on the full gamut
of recommendations in our recently circulated non-
paper. The DPKO and DFS non-paper is, as we always
say, the start of a dialogue, not the end.

We sincerely hope that the months leading to the
tenth anniversary of the Brahimi report can be used to
build a new vision among all stakeholders in the
peacekeeping partnership on how best to build on the
foundations laid for United Nations peacekeeping
nearly a decade ago. I am confident that in the coming
months we can arrive at a revitalized partnership that
sets out a common vision for United Nations
peacekeeping and a shared commitment to strengthen it
in order to serve the men, women and children who
depend on it today and tomorrow.

