Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to thank Mr. Serry for his
briefing. My delegation is also grateful to the
representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
contributions.
Only two days ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1850 (2008) on the situation in the Middle
East. That important resolution invites the parties to
continue negotiations within the framework of the
Annapolis process, but it can achieve its objectives
only with the decisive involvement of the parties and
the international community. With resolve and
determination, Israelis and Palestinians can succeed in
achieving peaceful coexistence and comprehensive
peace, having been able to maintain regular contact
during 2008.

Along with the Annapolis agreements, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map, there is
now a framework for the process and a means to
achieve the goals. The commitment of each of the
parties is well known and their responsibilities are
known as well, especially when it comes to
strengthening mutual trust. For its part, the
international community must support them decisively
and continue its efforts for the socio-economic
development of Palestine, including by strengthening
its institutional capacities and providing assistance to
Palestinian refugees and to the population of Gaza.

In the regional sphere, we welcome the general
calm currently prevailing in Lebanon as a result of the
efforts of the Lebanese people and parties. It will
continue and gain in strength so long as the Doha
Accord is fully applied. We urge the parties, in
particular, to overcome their differences in order to
prepare the legislative elections of May 2009 in a
peaceful manner. At the same time, improving relations
between Lebanon and its neighbours would help to
strengthen peace and stability in the country and
throughout the region. For that reason, we welcome
and encourage the initiatives undertaken in that
respect. We urge Israel and Syria to become part of that
same process in order to ensure the success of the
indirect negotiations undertaken under the auspices of
Turkey.

The countries of the region are destined to live
together and must therefore take the necessary
measures to facilitate a coexistence that would
guarantee peace and security for each and for all. In
that respect, the role of the United Nations will remain
crucial. Notably, the United Nations is making a
valuable contribution to stability in the Middle East
through the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. We appeal once again to all of the parties to
cooperate fully with those Forces.

The year that is coming to an end has seen some
progress in the resolution of major crises in the region.
However, many challenges remain. Primarily with
respect to the Palestinian question, we express the wish
that 2009 will keep the spirit of Annapolis alive with
the objective of creating a Palestinian State living side
by side with the State of Israel in peace and security.

With the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), the
Security Council should be in a position to support the
parties and the process in a more committed, more
visible and especially more tangible manner.

