Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno
for his briefing to the Council today. I also would like
to express our gratitude to Mr. Tom Koenigs, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and his colleagues in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
hard work and dedication to the cause of the Afghan
people.

We congratulate Mr. Kai Eide on his new
assignment and wish him every success in that
important position. We hope that he will be able to
perform his immense duty to improve the situation in
Afghanistan in line with the policies of the Afghan
Government.

Two years after the adoption of the Afghanistan
Compact, the country is witnessing major
accomplishments and continuing to face daunting
challenges. Undoubtedly, there have been remarkable
achievements in certain areas in Afghanistan in recent
years.

The Afghan Government is finalizing the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, which
will serve as the country's main national planning and
budgeting exercise and principal poverty-eradication
strategy. Also, as indicated in the report at hand,
progress continues in several sectors, including inter
alia health services, enrolment in schools, gross
domestic product and investment in the natural
resources of the country.

At the same time and despite these remarkable
accomplishments, threats, such as terrorism and
insecurity caused by Al-Qaida, the Taliban and other
criminal and terrorist groups, as well as the menace of
opium production and drug trafficking, have intensified
and continue to be of grave concern.

As mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
report, in 2007, the level of terrorist activities
increased sharply from that of the previous year, as has
the number of attacks against local and international
humanitarian workers. Many humanitarian workers
have, unfortunately, been either killed or abducted. We
are concerned about the increase in insecurity and
terrorism in Afghanistan and unequivocally condemn
all acts of terrorism perpetrated in that country.

In our view, to address insecurity in Afghanistan
more serious consideration should be given to the
necessity of full national ownership by Afghans over
the security of their country. Certainly, strengthening
the independence and integrity of the Afghan National
Security Forces and increasing home-grown security in
the country are key to realizing the long-awaited
national ownership by Afghans of their own security
issues. Additionally, capacity-building and
reconstruction of infrastructure, including through
utilizing regional potentials, can also contribute to the
improvement of the overall situation in Afghanistan.

One of the most daunting challenges facing
Afghanistan, with serious consequences for the
country, the region and beyond, is the vicious threat
posed by the cultivation, production and trafficking of
narcotic drugs. This threat has thus far had serious
negative impact on the economic development of
Afghanistan and has contributed to insecurity in the
country.

It has also caused serious problems for the wider
region, especially neighbouring countries, including
Iran. As pointed out in the report of the Secretary-
General, Afghanistan is emerging as one of the largest
suppliers of cannabis in the world and, despite certain
efforts made by the Afghan Government to combat this
challenge, tangible results in this regard still remain
elusive and very limited.

Therefore, more vigorous, decisive and concerted
actions, both on the part of Afghanistan and the
international community, are needed if this vicious
menace is to be tackled in a meaningful and effective
way.

It is an unfortunate reality that the progress made
in this regard, including through implementation of
Afghanistan's national drug control strategy, have been
limited and unsatisfactory so far. We concur with the
Secretary-General that there is an urgent need to
strengthen enforcement activities on eradication and
interdiction of trafficking in illicit drugs, including
chemical precursors, and dismantling of production
facilities.

As a country that has resolutely fought the
menace of drug trafficking originating from
Afghanistan and as a nation that has endured heavy
losses of lives and material in this costly and deadly
war over the past three decades, the Islamic Republic
of Iran continues to be resolute and at the forefront of
the world-wide war against drug traffickers and insists
on the necessity of more tangible actions on the part of
Afghanistan and the international community in this
important fight.

As a neighbouring country with deep historical
and cultural relations with Afghanistan and as a
country that has hosted and continues to host millions
of Afghans, Iran has a high stake and a vital interest in
the development, stability, security and prosperity of
Afghanistan. We have therefore spared no effort to
support the Afghan Government in its endeavours to
improve the security and economic situation of the
country.

The Islamic Republic of Iran has made sincere
and concrete contributions to the reconstruction of
Afghanistan, and, despite the illegitimate sanctions
imposed on our nation, we will continue our
development assistance to Afghanistan to the extent
possible. The economic development of Afghanistan
and that of the region are mutually reinforcing and can
not be seen in isolation from one another.

Iran has been actively engaged in various
infrastructural projects in Afghanistan, including
electricity projects, road and railroad construction,
manpower training, health-care services and many
other projects.

Moreover, the second phase of our development
assistance to Afghanistan is underway and will
continue with building railroads to the western part of
Afghanistan and completing previous infrastructure
projects. The results of Iran's contribution to the
reconstruction and economic development of
Afghanistan are tangible and can be seen in the daily
lives of the Afghan people.

Furthermore, our nation has generously hosted
millions of Afghan refugees and illegal migrants in the
past several decades. We have tried our best to make
them feel at home at a time when they were in need
and going through hardship.

Now that the situation in Afghanistan is different,
we earnestly hope that conditions in that country will
pave the way for the repatriation of Afghan refugees to
their home country in a timely and promising manner.
As indicated in the report at hand, the efforts of both
Afghanistan and Iran have continued in order to find
mutually acceptable solutions to this problem.

Before concluding, I wish to stress that we attach
high importance to the continued impartial and central
role of the United Nations in Afghanistan. We believe
that the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan should be aimed at reinforcing
the leadership and ownership on the part of
Afghanistan over the country's affairs, and should be in
line with the efforts made by Afghan Government to
improve the overall situation in that country. The
Government of Afghanistan needs the support of its
neighbouring countries but, even more, that of the
entire international community.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, for its part, has
done and continues to do its utmost to help and
strengthen the Government of Afghanistan, under the
leadership of President Karzai, so it can assume full
ownership and authority over the affairs of the country.

