The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: I have received a request dated 15
January 1996 from Mr. Jovanovie to address the Council.
With the consent of the Council, I would propose to invite
him to address the Council in the course of the discussion
of the item before it.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1025 (1995), document S/l995/1028*.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l996/23, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America; and document S/1996/24, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course
of the Council's prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1995/951
and S/l996/13, letters dated 15 November 1995 and 10
January 1996, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General and to the President of the
Security Council, respectively; and S/ 1996/21 , letter dated
ll January 1996 from the charge d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Croatia, on
whom I now call.


