Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening this important high-
level open debate on non-proliferation as we mark the
tenth anniversary of resolution 1540 (2004). We consider
your presence here today, Sir, as a major commitment
to the overall implementation of the resolution, which
calls upon States to take the necessary measures in
combating the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery. I also
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing.

Today's debate is a great opportunity to take stock
of our efforts in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) since 2004. It is evident that there was significant
progress in the past 10 years and, more important, on
raising awareness of the goals and the objectives and
obligations of the resolution. We welcome the national
reports submitted by Member States to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Rwanda is among the Member States to have
fulfilled the obligations according to the pertinenent
provisions of the resolution. We will continue to ensure
its implementation within our borders and in our region.
We urge States that have not submitted national reports
and other required information to do so. We encourage
all Member States to cooperate in identifying effective
practices, experiences and lessons learned. Such efforts
will further contribute to the development of a long-term
vision and strategy for the effective implementation of
the resolution.

While we have accomplished raising awareness,
there is still a major challenge when it comes to attempts
to procure weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
related material. Private entities are becoming more and
more involved in the procurement business, as middle
men and for private benefit. We must combat the illicit
trafficking in WMD-related commmodities through a
mechanism that consists ofmeasures against originating
parties, export licensing and control lists, private-sector
internal compliance programmes, financial controls,
international outreach and capacity-building. In View
of emerging potential threats and risks, proliferators
exploit legal loopholes to broker illicit transactions
and cover up end-users; but they also take advantage
of existing poor border-control mechanisms in some
States, which allows diversion. We must tailor our
efforts to address those challenges by setting up effective
export-control systems, processes and methodologies,
while utilizing the World Customs Organization,
which has been an indispensible partner of the 1540
Committee with regard to the implementation of border
control-related obligations. Let me also emphasize
the need for raising the political will of Governments,
well-defined legislation, information-sharing,
inter-agency coordination, engagement with industry
and international cooperation as crucial elements of
essential control systems.

Proliferation financing remains a key factor that
contributes to the threat to international peace and
stability. As most perpetrators of illicit trafficking
strive to conceal their goods and the related financial
transactions, there remain significant capacity issues in
many States, which lack an extensive legal foundation
on which to build non-proliferation measures. In
that regard, we appreciate the work of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) in collaboration with the
1540 Committee to prohibit the facilitation of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
through financing. From our perspective, targeted
financial sanctions are crucial for the overall success of
counter-proliferation efforts, taking into consideration
the guidelines of the FATF framework.

Rwanda believes that there is a strong link between
the fight against terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, owing to the abuse of
the controls on stockpiles and the dissemination of
information and technologies, thus increasing the
possibility for terrorist groups to gain access to and
use such weapons. We reiterate the need to continue
to enhance and strengthen cooperation concerning the
prevention of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. In the same vein, we reiterate
our support for the 2004 Protocol to the Organization
of African Unity Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism. The Protocol obligates State
parties to strengthen national instruments to prevent
terrorists from acquiring WMDs and to cooperate with
the international community in the implementation of
continental and international instruments relating to
disarmament and non-proliferation.

Despite the progress achieved, we acknowledge that
much work remains. Noting the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), Rwanda seizes this opportunity
to encourage Member States to redouble their efforts
to fulfil their obligations and commitments related
to non-proliferation requirements and initiatives. We
reiterate our support for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) and the work of the 1540 Committee.
We support the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations. We also reaffirm our
commitment to fully implement the resolution in areas
where we have not already done so.

To conclude, Rwanda commends the Republic of
Korea, Chair of the 1540 Committee, for its leadership
in the Council on the issue of non-proliferation and
for introducing presidential statement S/PRST 2014/7,
adopted today with the full support of Rwanda.

