The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.

I wish to join other members of the Council in
welcoming Justice Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and Steven Rapp,
Prosecutor of the Special Court, and I thank them for
their briefings. I would also like to welcome the
representative of Sierra Leone to this meeting.

Uganda appreciates the tremendous work carried
out by the Court over the past six years. We attach
great importance to the delivery of justice and to the
fight against impunity for persons who bear the
greatest responsibility for heinous crimes and
Violations of international humanitarian law. Uganda
applauds the President, the Prosecutor and the Court on
the completion strategy and on the timely manner in
which they plan to complete the cases before the Court.
To that extent, the Court can rightly claim the
accolades it has received for being an exemplary model
for international criminal justice.

We note, however, the challenge of the residual
issues, which also concerns other interim tribunals. It
is imperative that those issues be dealt with properly
and ensure the smooth conclusion of the work of the
tribunal. Uganda welcomes the capacity-building
programmes and the training extended to the Sierra
Leone police on investigations. In that way, the Court
ensures that, even when its mandate is over, there will
be continuity. There is no substitute for programmes
such as victim and witness protection until the last
sentence has been served.

We also welcome the outreach programmes,
which ensure that the victims and the community are
informed at every stage of the process. Only thus will
they develop confidence that the system works, so that
the healing process can start in full awareness that their
abusers were punished for their transgressions. Justice
must not only be done - it must also be seen to be
done. The Special Court's outreach programmes
reinforce that long-held legal adage.

We have noted with concern that, based on
current available funds, the Court will experience a
significant shortfall by the beginning of next month,
which is likely to disrupt its work. It is important that
the resources of the Court be predictable and consistent
in order to enable the Court to concentrate on its
judicial work and not to be encumbered by engaging in
fund-raising activities. We therefore appeal to the
international partners to urgently provide the requisite
funds to the Court and thank the international partners
for the exemplary efforts that they have made in
mobilizing the resources that have supported the
Courts to date.
Finally, I thank the President, the Prosecutor and
the staff of the Special Court for their good work.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Sierra Leone.

