Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to express
its sincere thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ghassan Salame, Ambassador
Schoulgin Nyoni and Ms. Hajer Sharief for their clear
statements. We welcome the call of Ms. Sharief for an
inclusive approach, including the perspective of civil
society, particularly women and youth.

Please allow me to focus on three important
aspects: ending the political crisis, the human rights
situation and combating impunity, and coordinating
international efforts.

My first point concerns the political process. The
year 2018 will be crucial for Libya. The Libyan people
have long awaited an end to their country's political
transition. The current window of opportunity to
achieve this, through the successful implementation
of the action plan, should not be missed. We express
our deep concern about Monday's clashes at Mitiga
Airport, which regrettably are symptomatic of the
fragile security context in which Libya's transition is
taking place.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame's action plan. Its success will depend, above all,
on the political will and courage of the Libyan parties
to take the required steps. We call on all parties to
continue to work within the framework of the Libyan
Political Agreement. This Agreement remains the only
viable framework to end the Libyan political crisis. In
this context, we urge the delegations of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council to swiftly
finalize their negotiations on the limited amending
of the Libyan Political Agreement. To thoroughly
prepare for elections, the sequencing of the steps of
the action plan will be of key importance. Concrete
results from the negotiations on amendments will give
the necessary boost to its implementation and will
provide the foundations for the next stage of convening
a national conference.

My second point concerns the human rights situation
and the prevailing culture of impunity in Libya. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains deeply concerned
about serious human rights Violations and abuses that
continue throughout Libya. The human rights situation
of migrants and refugees remains ofparticular concern.
Immediate steps need to be taken to improve their
plight, and the international community, including the
Council, should do more. Dismantling the criminal
trafficking networks that exploit migrants and refugees
and destabilize Libya requires our specific attention.
During our membership of the Council, including
through the Libya sanctions regime, we will explore
new avenues in combating these inhumane practices.

We welcome the resolute action taken by the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
countries of origin and local authorities to facilitate
the safe return home of a growing number of migrants
who were facing dire conditions in Libya. This shows
the importance of our strengthened cooperation. Joint
efforts can lead to concrete and humane solutions in the
very complex field of migration.

Impunity in Libya remains a grave problem. In 2014,
Salwa Bugaighis, a leading women's right advocate
in Libya, was brutally murdered. Her case is just one
example among many that have yet to be investigated
and prosecuted. We urge all parties to respect human
rights and international humanitarian law and reiterate
that all those responsible for violations and abuses must
be brought to justice. It is essential that we answer the
calls for accountability in line with resolutions 1970
(2011) and 2174 (2014). Their prosecution will help
prevent further atrocities and thereby contribute to
sustaining peace. In that regard, we welcome the efforts
of the International Criminal Court and call upon the
Libyan Government, and in fact all concerned, to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor.

This brings me to my third point, namely, that
of the coordination of international efforts in Libya.
We welcome the progress made in the return of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
to Libya. The Mission's partial relocation to Tripoli
is an important step forward. We look forward to the
further return to other parts of Libya, to the extent
that the security situation will allow it. The expansion
of UNSMIL's presence in Libya will also benefit its
coordinating role in the fields of humanitarian aid,
security and human rights, which remains vital.

We welcome the progress made by the joint police
and security programme of UNSMIL and the United
Nations Development Programme in improving the
security situation in Tripoli, though Monday's clashes
show that no progress can be taken for granted.

In conclusion, with the launch of the action plan
in September the Libyan parties have been presented
with a new opportunity to direct their country towards
a future of stability and prosperity. It is now up to
them to show the courage and leadership to make the
necessary compromises.

