Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Matar for her briefing. As always, we reiterate the Dominican Republic's support for the collective efforts to strengthen the long-standing political process in the Syrian Arab Republic - one that opens the door to lasting peace. This year, 2020, is the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015). Its full implementation remains pending. As the guarantor of that resolution, the Council bears the sole responsibilityfor the implementation of all its provisions through facilitation, mediation and inclusive dialogue. In that regard, we regret the lack of progress in the dialogue between the Syrian Government, the opposition and civil society within the framework of the Constitutional Committee, which was seen as the first major step in opening the way for a broad political process. Only a real and meaningful dialogue between the parties, with a negotiated political solution as the outcome, will lay the basis for meeting the aspirations of the Syrian people, inside and outside the country, to live in peace and to move forward in building their own future. The continued and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of the political process is not only conducive to achieving sustainable peace but vital. The needs of and solutions regarding displaced and refugee women must be at the centre of that process if we are to call it a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned process. However, that dialogue, like any political solution, is threatened every time there are attempts to resolve the conflict through military means. It is at risk every time there are indiscriminate attacks on the civilian population and every time hundreds of thousands of people have to flee in search of protection and security. There is no military solution that can bring about a future reconciliation in Syria. The basis for reconciliation is trust, mutual respect and the political will of the parties to comply with international law and respect the human rights of the entire population. We ask ourselves if the military approach creates or destroys trust. That is why the situation in the north- west of the country fills us with concern. The ongoing violations of international humanitarian law, resulting in the suffering of the civilian population, are simply unacceptable and require a response by the Council. In that regard, we would like to say the following. It is essential to achieve a lasting ceasefire. Humanitarian access to vulnerable populations must be ensured on a safe, sustained and unimpeded basis, not only in the north-west of the country but throughout Syria, wherever there are needs to be addressed. That is the least that the parties should do to protect those who have been so devastated and traumatized by nearly a decade of conflict. We reiterate that today, more than ever, any international effort to end this terrible conflict must be accompanied by measures on the ground that will build confidence not only in the process but among the parties and the population. The Dominican Republic would like to see more progress with regard to the release of detainees, secure access to basic services, the facilitation of civil documentation and, not least, the provision of credible information to the families of missing persons. Similarly, we wish to reiterate that any movement or return of displaced persons and refugees must be safe, dignified and respectful of people's willingness to return to their places of origin, or wherever they decide. We call on all the parties concerned to focus every effort on a negotiated political solution, facilitated by the United Nations and in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We urge all members of the Council in a position to do so to honour the commitments undertaken in the resolution. Let us match our actions with words.
