Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for coming
here this morning to brief the Council. I would like to
begin by welcoming the outstanding work undertaken
by the International Criminal Court and the Prosecutor
against very complex circumstances, particularly given
the lack of cooperation on the part of the Sudan and
other States, as well as the lack of support from the
Council.

The Sudan must cooperate. Not being a party to
the Rome Statute is not a valid reason not to cooperate,
especially when there are Security Council resolutions
that are legally binding and enforceable under the United
Nations Charter. Failing to abide by this obligation is
inexcusable. Resolution 1593 (2005) was the first such
resolution to refer an issue to the International Criminal
Court and constituted a milestone in the Council's
commitment to the fight against impunity.

However, some 10 years and 22 reports later, nothing
has changed. None of the arrest warrants enacted for
the alleged commission of the most serious crimes
constituting genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes has been carried out. The Council continues not
to respond to the Court's reports of non-cooperation.
That lack of response, as earlier speakers have noted, is
undermining the credibility of the Council and casting
doubt on the strength of our commitment to fighting
impunity.

This is not the only issue, however. Our failure
to act is also undermining the credibility of the Court
itself and is causing it to squander its limited resources
in pursuit of goals that are impossible to achieve.

I should like to ask two questions: what is the point
ofadopting a referral resolution ifthere is no willingness
to implement it? What message are we sending to
those who believe themselves entitled to flout the most
fundamental norms of international humanitarian law
and to commit human rights violations, without fear of
the consequences and with complete impunity, not only
in Darfur but also in other parts of the world?

The humanitarian crisis and insecurity continue to
prevail in Darfur. The civilian population, the staff of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian workers continue
to be the target of all parties to the conflict. Impunity
continues to reign in Darfur. The obstacles faced by
UNAMID continue to put at risk its capacity to fully
discharge its mandate. It is key that the Mission be able
not only to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian
access but also to continue to document violations and
abuses.

We fully agree with the Prosecutor that the current
situation is unacceptable and cannot go on. The Security
Council, in adopting resolution 1593 (2005), made a
commitment to the victims and to the people of Darfur.
The time is ripe for us to honour that commitment. We
reiterate to all parties their ineluctable obligation to fully
comply with the norms of international humanitarian
and human rights law. We would also recall the
particular responsibility borne by the Government of
the Sudan to protect its people. There can be no military
solution to the conflict; it must be political and based
on an inclusive dialogue. We wish also to reiterate that
all States parties to the Rome Statute are obligated to
cooperate with and provide assistance to the Court, and
we call upon all others to work to implement resolution
1593 (2005).

We note once again that the cost of referrals
continues to be borne solely by the States parties to
the Rome Statute and that article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court remains unimplemented.

I should like to conclude by conveying our support
and gratitude to the personnel of UNAMID, to the
Prosecutor and to the Court, as well as to all those who,
in the midst of such difficulties, continue daily to make
every effort to collect information, gather evidence
and identify those in Darfur who believe that they can
operate outside the law. We trust that one day they will
be brought to justice.

