Mr. Baja (Philippines): I would like to
congratulate the presidency of the United Kingdom for
bringing to the forefront of the agenda of the Security
Council the important issue of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
issue represents one of the most important spokes in
the hub of the overall responsibilities of the Council
under the Charter.

In her speech last Friday to the General
Assembly, Her Excellency President Gloria
Macapagal-Arroyo mentioned the promotion of the rule
of law as one of the main priorities of the Philippines at
the United Nations. She emphasized that international
security must be underpinned by a strong commitment
to the rule of law, where individuals and communities

are protected from violence and impunity is curtailed
through the enforcement of international human rights
and humanitarian norms.
Establishing the rule of law, especially in post-
conflict societies, is indispensable if the United
Nations is to help establish sustainable and responsible
governance in these areas. Erecting machineries and
infrastructure for the rule of law should be included as
a key part of any exit strategy of United Nations peace
operations. In fact, it should be a core function of all
United Nations peace operations. It is my delegation's
view that the Security Council should provide the
necessary leadership in moving the United Nations to a
stronger commitment to the rule of law in areas where
the United Nations is engaged in peace operations. The
rule of law is the key link that connects post-conflict
societies to their full restoration.

The rule of law does not, however, operate in a
vacuum. Conditions must be set to allow it to take root
and flourish in post-conflict societies. No matter how
important institutions, machineries and written laws
are, on their own they cannot guarantee the attainment
of justice or the rule of law. They remain empty shells
if they are not imbued with energy to actually serve
justice.

Thus, it is crucial that various pitfalls be avoided
to ensure that those who are most in need of the
benefits of the rule of law - communities in post-
conflict societies - actually attain them.

First, it is important that local actors and
resources are employed in establishing the foundations
of the rule of law in a post-conflict context. The local
population should have a stake in the process so that
they can own up to the responsibility of charting their
community's destiny. They should be provided all the
necessary assistance to succeed, but they must be the
ones ultimately responsible for their future.

Secondly, the power relationships in post-conflict
societies must be given serious consideration in the
United Nations efforts to provide a solid foundation for
the rule of law. While power, both political and
economic, is unavoidably unequal most of the time,
over-domination by a single interest in a society would
be detrimental to the rule of law. It is, therefore,
important that establishing a comprehensive rule of law
must include paying attention to social, economic and
political reforms of post-conflict societies.

We are at an important crossroads in our effort to
find a lasting solution to the conflicts that continue to
plague our world today. Our experience over the last
decade has shown that focusing merely on resolving
and preventing conflicts without concomitant attention
to strengthening the instruments and foundations of the
rule of law in post-conflict societies is at best a half-
baked effort.

We are fortunate that the United Nations has deep
expertise and resources in this field, as reported last
year by the Secretary-General's Task Force on the Rule
of Law in Peace Operations. It is now imperative that
the Security Council harness those resources and
expertise to help institute the effective rule of law in
societies that the international community is helping to
attain stability and progress.

