Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China has
followed the escalation ofthe conflict in several regions
of Syria and is deeply moved by the wartime suffering
of the Syrian people. China strongly condemns all
terrorist activities that harm and kill innocent people.

In that regard, the international community should
continue to work towards and push for a political
solution to the dispute through dialogue between all
parties involved in the conflict, so as to stop the fighting
as soon as possible. Actions taken by the Security
Council concerning the situation in Syria should be
able to concretely improve the situation, help push
for a cessation of hostilities, support and coordinate
United Nations efforts for humanitarian assistance and
facilitate stronger efforts to combat terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council, including the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Such action should
promote the search for a solution that is acceptable to
all parties in a political process owned and led by the
Syrians under the auspices of the United Nations.

The draft resolution submitted by France and
Spain (S/2016/846) contains a number of important
elements, such as the need for a ceasefire, a call for
a political solution, improvement of the humanitarian
situation, and enhanced efforts to combat terrorism.
However, some of the draft resolution's provisions
do not fully respect the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria. Moreover, the
constructive views of some Security Council members
were not incorporated. For those reasons, China had to
abstain in the voting on the draft resolution.

The draft resolution submitted by the Russian
Federation to the Security Council (S/2016/847)
urges the parties to immediately cease hostilities,
enable access to humanitarian aid, enhance efforts
to combat terrorism, and support the good offices of
Special Envoy Staffan De Mistura, and calls for an
early resumption of peace talks in Geneva. The draft
resolution reflects a four-track strategy comprised of
a ceasefire, humanitarian assistance, joint efforts in
combating terrorism and political negotiations. It also
reflects respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, with complete,
comprehensive and balanced content. China voted in
favour of the draft resolution and regrets that it was not
adopted.

Syria is an important country in the Middle East.
An immediate restoration of peace and stability is in
the common interests of Syria, other countries of the
region and the international community. China hopes
that the Security Council will maintain the safety of the
Syrian people as its first priority and remain united in
order to reach consensus, pursue its efforts to push for
a political solution to the conflict in Syria, workjointly
to prevent the further breeding and spread of terrorism
and play a positive and constructive role in maintaining
peace and stability in Syria and the region.

