Mr. Djinnit: I have the honour to present the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/886) on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo
and the Region, covering the period from 1 March to
31 August. I am pleased to do so just a few days after
the ninth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, held in Kampala on 8 October.

In line with my road map, and working in close
collaboration with the other guarantors of the framework
agreement - the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR)
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), as well as the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations system
and other partners - my colleagues in the Office and
I have spared no effort to promote joint action aimed at
advancing key commitments and the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. In that regard, our priority
areas of work include the following.

The first concerns the neutralization of negative
forces. Insecurity in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo persists as the result of the continued
presence of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR),
the ex-Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and some armed
Burundian elements, in addition to a plethora of local
armed groups in the same region. Allegations of cross-
border interventions continue to be made. In addition
to creating insecurity and causing the displacement of
populations, the activities of those negative forces fuel
mistrust among countries of the region and constitute a
threat to regional peace and security.

With regard to the strengthening of the MONUSCO
Force Intervention Brigade, as recommended by
the Brazzaville meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism in October 2017, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and MONUSCO embarked
on the implementation of the recommendations made
by the United Nations-SADC joint assessment mission
dispatched to the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo in April. For its part, my Office continued to
promote regional and international support for related
existing mechanisms, including the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Joint Intelligence Fusion
Centre and the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on the ADF.

Meanwhile, with regard to the repatriation of
disarmed combatants sustained efforts have been
exerted through the reactivation of the relevant
Follow-up Mechanism, which yielded some results.
Following a series of field visits, which were attended
by representatives of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, together with the
guarantors of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, a total of 41 people have been repatriated
to their countries of origin, including five former
FDLR combatants and their 22 dependents, as well
as 14 former M-23 combatants. While those visits
might be modest, what is important is the fact that the
Follow-up Mechanism has created a positive dynamic
of cooperation among the countries concerned. It has
also demonstrated that goodwill and cooperation by
stakeholders lead to results on the ground. We will
endeavour to foster the same spirit of collaboration,
which is needed to address the long-standing challenge
of negative forces in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The second priority area relates to efforts to
strengthen the bonds of friendship and cooperation
among the core countries of the region. As I reported
in my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8227),
the workshop that had been jointly organized with the
African Union on the occasion of the fifth anniversary
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
early this year in Addis Ababa, emphasized, inter
alia, the need to address the persisting mistrust among
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda. Consequently, in my engagement
with stakeholders in the region, I have encouraged
initiatives to promote frank dialogue among leaders
to resolve differences and address any issue that could
jeopardize good relations and cooperation among
them. In that regard, I am pleased to report that,
based on my suggestion, the ninth high-level meeting
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, during which
President Museveni took over the chairmanship from
President Sassou Nguesso, provided an opportunity for
such conversation.

Despite the absence of the Heads of State of
several core countries, discussions during the closed-
door session revealed the deep concerns of member
States about the local and regional implications of the
negative forces as the main cause ofmistrust among the
core countries of the region. The meeting recognized
the need for a new approach beyond the existing
measures to enhance regional cooperation against
the threat posed by the negative forces. It mandated
President Museveni to convey to President Kabila
the outcomes of the discussions at the meeting and to
consult with the Chairperson of the African Union,
the ICGLR and the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security Cooperation on the next steps to take in
joint engagement in that area. The Regional Oversight
Mechanism also requested President Sassou Nguesso,
as the Chairperson of the ICGLR and outgoing
Chairperson of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, to
consider taking initiatives to strengthen the bonds of
friendship and cooperation among the core countries of
the region, building on the previous initiatives that he
has taken in that regard.

The third priority area concerns support for
peaceful, credible and inclusive electoral and political
processes in the region. Despite some positive
developments, the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Burundi, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan continues to contribute to instability
in the region. Recognizing the importance of peaceful
and credible elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for stability in the region as a Whole, I have
focused my efforts on mobilizing concerted regional
and international support for the implementation of
the 31 December 2016 agreement. Throughout my
consultations in the region, including with President
Sassou Nguesso, as Chairperson of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism and of the ICGLR; President
Lourenco of Angola, as outgoing Chairperson of
the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
Cooperation; and President Lungu of Zambia as
incoming Chairperson of the SADC Organ, as well as
with the leadership of the African Union Commission,
I encouraged sustained regional engagement in support
of peaceful, credible and inclusive elections in line with
the 31 December agreement.

I have also continued to emphasize the importance
of addressing persisting differences between the
Government and the opposition in Burundi through
inclusive dialogue. As we await the outcome of the
discussions of the fifth round of the inter-Burundian
dialogue, it is important that the region continue to
stand with the Burundian Government and people in
support of inclusive, credible and peaceful elections
in 2020, in full respect for the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi. The situation
in those countries was also on the agenda of the
recently concluded meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism, which among other things called for
inclusive electoral and political processes in the region,
while noting that the exclusion of national stakeholders
leads to perpetuating instability.

Enhanced commitment to inclusive dialogue
and inclusive politics should also mean the greater
participation ofwomen, youth and civil society in peace
and political processes in the Great Lakes region. That
was our fourth priority during the period under review.
In addition to continuing to support the preparation of a
regional action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), my Office - in collaboration with the
ICGLR, the African Union, FemWise-Africa and UN-
Women - facilitated joint solidarity missions led by
women leaders in the region to Burundi, the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in July and August. In all the countries visited,
they were able to engage stakeholders at all levels,
including the respective Heads of State and legislative
and executive authorities, and were successful in
raising awareness of the importance of ensuring that
women are included in political decision-making.

The key recommendation from those missions is to
work towards achieving full gender parity and, in the
interim, ensure a minimum of30 per cent representation
of women in peace and political processes, as well
as in executive and legislative bodies, by 2023. That
recommendation was endorsed by the ninth meeting
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, following a
statement delivered by Ms. Samba-Panza, former
interim President of the Central African Republic,
on behalf of the Advisory Board of the Women's
Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We will, of course, continue to pursue that
initiative vigorously.

The fifth priority area covered efforts to address
the root causes of conflicts in the region. In that regard,
my Office focused on efforts to fight impunity and
address the protracted displacement in the region, in
addition to supporting initiatives to address the illicit
exploitation and trade of natural resources. We continue
to support the operationalization of the Great Lakes
Judicial Cooperation Network, including through the
holding of its second meeting on 13 and 14 June in Dar
es Salaam. I am pleased to report that the Network has
now started to address specific cases ofwar crimes and
crimes against humanity.

My Office, together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the ICGLR
and other partners, has also continued to promote
durable solutions to protracted displacements pertaining
to refugees from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, whose presence contributes to
mistrust among countries in the region. In that regard, I
am pleased to note the request of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism in Kampala that President Museveni lead
efforts on displacement in the region, including by
hosting ministerial-level consultations later this year,
to be jointly convened by my Office and the ICGLR.
We expect that event to generate political will and
commitments to making progress in this critical area.

Lastly, I would like to stress that the illegal
exploitation and trade of natural resources remain
factors for instability in the Great Lakes region and
deprive the region and its people of much-needed
sources of socioeconomic growth. During the period
of the review, we continued to consult with the
ICGLR on joint efforts in the implementation of the
recommendations that were made at the workshop that
we jointly convened in July 2016 in Nairobi.

Despite some progress, a lot remains to be done
to fully achieve the objectives of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework. Sustained economic
development will depend on progress in establishing
security in parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region as a whole, and in strengthening
collaboration among the countries concerned in order to
ensure that the resources of the countries of the region
benefit the people of the region. Greater goodwill is
needed to address the root causes of instability in the
region. My Office will of course continue to support
the countries of the region in those efforts.

