Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Zannier
for his briefing.

When the Security Council decided not to hold a
meeting on this issue on the day ofPresident Zelenskyi's
inauguration, the Russian Ambassador accused the
Council of censorship. Well, there is no censorship.
Here we are debating the issue. Back then, Russia was
offered any other date it wanted, but it insisted that we
had to meet on inauguration day. Which country around
this table would not think that unnecessary, provocative
and disrespectful if proposed in its region?

We are now at this meeting, as we said then that we
would be, discussing Ukraine, and there should be no
censorship. That is why I was surprised not to hear the
Russian Ambassador explain why Russia continues to
arm separatists in eastern Ukraine, why Russia refuses
to implement the Minsk agreements, why it continues
to illegally detained 24 Ukrainian servicemen or why
it persecutes the Tatar community in illegally annexed
Crimea. Those are the issues that warrant continued
discussion around this table.

Let me address Ukraine's policy on State
language. It is important that we do so in the
context of Russia's continued attempts to undermine
Ukraine's independence. We reject the tenuous link
Russia was drawn between the language law and the
Minsk agreements, and call on Russia to live up to
its responsibility to uphold international peace and
security by implementing its Minsk commitments.

As we have heard, the bill on ensuring the
functioning of Ukrainian as the State language, which
was adopted by the Ukrainian Parliament on 25 April,
is designed to reinforce the role of the Ukrainian
language in public life. We note that the law requires
the Ukrainian Parliament to pass further legislation on
the realization of the rights of indigenous peoples and
national minorities of Ukraine. We welcome the fact
that the law requires the Ukrainian Parliament to pass
further legislation to protect the rights of indigenous
peoples and national minorities. Of course, we expect
Ukraine to comply with its international obligations,
including with respect to the Council of Europe
Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities and the European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages. I agree with Mr. Zannier that the
language law should unite, not divide, a diverse society.

Ukrainians continue to suffer as a result of the
Russian-fuelled conflict. Almost 13,000 people have
lost their lives. Russia denies providing weaponry
and personnel, but if it has nothing to hide, why does
Russia and the separatists it backs block access for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to the Ukraine-Russia
border outside Ukrainian Government control? And
why has Russia still failed to provide any explanation
for the shooting down of a long-range unmanned aerial
vehicle belonging to the Special Monitoring Mission
in October last year on the border outside Ukrainian
Government control? We call on Russia to play its part
in ensuring that the security and humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine is resolved.

Three months ago, the day after President
Zelenskyi's overwhelming democratic election, Russia
decided to make it easier for Ukrainian citizens living
in eastern Ukraine to receive Russian citizenship. That
showed a clear disregard for Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity and runs counter to the spirit
and objectives of the Minsk agreements. The United
Kingdom supports the European Union's readiness to
respond to that, including through the non-recognition
of Russian passports issued in contradiction to the
Minsk agreements. And I recall that it was on the
pretext of protecting Russian citizens that Russia
invaded Georgia. It is important that there be no such
plan for Ukraine.

The United Kingdom welcomes President
Zelenskyi's efforts to address the Ukraine crisis and
stands ready to support his efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation and bring peace to Donbas. We
also continue to support the efforts of our partners with
the Minsk process and are prepared to assist further
as required. All parties have responsibilities under the
Minsk agreements, and we expect to see the withdrawal
of Russian personnel and weaponry supplied to
Russian-backed separatists and the safe access,
delivery and distribution of humanitarian assistance to
those in need. I welcome the information provided to us
by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo about some of the
recent improvements in that regard.

The situation in illegally annexed Crimea is
desperate. We deplore the continued persecution of the
Crimean Tatars, including the arbitrary arrest of 24
individuals in Simferopol in March. We call on Russia
to immediately release all political prisoners and
allow unrestricted access for human rights monitoring
organizations. We further call on Russia to immediately
release the 24 Ukrainian naval servicemen detained
since 25 November, in line with the ruling of 25 May of
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.

Tomorrow marks the fifth anniversary of the
shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
which resulting in the tragic deaths of the 298 people
on board. The family and friends of those who died
deserve justice. We welcome the indictment of four
individuals accused of perpetrating those attacks, and
we urge Russia to fully cooperate with the prosecution
in accordance with resolution 2166 (2014).

The day after President Zelenskyi was
overwhelmingly democratically elected, Russia
introduced its new passport law. On the day President
Zelenskyi was inaugurated, Russia tried and failed to
hold a Security Council meeting to distract attention.
Instead of that aggression, why does Russia not engage
with President Zelenskyi and lower tensions rather
than stoke them in eastern Ukraine and withdraw from
Ukrainian territory?

We want to engage in constructive dialogue with
Russia on the issues that matter. But it is a matter of
deep regret that, through its actions, Russia continues
to violate the rules, norms and international law that we
around this table are tasked with upholding. I urge Russia
to choose an alternative path to the one it pursues today.
But until it does, the international community must
stand resolute in its opposition to Russia's continued
attempts to destabilize and undermine Ukraine.

