Mr. Nguema Obiang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to present
to the Security Council the apologies oins Excellency,
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, who was not able to
participate in this important meeting due to previous
State obligations. It is therefore my responsibility to
convey his greetings of peace, as well as his wishes for
the success of this meeting.

I would also like to express our congratulations
to His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of
the Republic of Poland, for the magnificent work his
country is carrying out during its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May, and for having
convened this meeting to discuss an issue of such
importance to peace and security in the world.

We also congratulate the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and his entire team
for the excellent and exhaustive briefing, which reveals
once again the commitment and efforts of the United
Nations in favour of peace, security and stability
throughout the world.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is firmly
committed to an international order based on the
rule of law with the United Nations at its centre and
in which the Security Council assumes the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The strengthening of the rule of
law must lead to the consolidation of sustainable peace
and development and to the defence of human rights.
Peace, security and stability are essential elements for
the economic and social development of countries and
are intrinsically linked to the tranquillity and harmony
that must prevail among the peoples of the world.

Long-term conflicts such as those in Central
Africa, Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan, Yemen, Libya, Somalia and other
countries, where the use of sophisticated weapons
causes the extermination of human lives, also cause
great collateral damage. Refugees, famine and forced
displacements must be treated in accordance with
international law to ensure the protection of human
rights. To achieve ajust and safe world, therefore, it is
important to promote the resolution of disputes through
peaceful means as an essential part and basic principle
of international law enshrined in Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Given the complexity of current conflicts, and
the sophisticated techniques of weapons that produce
disastrous effects, the international community
should also adapt to the new reality and its principles.
Apart from armed confrontations, the effects of
climate change, famine, pandemics and other natural
phenomena constitute a threat to the peace and security
of nations because they can aggravate the consequences
of wars and conflicts. In order to enforce international
law in conflicts, it is essential to ensure compliance
with the principles for peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations and regional organizations. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to
reform peacekeeping operations in order to gain the
confidence of the host countries, and the commitment
that the Council has shown in incorporating defence of
the rule of law.

Any resolution of conflicts must include the
promotion of inclusive development that benefits the
parties so that the development can continue to expand
through the United Nations system and thereby promote
the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. As the world's main victim
of major conflicts and the problems arising from them,
Africa has a huge interest in ensuring that just and
lasting solutions can be found for them, and the United
Nations should support the African Union in its efforts
to maintain peace and security in Africa, with the aim
of optimizing and promoting joint action to achieve
synergy in the international community.

There can be no peace without justice, and in
order to build peace processes and resolve conflicts
it is important to ensure that victims have the feeling
thatjustice has been done, because policies that permit
impunity can foster revenge and hatred. Humankind has
always longed for peace and justice, two concepts that
complement and reinforce each other. The achievement
ofjustice is not merely a legal problem but is intimately
linked to other political, economic and cultural factors.
Justice's ultimate goal is stability and reconciliation,
essential concepts for peace, especially in post-conflict
environments. Beyond that, the Council has experience
in the establishment of international tribunals to
judge crimes against humanity such as genocide, war
crimes and so forth. It is important to encourage the
continuation of such mechanisms in order to combat
appearances of impunity in post-conflict situations.

Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the importance of the
concept of the peaceful settlement of conflicts through
frank, direct and inclusive dialogue, and the United
Nations has a primary role to play in encouraging
countries to resolve their differences based on those
principles. In that regard, with the support of the United
Nations, Equatorial Guinea has agreed to settle its
border dispute with its sister republic of Gabon before
the International Court of Justice.

Equatorial Guinea wishes to see its policies,
its principle of national sovereignty and its judicial
freedom respected, and it brooks no foreign
interference in its internal affairs. In that regard, before
this important body, I want to denounce a ferocious
international media campaign that is currently being
waged against my country through the dissemination
of fake news and montages of images, with the aim
of distorting and denigrating the image, honour and
reputation of my country and Government and the
ultimate goal of discrediting them with the help of so-
called non-governmental organizations, all of it having
a negative effect on Equatorial Guinea's performance
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.

When we were elected to the Security Council,
we took on the responsibility that it entailed in full
awareness, and we are faithful to the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, the Constitutive Act of the African Union and
our internal legal order. This is the foundation guiding
my Government's statements, opinions and decisions
during our membership of the Security Council. We
aware of the historic importance of this situation
and firmly reject these attempts at manipulation and
blackmail that damage our good image and distract the
international community.

In December, as the Council knows, my country
was threatened by mercenaries who wanted to violate
and harm our independence, sovereignty and stability
in an attack that was quickly neutralized by our national
security forces, thanks to the cooperation and support
of our sister republic of Cameroon. We would like to
recall that Equatorial Guinea has been the victim of
similar attempts in the past, specifically in March
2004, and I want to take this opportunity to denounce
such attempts, which are a direct assault on the norms
of coexistence between States.

In conclusion, I would like to say that while
today all the States Members of the United Nations
are looking to achieve the same goal, that of ensuring
peace and security in the world, we do not believe
that the leadership of one State or group of States can
dictate the implementation of international law and
morality. That constitutes a usurpation of the authority
of the United Nations and undermines the effectiveness
of our global Organization, which must impose its
own authority in the international arena, avoiding
any possibility of being manipulated through external
pressure from States or groups of States that violate
those laws. My country reaffirms its principles and its
absolute belief in the rules of international law, while
we extend our hand to all friendly countries in order
to cooperate in addressing every issue that affects our
peoples' peaceful coexistence.

