Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important meeting today. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report, and Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his detailed briefing. I
also welcome among us Mr. Gusmao and Mr. Ramos-
Horta, and thank them for their important statements.

China notes with pleasure that the work towards
independence has been proceeding in an orderly
manner. A few days ago, work began on registering
voters for the election of the Constituent Assembly.
The active participation of the political parties in East
Timor testifies to the fact that they take the process of
democracy and independence seriously.

The problem of refugees in West Timor is still
very disquieting. China believes that the decision by
the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator
to organize and lead an inter-agency security
assessment mission to West Timor this month is very
important. We hope that that measure will help to
provide assistance to refugees in dire need and
accelerate the repatriation process, so that they can
fully participate in the independence process in East
Timor and exercise their due democratic rights.

We note that, although the overall security
situation in East Timor is good, as mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, the local population
remains highly concerned as to whether the political
process will continue to develop peacefully. A number
of recent incidents prove that the population's concern
for the future is not unfounded. Violence has erupted
on occasion, as indicated in paragraphs 19 and 20 of
the report, targeting civilians and United Nations
peacekeepers. These acts are totally unacceptable and
the perpetrators should be brought to justice.

Experience shows that, along with the
acceleration of the process leading to political
independence, the opportunities for an exacerbation of
the tensions will also multiply. We therefore endorse
the relevant analysis and recommendations of the
Secretary-General. We believe that, against the
backdrop of an uncertain security situation in East
Timor, UNTAET should take measures to build the
people's confidence in the orderly unfolding of the
independence process so as to create a more stable
social environment for the exercise of their democratic
rights. In this regard, the cooperation and support of
Indonesia are very important. I also wish to point out in
this respect that the international community should
support the stability of both Indonesia and East Timor,
which remains important to peace and stability in Asia
and the world as a whole.

UNTAET has established a working group on the
ground to draft a post-transition plan and a
corresponding body has been established at United
Nations Headquarters to assist that group. These
measures will help to increase East Timor's capacity
for independent administration following its accession
to independence. Meanwhile, China also hopes that the
United Nations will respect and heed the aspirations of
the East Timorese people and, on that basis, propose
specific recommendations for every aspect of the
transition of power for the Security Council's
consideration.

The independence and self-sufficiency of East
Timor require the political support of all Member
States, as well as the generous assistance of the
international community to the economic development
of the territory. To that end, China has already provided
every possible assistance and will continue to explore
with East Timor the opportunities for promoting
economic and trade relations and new channels for
investment there.

