Mr. Alatas (Indonesia): At the meeting of the
Security Council on 11 September 1999, Indonesia
apprised the members of the Council of the efforts it had
undertaken to restore security and tranquillity in East
Timor. My delegation confirmed that Indonesia had
proclaimed a state of military emergency on 7 September
1999. The proclamation provided a legal basis for
measures taken to restore law and order in East Timor.
And while my delegation shares the deep concern of other
Member States at the incidents that had taken place at
that time, we also stressed that it is and will never be the
policy of the Indonesian Government to condone any
form of violence under any circumstances.

Since then, important developments have taken
place. Following the visit of the Indonesian Armed Forces
Commander, General Wiranto, to East Timor, when he
accompanied the Mission sent by the Security Council on
11 September to directly observe the effect of the
declaration of a state of military emergency, the
Indonesian Government again reviewed the situation in
East Timor. The Indonesian Government found it
regrettable indeed that despite the tireless efforts of the
Indonesian defence forces to bring the situation under

 

control, the violence had not fully subsided. There are
indeed limits to what even the armed forces can accomplish
in a short time when operating in such a difficult and
complex situation.

Hence, my Government came to the conclusion that it
was now the appropriate time to request the United Nations
for cooperation in dealing with the security situation in East
Timor. President B. J. Habibie therefore announced in his
address to the Indonesian nation on 12 September our
readiness to accept, through the United Nations,
international peacekeeping forces from friendly nations in
order to restore peace and security in East Timor, to protect
the people and to implement the result of the direct ballot
of 30 August. He stressed:

"Too many people have lost their lives since the
beginning of the unrest, lost their homes and security.
We cannot wait any longer. We have to stop the
suffering and mourning immediately."

In so doing, my Government was motivated solely by
the strong desire to bring the situation in East Timor under
control and back to normalcy. Indonesia could not allow the
killings and destruction of property to continue. While the
people of East Timor await the implementation of the next
phase of the 5 May Agreements, they have to be protected.

In this context, President Habibie asked me and my
delegation to travel to New York forthwith to follow up on
the implementation of this proposal and to discuss with the
Security Council and the United Nations Secretary-General
its detailed aspects.

It is in this spirit of cooperation and flexibility that the
Indonesian Government has placed no conditions with
regard to the multinational force to be deployed in East
Timor. However, there are several details that are being
worked out expeditiously between Indonesia and the United
Nations at the present time, particularly clarifications
regarding the deployment of the multinational force,
including its composition and its command structure, as
well as the modalities of cooperation defining the respective
duties and responsibilities of the Indonesian defence forces
and the multinational force. Indonesia's main objective
throughout this whole process remains, as stated by
President Habibie, to further enhance the effectiveness of
our common effort to restore peace and security in East
Timor as quickly as possible.

As we affirmed in the Council last week, Indonesia
will also continue to cooperate with humanitarian
organizations such as the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World
Food Programme (WFP) and the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) in efforts to provide immediate
assistance to the internally displaced persons. The
Indonesian Government would also like to assure the
Council that adequate measures would be taken for the
safety and security of those rendering such humanitarian
aid.

My delegation notes with appreciation the Council's
prompt response to this request, as reflected in the
resolution just adopted. We believe that resolution will
provide a firm basis for the effective operation of the
multinational force, which, we hope, will be deployed as
expeditiously as possible. It is also expected to help create
a secure environment for the effective discharge of the
mandate entrusted to the multinational force acting under
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

We are further of the view that countries in the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) region
are uniquely placed to serve in the multinational force as
they, more than any other countries, understand the
regional characteristics, dimensions and sensitivities of the
problem. Particular consideration should therefore be
given to ASEAN countries' participation in the
composition of such a multinational force.

It is also imperative that the multinational force
conduct itself in an impartial manner so that its presence
in East Timor will be credible. It should endeavour to
earn the confidence of the conflicting parties involved,
while ensuring that its actions do not further exacerbate
an already difficult situation. Indonesia, for its part, will
extend its cooperation to facilitate the accomplishment of
the task entrusted to the multinational force.

Finally, Indonesia remains fully committed to the 5
May 1999 Agreements and will spare no effort to help
ensure that the question of East Timor is resolved in a
peaceful, honourable and fair manner. We are confident
that resolution 1264 (1999) is a concrete step in that
direction.

