Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is gravely concerned by the escalation
of this crisis, which poses a serious threat for Israel and
Lebanon and for the wider security of the region. The
United Kingdom is committed to helping to resolve
this crisis. Foreign Secretary Beckett has spoken to her
Israeli colleague, and the Prime Minister has spoken to
the Lebanese Prime Minister, Mr. Siniora. We
appreciate the pressures that both Governments are
under at this particularly difficult time.

Our priority must be to calm the situation,
support the moderates on all sides and create
conditions for a peaceful, diplomatic resolution.
Focusing on finding fault will not help us in that
endeavour. We urge all parties to do all that they can to
address this crisis and to prevent the situation from
worsening.

Prime Minister Blair has also spoken to the
Secretary-General, and we fully support his decision to
send a mission to the region to try to calm the situation
and assist efforts for a diplomatic solution. We also
fully support the mission of the European Union High
Representative, who will be travelling to the region
early next week. We hope that the two missions can
coordinate closely on the ground and contribute to a
solution.

We reiterate our call for the urgent release of the
kidnapped Israeli soldiers and for an end to attacks on
Israeli towns and cities. We urge all those countries
with influence over Hizbollah, in particular Syria and
Iran, to play their part.

Israel has every right to act in self-defence. But it
must exercise restraint and ensure that its actions are
proportionate and measured, conform to international
law and avoid civilian death and suffering.
Disproportionate action will only escalate an already
dangerous situation.

This crisis underscores the need for the full and
sustainable implementation of resolution 1559 (2004),
including the importance of the Government of
Lebanon exercising and being able to exercise its full
authority throughout Lebanese territory.

