Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I join others
in welcoming you, Sir, to this Council, congratulating
you on becoming the Permanent Representative of
Libya and, in particular, on assuming instantly the role
of presidency of our Council. You are very welcome
here, Sir.

I also extend my thanks to Mr. Prodi and his
panel for the hard work they have put in to the report
(8/2008/813) we are discussing today. It is a particular
pleasure to welcome Mr. Prodi here today, as well as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa and
Ambassador Lamamra from the African Union.

Peacekeeping is central to the work of the United
Nations and in recent years we have seen a rapid
growth in the scale and complexity of the missions
undertaken by the international community. The United
Nations has been central to meeting this demand, but
the regional and subregional organizations have played
an increasingly important role within the framework of
Security Council mandates.

No organization has done more than the African
Union. I applaud its efforts, not only as a peacekeeper
in Burundi, the Sudan and Somalia, but also for
creating the conditions for recovery in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and elsewhere. In Kenya, the African Union
played a crucial role in supporting Kofi Annan's
mediation following the post-election violence. Since
the Kenya crisis a year ago, Africa has faced a
disturbing number of examples - in Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Zimbabwe and today Madagascar - where
power is decided by force and violence rather than in
accordance with constitutional requirements. Many
other African countries, not least the Sudan, face
serious problems of poor governance and lack of
respect for national and international law. Those cases
all increase the burden on the African Union to uphold
the rule of law and constitutionality in Africa, and it
deserves our support in its efforts to address those
problems.

The United Nations-African Union joint
Declaration of November 2006 and the Africa-
European Union Strategic Partnership, backed by the
European Union's African Peace Facility, are important
contributions to building a better global peace and
security architecture. The United Kingdom is playing a
full part in that. We are helping to develop African
peacekeeping capability through assistance in training
thousands of troops and support to the African Standby
Force. We are also supporting African Union
operations in the field. The United Kingdom has
already provided some £5 million to the African Union
Mission in Somalia to support its crucial role in that
country, and we are working to ensure that the
peacekeeping mission receives further funding in the
weeks ahead. We are committed to supporting the
African Union and its growing peacekeeping role.

Security Council resolution 1809 (2008) stressed
the need for the United Nations to develop effective
partnerships, in particular with the African Union,
under Chapter VIII of the Charter. The Security
Council, of course, retains the primary role in
international peace and security and nothing can
detract from that, but we want to see the relationship
between the United Nations and the African Union
enhanced, and that includes further work on how best
to provide reliable and sustainable funding for African
Union peacekeeping.

As my Prime Minister Gordon Brown noted in
the debate which preceded the adoption of resolution
1809 (2008) (see S/PV.5868), all those involved need to
reach agreement on a way forward. A pragmatic
approach is necessary to assure that we find a workable
solution. The report of the panel led by Mr. Prodi
makes an important contribution to that work. I would
highlight the need for a shared strategic vision between
those involved in the maintenance of peace and
security, the need for increased African Union capacity
to manage operations at the headquarters level, the
need for more effective logistics support and the need
for a more coordinated approach to capacity-building.

Those important issues require further debate and
further work. We look forward to hearing the
Secretary-General's views, taking into account the full
range of financing options, in particular the need for
start-up and early sustainment costs. One solution may
well be a multi-donor trust fund for African Union
operations, an idea that the United Kingdom has
advocated before. The voluntary nature of such a trust
fund would make it widely acceptable and encourage
new donors to play a part. It would also help provide
secure funding for an African Union rapid deployment
capability.
We welcome this debate today as another
important step forward for the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. Once again, we
thank Mr. Prodi and his panel for their work and we
support the presidential statement that the Libyan
delegation has negotiated. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's forthcoming report. I hope we will
also have an opportunity to consider these issues
during the forthcoming Security Council mission to
Africa.

