Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, and Ijoin colleagues in welcoming you to
the presidency for this month and saying that the United
Kingdom looks forward to working with Russia. I also
thank Poland for its very distinguished presidency of
the Council.

The United Kingdom remains extremely concerned
by the situation in Gaza. We condemn the violent
activities of Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
other terrorist organisations, and we condemn them
unreservedly. We have recently witnessed unacceptable
mortar and rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel. Such
acts of terror are destructive to peace efforts, and
they need to stop. In the past weeks, we have seen
violence, Hamas' exploitation of peaceful protests and
a disturbing volume of live fire. Hamas' military wing
has been proscribed as a terrorist organization by the
United Kingdom since 2001, and the United Kingdom
has sanctions in place against senior Hamas officials.
The recent violence has led to the tragic loss oflife
of over 100 Palestinians, and we reiterate that there is
an urgent need to establish the facts surrounding past
weeks' events. The deteriorating situation in Gaza
should concentrate our minds on how we can work
urgently towards a resolution of the long-standing
issues between Israel and the Palestinian people.

The United Kingdom has long supported United
Nations action on Israeli-Palestinian issues. It is
therefore regrettable that today's draft resolutions
S/2018/516 and S/2018/520 contain elements that are
either imbalanced or too vague to be viable. For example,
the Kuwaiti text fails to name terrorist actors, including
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and its suggestion
of an international protection mechanism risks raising
unrealistic expectations. We condemn Hamas, but at
the same time we regret that the American text does
not adequately reference Israel's responsibilities and
obligations with regard to Gaza. Therefore, the United
Kingdom will abstain in the voting on both draft
resolutions today.

I have set out our principled rationale and nothing
more should be construed.

