President Jonathan: I would like to commence by
appreciating the vision of the President in convening
this timely and crucial meeting. It underpins the long-
standing commitment of the United States of America
to the high aims of international peace and security.
Our appreciation also goes to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for the clarity and depth of his briefing.

The people of Nigeria and indeed the entire
peace-loving world were horrified at the gruesome
murder of two American journalists and a British aid
worker by elements linked to the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and, of course, only today, as the
President mentioned, at the incident where a French
citizen was killed, Those murders typify a new phase of
global terrorism marked by executions, acts of brutality
and impunity.

Unfortunately, ISIL is not alone in this despicable
campaign against humanity. Al-Qaida in the Maghreb,
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and Boko Haram share this
common agenda: to unleash terror, mayhem, destruction
and instability around the world. Boko Haram has
perpetrated more heinous, barbaric acts than any other
known terrorist group.

There is no doubt that foreign fighters have added a
troubling dimension to this emerging phase of terrorism.
From targeted attacks by Al-Qaida a few years ago,
we now have mobile bands - thousands of terrorists
sweeping across vast areas, destroying lives and even
attempting to hold territory. This is unacceptable; we
must act now.

Nigeria knows all too well the destructive effects
of terrorist activities. Over the past five years, we have
been, and are still, confronting the threats posed by
Boko Haram to peace and stability, predominantly in
the north-eastern part of our country. The costs are
high. Thousands of innocent people have been killed,
whole communities razed and hundreds of peasants
kidnapped, the most prominent being the mindless
kidnapping of innocent daughters from Chibok
secondary school in Borno state, in north-east Nigeria.

As daunting as the challenge may be, we are facing
it with unrelenting determination, mobilizing all the
resources at our disposal to ensure that the scourge
of terrorism is rooted out of our nation. In addition
to our counter-terrorism efforts, we have evolved
initiatives to alleviate the plight of the populations
of the communities affected. These include a holistic
effort, through the presidential initiative for the north-
east, which is aimed at providing immediate relief and
fast-tracking the infrastructure redevelopment of the
region. It also has as a core goal an integrated effort
to achieve the de-radicalization of potential terrorist
recruits.

In partnership with the private sector, we have also
launched a victim-support fund, which has already
raised about $500 million in cash and pledges out of
the expected minimum of $1 billion in direct support of
the victims of acts of terrorism. This is in addition to
the Safe Schools Initiative championed by Mr. Gordon
Brown, former British Prime Minister and current the
United Nations Special Envoy for Global Education.
That initiative is being rigorously supported by
Nigeria's federal Government.
Let me thank President Obama and the United
States Government for the security governance
initiative following the United States-Africa summit
last August. I believe that the initiative, if expeditiously
implemented, will enhance security on the continent.

We must now capitalize on the commitment and
evident determination of the Security Council to seek
more innovative responses to the threat of terrorism,
and in particular to the growing menace of foreign
fighters. The Council should be concerned about the
existence of sources of the arming and funding of
terrorism. Evidence has shown that Boko Haram, for
instance, is resourced largely from outside our country.
We must also commit to ensuring that countries that
are in the front line of this challenge receive adequate
support from the international community.

The resolution that we have adopted here today is
a critical first step in mobilizing international action.
Only by united action and firm resolve can we check
this urgent threat to humanity and also build the
enduring structures that will resist their re-emergence.

