Mr. Corell: Thank you for inviting me to brief
the Security Council on this very important topic,
international terrorism. A couple of days ago I provided
a briefing note in which I have elaborated together with
my collaborators, in the Office of Legal Affairs, on this
topic.

The briefing note examines the role of the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretariat of the United Nations as regards the
significant developments in international law
pertaining to terrorism that took place in the 1990s.
Particular attention is given both to the application of
sanctions in specific cases and to the strides made in
the development of a legal framework of conventions
dealing with international terrorism where a number of
innovative measures have been taken. As it appears,
the note attempts to give a general overview of the
situation, while at the same time it describes in more
detail, under separate headings, salient parts of the
documents discussed in order to provide more in-depth
information to the interested reader.
Allow me first to focus on the actions taken by
the Security Council in this field. The Council has
dealt with the matter both in general terms and in more
specific cases.

First, members of the Security Council will recall
that the Council addressed the matter of international
terrorism in general in January 1992. In a statement
issued on the occasion of the Security Council Summit
of 31 January 1992, the members of the Council
expressed their deep concern over acts of international
terrorism and emphasized the need for the international
community to deal effectively with all such acts.

The most prominent individual cases in which the
Council has dealt with the issue of international
terrorism are those involving Libya, Afghanistan and
the Sudan. I am, of course, prepared to present these
cases to the members of the Council if this is deemed
useful. However, since these are matters with which
the Council is familiar, I do not otherwise intend to
dwell upon them in this presentation. For the
convenience of the members of the Council, the details
are included in the briefing material.

I should instead like to focus on the very
important Security Council resolution 1269 (1999) of
19 October 1999. In this resolution, the Council, inter
alia, unequivocally condemned

"all acts, methods and practices of terrorism as
criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, in all their forms and manifestations,
wherever and by whomever committed, in
particular those which could threaten
international peace and security". (resolution 1269 (1999), para. 1)

The Council called upon States to implement
fully the anti-terrorism conventions to which they are
parties and to consider adhering to those to which they
are not parties. It encouraged the speedy adoption of
pending conventions; emphasized the need for
enhanced cooperation among States and regional and
international organizations; and called upon States to
take a series of steps in order to prevent the
preparation, financing and commission of terrorist acts
and to bring to justice the perpetrators of such acts.
Furthermore, the Council expressed its readiness

"to take necessary steps in accordance with its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United

S/PV.4242

 

Nations in order to counter terrorist threats to
international peace and security". (ibid., para. 6)

In the resolution, the Security Council also
requests the Secretary-General, in his reports to the
General Assembly - in particular those reports
submitted in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 50/53 on measures to eliminate international
terrorism- to pay special attention to the need to
prevent and fight the threat to international peace and
security as a result of such terrorist activities. I will
revert to this issue in a few moments.

I should now like to focus on actions taken by the
General Assembly. The first element in this context is
the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism. During the 1990s, the principal
trend to emerge from discussions in the Sixth
Committee on the topic of international terrorism was
an emphasis on international cooperation between
States as the primary means to prevent and eliminate
international terrorism. To this end, Member States
elaborated a draft declaration on measures to eliminate
international terrorism. The General Assembly adopted
the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism in resolution 49/60 of 9 December 1994.

The preambular paragraphs of the 1994
Declaration refer to the desirability for closer
coordination and cooperation among States in
combating crimes closely connected with terrorism,
including drug trafficking, unlawful arms trade, money
laundering and the smuggling of nuclear materials; the
"determination of the Assembly to eliminate
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations"; and the desirability of keeping under
review the scope of existing international legal
provisions in order to ensure a comprehensive legal
framework for the elimination of terrorism.

In the Declaration, the Member States solemnly
reaffirmed their unequivocal condemnation of all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable, wherever and by whomever committed,
including those which jeopardize the friendly relations
among States and peoples and threaten the territorial
integrity and security of States. Furthermore, it is
declared that criminal acts intended or calculated to
provoke a state of terror in the general public, a group
of persons or particular persons for political purposes
are in any circumstances unjustifiable, whatever the
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological,
racial, ethnic, religious or any other nature that may be
invoked to justify them. More detailed information
appears in my briefing note.

In 1996, the General Assembly adopted the
Declaration to Supplement the 1994 Declaration on
Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism. This
was done in resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996.
In the Declaration, the General Assembly reaffirmed
that States should take appropriate measures in
conformity with the relevant provisions of national and
international law, including international standards of
human rights, before granting refugee status, for the
purpose of ensuring that the asylum-seeker has not
participated in terrorist acts. In this regard, relevant
information as to whether the asylum-seeker is subject
to investigation for or is charged with or has been
convicted of offences connected with terrorism should
be considered. The General Assembly says that the
same should apply, after granting refugee status, for the
purpose of ensuring that that status is not used for the
purpose of preparing or organizing terrorist acts
intended to be committed against other States or their
citizens. Further details are given in the briefing note.

Allow me now to focus on the 1997 International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.

In 1996, the Secretary-General prepared a report
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 50/53 in
relation to the implementation of the 1994 Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism. In
this report, the Secretary-General conducted an
analytical review of existing international legal
instruments relating to international terrorism and
concluded that there was a need to elaborate
international treaties or other kinds of instruments in
areas or with respect to subjects not covered by
existing treaties. Possible subjects suggested by the
Secretary-General included terrorist bombings, terrorist
fund-raising, traffic in arms, money laundering and
preventing the use of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists and the use of modern information
technology for terrorist purposes. The goal was to
develop a comprehensive legal framework of
conventions for dealing with international terrorism.

In resolution 51/210, the General Assembly
decided to establish an Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate
an international convention for the suppression of
terrorist bombings and, subsequently, an international
convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear

S/PVAZAZ

 

terrorism, to supplement related existing international
instruments. The General Assembly also decided that
the Ad Hoc Committee would at a later stage address
means of further developing a comprehensive legal
framework of conventions dealing with international
terrorism.

The Ad Hoc Committee, whose mandate has been
renewed on a yearly basis since 1997, was instrumental
in preparing, in the latter half of the 19905, some of the
most important international conventions against
international terrorism. The Committee is composed of
all States and has met for an average of two weeks in
the first half of each year, while a Working Group of
the Sixth Committee has continued the elaboration of
the respective conventions during an additional period
of two weeks in the second semester of each year.

The first task entrusted to the Ad Hoc Committee
was the elaboration of an international convention for
the suppression of terrorist bombings. France, on
behalf of the Group of Seven and the Russian
Federation, submitted a preliminary working
document, which constituted the basis of the
negotiations.

The International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings was adopted in General
Assembly resolution 52/164 of 15 December 1997 and
constitutes one of the main achievements of the Ad
Hoc Committee. The provisions of the terrorist
bombings Convention have been used in the
subsequent negotiations of other anti-terrorism
conventions. The details appear in the briefing note.

The terrorist bombings Convention was opened
for signature on 12 January 1998 and, as of 1
December 2000, had 58 signatories and 16
ratifications. The Convention requires 22 ratifications
to enter into force.

The next achievement in this context is the 1999
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.

As early as 1996, the Secretary-General
considered that there was a need to elaborate an
international treaty dealing with terrorist fund-raising.
This convention would contribute to the General
Assembly's stated goal of developing a comprehensive
legal framework of conventions for dealing with
international terrorism. Such a convention would not
only punish those financing terrorist acts, but would

also prevent such financing through mutual legal
assistance and cooperation. It would also serve as a
means of alerting donors who intended to contribute to
charitable, humanitarian or other legal causes that their
funds could be used to finance terrorist activities.

In 1998, the General Assembly decided that the
Ad Hoc Committee should elaborate a draft
international convention for the suppression of terrorist
financing. The basis for the discussions in the Ad Hoc
Committee was a draft convention prepared by France.
Many of the provisions in the draft convention closely
follow the corresponding provisions of the terrorist
bombing Convention.

The International Convention for the Suppression
of the Financing of Terrorism was adopted without a
vote in General Assembly resolution 54/109 of 9
December 1999. With respect to the details, I refer
again to the briefing note.

The Convention was opened for signature on 10
January 2000. As of 1 December 2000 it had 35
signatories and 2 ratifications. This Convention
represents a further step in the consolidation of legal
norms pertaining to the elimination of international
terrorism. It not only reaffirms certain principles
included in the terrorist bombings Convention but also
extends the reach of the international legal regime to
acts ancillary to terrorist acts. By targeting the
financial activities that are necessary for the
commission of a terrorist offence, the Convention
constitutes a valuable part of the overall framework of
counter-terrorism treaties.

A matter that the Ad Hoc Committee is still
discussing is a draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. When it
established the Ad Hoc Committee, in 1996, the
General Assembly entrusted the Committee with the
elaboration of an international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, a task that the
Committee began in 1998 immediately upon
completion of the terrorist bombings Convention.

The Russian Federation had proposed a
convention to combat acts of nuclear terrorism in order
to fill the lacunae left by the 1980 Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, which is
referred to as the 1980 Convention. The proposal
comprises the extension of the definition of nuclear
material to include objects and materials for military
use, as well as the provision of a clearer definition of

S/PV.4242

 

the crime of illegal acquisition of nuclear materials for
terrorist purposes and the inclusion of terrorist acts
against nuclear power plants, vessels with nuclear
power sources and the use of automatic nuclear
devices. In that regard, the new convention would
cover to the broadest extent the possible targets, forms
and manifestations of acts of nuclear terrorism.
Furthermore, unlike the 1980 Convention, the proposed
convention would draw a distinction between acts of
nuclear terrorism and other criminal acts involving the
use of nuclear material by referring to the purpose of
such acts. Further details with respect to the draft
appear in the briefing note.

Negotiations to finalize the draft international
convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear
terrorism, as proposed by the "Friends of the
Chairman", have been stalled due to the concern by
some delegations about certain provisions, most
notably its scope of application. One particular concern
is the inclusion of draft article 4, which excludes the
activities of the armed forces of a State from the scope
of the draft convention. Divergent Views were also
expressed on extending the scope of the draft
convention to cover acts of State terrorism and on the
inclusion of provisions dealing with the dumping of
radioactive waste.

Since October 1998 repeated attempts have been
made, so far without success, to find a compromise that
would allow the adoption of the draft convention
without a vote. The draft resolution on the measures to
eliminate international terrorism recently adopted by
the Sixth Committee once again entrusts the Ad Hoc
Committee with attempting to complete the instrument.
That brings me to the mandate of the Ad Hoc
Committee.

In resolution 54/110, the Assembly renewed the
mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee, entrusting it with,
in addition to finalizing the draft convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism, addressing the
question of convening a high-level conference under
the auspices of the United Nations to formulate a joint
organized response of the international community to
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and to
begin consideration of, with a View to the elaboration
of, a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism.

With regard to the question of convening a high-
level conference on terrorism, the Ad Hoc Committee
held discussions on the matter in February this year.
Some delegations expressed support for holding such a
conference, which could, inter alia, focus on concrete
measures to strengthen the existing framework of
international cooperation; focus on preventive
measures such as the promotion of cooperation among
the law-enforcement authorities of States; elaborate a
definition of terrorism, and so forth. On the other hand,
other delegations had doubts about the practical
benefits of holding a conference on terrorism and the
likelihood of concrete results arising therefrom. The
Ad Hoc Committee, as a result of its deliberations at its
fourth session, formulated no recommendation on the
matter. The Views of delegations were repeated during
the recent consideration in the Sixth Committee of the
item entitled "Measures to eliminate international
terrorism". Bilateral consultations on the issue
continue.
A Working Group of the Sixth Committee
embarked on the elaboration of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism from 25
September to 6 October 2000. The basis for the
negotiations was a draft text prepared by India, and the
progress made is reflected in the report of the Working
Group.

During the recent consideration of the item in the
Sixth Committee, delegations expressed support for the
work begun. Some delegations were of the View that
the instrument should be truly comprehensive in scope,
containing a definition of terrorism that clearly
distinguishes between terrorist acts and the legitimate
struggle of peoples for national liberation from
colonial and other forms of alien domination and
foreign occupation, as well as covering all aspects of
the problem, including State terrorism and certain
activities of armed forces. Other delegations, however,
were of the view that the future convention should
complement and complete the existing sectoral anti-
terrorism conventions rather than replace them.

The draft resolution adopted by the Sixth
Committee on the item, which is scheduled for
consideration by the General Assembly on 12
December 2000, renews the mandate of the Ad Hoc
Committee. It is proposed that the Committee should
meet from 12 to 23 February 2001, in order to continue
the elaboration of a draft comprehensive convention
against international terrorism, but also to consider the
outstanding issues on the draft international convention
for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism and to

S/PVAZAZ

 

keep on its agenda the question of convening a high-
level conference on terrorism.

In this context, I should like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the 2000 United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, even if that Convention does not focus
expressly on terrorism. That Convention was adopted
by the General Assembly on 15 November 2000. The
Convention will be opened for signature at the High-
level Political Signing Conference to be held in
Palermo from 12 to 15 December 2000, that is to say,
next week.

The Convention focuses on crimes of a financial
nature, money-laundering and corruption, and contains
extensive provisions on international cooperation. Of
particular interest in this context is that the General
Assembly, in its resolution adopting the Convention,
recommended that

"the Ad Hoc Committee established by the
General Assembly in its resolution 51/210 of 17
December 1996, which is beginning its
deliberations with a View to developing a
comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, pursuant to Assembly resolution
54/110 of 9 December 1999, should take into
consideration the provisions of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime". (General Assembly resolution 55/25, para. 7)

In this context, I would also like to refer to the
Vienna Declaration on crime and justice, meeting the
challenges of the Twenty-first Century, endorsed by the
General Assembly on Monday, 4 December. In that
Declaration, which is an outflow of the Tenth United
Nations Congress on the prevention of crime and the
treatment of offenders held in Vienna 2000, there is a
passage that reads as follows:

"We note that acts of violence and terrorism
continue to be of grave concern. In conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and
taking into account all the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, we shall together, in
conjunction with our other efforts to prevent and
to combat terrorism, take effective, resolute and
speedy measures with respect to preventing and
combating criminal activities carried out for the
purpose of furthering terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. With this in View, we

undertake to do our utmost to foster universal
adherence to the international instruments
concerned with the fight against terrorism."
(resolution 55/59, annex, para. 19)

Allow me now to focus towards the end of my
intervention on the role of the United Nations
Secretariat.

Paragraph 10 of the 1994 Declaration on
Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism called
upon the Secretary-General to assist in its
implementation by taking a series of practical
measures.

The principal means of doing so has been an
annual report by the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly on the topic, containing data on the status
and the implementation of existing multilateral,
regional and bilateral agreements relating to
international terrorism, as well as information on
relevant incidents and criminal prosecutions. Pursuant
to the Declaration, the material contained in the report
is based on information received from the depositaries
of the respective anti-terrorism conventions and from
Member States. In the future, a specific reference will
be made to operative paragraph 5 in Security Council
resolution 1269 (1999) of 19 October 1999, to which I
referred a few moments ago. The purpose is, of course,
that Member States submitting information for the
report of the Secretary-General may pay special
attention to the terms of this resolution by the Security
Council.

An analytical review of relevant existing
international legal instruments was included in the
1996 report of the Secretary-General, and the General
Assembly has taken action on some of the observations
and conclusions contained in that review. It should be
noted that there are currently 19 global or regional
treaties pertaining to international terrorism. The
Secretary-General presented their status with respect to
signature, ratification, accession or succession to the
General Assembly in a report (A/55/179) on 26 July
2000.

Another measure entrusted to the Secretary-
General by the Declaration was the preparation of a
compendium of national laws and regulations
regarding the prevention and suppression of
international terrorism. Since the Declaration was
adopted, the Secretariat has been compiling the
pertinent information submitted by States. The

S/PV.4242

 

Secretariat has received information from 50 States.
The respective volume of the Legislative Series is
currently being prepared and should be finalized before
the end of the year.

The Office of Legal Affairs has also prepared a
compilation of the global and regional conventions on
international terrorism, which will be submitted for
publication by the end of the year.

An important contribution to combating
international terrorism is also made by the United
Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention
(ODCCP) in Vienna. The Terrorism Prevention Branch
at ODCCP came into existence in mid-April 1999 and
is linked to the Centre for International Crime
Prevention. Its mandate derives from General
Assembly resolution 52/220 of 22 December 1997,
which endorsed the proposal of the Secretary-General
to strengthen the capacity of the newly created Centre.

The Branch has, in the field of preventing and
combating terrorism, a division of labour with the
Office of Legal Affairs. While the Office of Legal
Affairs focuses mainly on legal and normative matters,
including Conventions and Protocols against
Terrorism, the Branch concentrates more on research
and technical cooperation. In the field of technical
cooperation several manuals are planned, with titles
such as: Assisting Victims of Terrorism: A Manual for
Helpers; Responsible Media Coverage of Terrorism: A
Guide for Journalists and Law Enforcement Officers;
Bomb Threat Analysis and Response; and Hostage
Situations and Rescue Operations.

The Terrorism Prevention Branch organized a
meeting on "Terrorism Victimization: Prevention,
Control, and Recovery", on 12 April 2000, during the
Tenth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and the Treatment of Offenders, in Vienna, and,
together with the International Scientific and
Professional Advisory Council (ISPAC) of the United
Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme, an international conference on
"Countering Terrorism through Enhanced International
Cooperation", in Courmayeur, Italy, in September
2000. I had the privilege of participating in that
conference myself.

Furthermore, reports have been written on the
role of terrorism in the Chechen crisis and the Kosovo
crisis. United Nations Member States have been
approached with a questionnaire on "Best Practices"
and "Lessons Learned" in the field of combating
terrorism. Two major databases, on terrorist incidents
and counter-terrorist measures respectively, are
maintained and updated on a daily basis. A "Toolbox of
Counter-terrorism Measures" is being developed, and a
"Roster of Experts" has been created by the Branch.
Results of these efforts will be incorporated in a
biennial "Global Terrorism Survey", the first edition of
which is scheduled for late 2001.

With permission, I should now like to sum up
with a few concluding remarks.

The effectiveness of any legal regime in the
international field is limited by the amount of support
it attains. In the case of the conventions against
international terrorism, this support can be measured
by the number of signatures and ratifications of the
relevant international instruments, as well as the
development and promotion of national laws to
implement them. The most recent report of the
Secretary-General on measures to eliminate
international terrorism lists global or regional treaties
pertaining to the subject. The latest list includes recent
regional agreements by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Commonwealth of Independent States.
During the Millennium Summit, both the terrorist
bombings Convention and the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism
received additional signatures and ratifications that
constitute a renewed commitment from the
international community to unite around the common
goal of putting an end to the scourge of international
terrorism.

The fight against terrorism requires better
international cooperation. However, there are several
obstacles standing in the way of enhanced international
cooperation. The definition problem, the political
element, the links between terrorist groups and
organized crime groups and the perceived relationship
between religion and terrorism in some parts of the
world make terrorism a difficult issue to handle. One
can only express the hope that practical cooperation is
extended whenever possible, and that States realize
that cooperation is indispensable if they are to succeed
in countering terrorism and eliminating this cowardly
form of indiscriminate Violence against innocent
people for purposes of propaganda, blackmail or
intimidation.

S/PVAZAZ

 

I stand ready to answer any questions that
members of the Council may wish to put to me. I thank
you for your attention.

