Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council.

In today's interdependent world, development
issues are closely linked to security issues. The Russian
Federation views sustainable social and economic
development as an essential element of today's
collective security system. Global challenges and
problems in the area of development - such as
destitution and poverty, population migration, limited
access to water, energy and food resources, the illegal
arms trade, infectious disease pandemics, natural
catastrophes and environmental and man-made
disasters - can all have negative consequences for
peace, stability and security, and, in some cases, the
potential for international conflict. These problems
should of course be dealt with in depth by the relevant
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and
its partners.

In addition, something else that could be essential
is the possibility set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations for presenting to the Security Council special
reports of the Economic and Social Council, which is
responsible for coordinating activities in the
socio-economic sector of our universal Organization. It
is our view that the basic prerogative of the Security
Council is maintaining international peace and security
using the tools it has at its disposal. It would thus help
the Council carry out its tasks relating to dealing with
the items on its agenda if it received the most complete
and timely information possible from the other
agencies of the United Nations system that are
responsible for addressing socio-economic
development processes at the global, regional and
national levels.

Interlinkages between security and development
are particularly relevant for States that have
experienced conflict. The development processes
taking place in such countries in the areas of post-
conflict stabilization and building State institutions and
law-enforcement, judicial and penal systems all require
adequate efforts in the areas of economic recovery and
the rebuilding of physical and social infrastructure -
in other words, creating a kind of safety net to protect
against the recurrence of conflict.

Taking those circumstances into account, the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
peacekeeping missions - in particular in Haiti, the
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Afghanistan, Timor-Leste and Liberia - include early
peacebuilding tasks, which United Nations bodies deal
with well on the whole. Experience shows that the
orderly drawdown of a peacekeeping presence as a
situation normalizes in many cases requires concurrent
active and targeted actions in the area of peacebuilding.

Peacebuilding activities and development
planning rely on the principle of national responsibility
for determining priorities and approaches to
implementation. A key component of successful post-
conflict peacebuilding is the creation and strengthening
of national institutional capacity. The United Nations
plays a special role in coordinating international efforts
at post-conflict and socio-economic recovery. The
Organization has acquired vast experience in this area,
although this activity gives rise to new challenges,
requires the existence of well-trained and qualified
personnel and dictates the need for coordinated
activities by the Secretariat, United Nations funds and
programmes, Member States, regional organizations
and international financial institutions at United
Nations Headquarters, its various offices and in the
field. In that regard, a particularly relevant factor
would be to strengthen the coordinating functions of
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
who head United Nations peacekeeping operations and
political missions. Another aspect whose potential
should be fully utilized is the Peacebuilding
Commission, in close cooperation with the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation to the delegation of Brazil for preparing
the draft presidential statement on the subject of
today's meeting, which is a useful contribution to our
joint work in this important area.

