Mrs. Andelic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, allow me to welcome the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I would
also like to thank them for their comprehensive
briefings on the activities of the Tribunals and the
Residual Mechanism. Let me underscore the significant
contribution of all the staff of the Tribunals and
commend their efforts in the successful work and
completion of the Tribunals' mandates.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and has supported its work since the beginning.
We have continuously increased our level of cooperation
with the ICTY, including the Office of the Prosecutor,
and will continue to do so. We hope that good
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism will continue, as well. It is very
important for the Tribunal to accomplish its completion
strategy and transition to the Residual Mechanism. In
that regard, the Mechanism should be able to undertake
all necessary administrative and judicial work. We
welcome the decision that the Mechanism's staff should
include nationals of 46 States, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

With the aim of ensuring the prosecution of all
suspected war criminals in the courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we continue to strengthten the justice
system at both the State and the local levels. In 2013,
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted 80 proposals for the transfer of proceedings
to entity Prosecutor's Offices and courts. During the
same year, 67 war crimes cases were referred from
the entities and Brcko District to the Constitutional
Court. Currently, 91 cases are being assessed as to the
complexity of the war crimes. As of 4 February, the
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was dealing with a total of 352 of the most complex war
crimes cases against 3,309 individuals. The Prosecutor's
Office estimates that the most complex war crimes
cases will have been processed and completed by 2018.

Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the National War
Crimes Strategy on 29 December 2008, which was
followed by the establishment of its implementation
monitoring body in 2009. The majority of the Strategy's
goals have been fully or partially implemented, but with
a delay in the deadlines. The institutions at all State
levels are participating in implementing the Strategy.
To that end, we welcome the support of the European
Union in the implementation of the Strategy's goals.

Both the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda have contributed to classifying
sexual abuse as a crime against humanity. As a result,
sexual abuse has become an integral part of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court. Female judges and
women in senior positions at the respective Office ofthe
Prosecutor have made significant contributions to the
effective prosecution of cases of sexual violence against
women. In that respect, we welcome the decisions
that 56 per cent of the Mechanism's professional staff
and 53 per cent of its total staff should be women.
Furthermore, we welcome the assistance of UN-Women,
which sponsored a programme on prosecuting crimes
of sexual violence.

The Tribunals' initiatives on support to and
contact with victims' associations, such as during the
conference in Sarajevo in November 2013, are steps in
the right direction because Victims and their families
have waited long enough and, in some cases, are still
waiting for the opportunity of redress and closure.

In order to preserve the records and archives of the
ICTY and to ensure their accessibility in the future, we
have proposed that an information centre be located
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. That would have a very
symbolic significance in serving future generations
and as a constant reminder that violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law should never
be repeated. Today, information technology makes
it possible for there to be no difference between the
headquarters and branches of the information centre.
We welcome the interest of Croatia and Serbia in such
a project. We would like to encourage other countries
in the region and beyond to participate in supporting
the project. The legacy of the ICTY does not belong
only to the countries concerned but to all humanity as
the reminder and testimony of the justice achieved. We
believe that the issue deserves further consideration in
the spirit of regional cooperation and the inclusiveness
of the United Nations.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to promote
regional cooperation, most recently by signing the
Protocol on Cooperation in Prosecution of Perpetrators
of War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and Genocide
with Montenegro on 26 April. That followed the
signing of the protocols on the exchange of evidence
and information on war crimes, concluded between the
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Office of the Prosecutor of Serbia in January 2013
and the Office ofthe Prosecutor of Croatia in June 2013.
The protocols define the channels for concluding any
investigations concerning citizens of other countries.

