Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to brief the Council on the Security
Council's mission to investigate the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Great Lakes
region between 4 and 6 October, headed jointly by
the Deputy Permanent Representative of France,
Mr. Alexis Lamek, and myself. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mr. Martin Kobler, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and his whole
team for their welcome, their assistance and support
throughout that stage of the trip.

The Security Council's entire visit to the area
occurred, as the Council is aware, in a context that
particularly favours the possibility of lasting peace in
the region, thanks to the signing by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbours in Addis
Ababa, under the auspices of four international and
regional organizations, of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. The Council's
message was focused on the implementation of the
Framework Agreement and resolution 2098 (2013), and
on a general urging to all to work to ensure the success
of the Kampala negotiations.

On the way to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo the Council made a stop in Brussels, where we
met with representatives of the Political and Security
Committee of the European Union to discuss the
latest developments in the Great Lakes region, and the
political process under way and security sector reform
in particular. In Kinshasa the Council mission held
talks with all the Democratic Republic of the Congo
senior officials - the President of the Republic, the
Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and
the Ministers of Defence, the Interior and Justice, as
well as the Presidents of the Senate and the House of
Representatives and the Chairs of the independent
national electoral commission and of the follow-
up mechanism to the Framework Agreement. We
also attended the closing ceremony of the national
consultations, which have resulted in more than 200
recommendations.

On 6 October we arrived in Goma, where we
visited the site of the recent clashes in the hills around
Kibati between MONUSCO, the Forces armees de la
Republique de'mocratique du Congo and the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23), after which we metwith the Governor
of the province of North Kivu and representatives of
civil society. Finally, the Council mission concluded
this stage by visiting the Mugonga 3 displaced persons
camp, where we met with representatives of the camp
associations.

During the meetings with the Congolese
authorities, the Council acknowledged the importance
of effectively implementing the reforms that have begun
in various areas: the restoration of State authority,
democratization, decentralization and national
reconciliation, the security sector and in economic
governance. Regarding the recommendations resulting
from the national consultations, the Council urged
that they be speedily translated into concrete action.
Security sector reform is particularly crucial, since
it will enable the Congolese authorities to gradually
assume responsibility for security and the defence of
territorial integrity. That was an important message
from the Council mission to the Congolese authorities.
During a meeting specifically devoted to that topic
with the Ministers of Defence, Interior and Justice, the
Council encouraged them to step up their efforts. The
coordination role that resolution 2098 (2013) granted
MONUSCO also makes it possible for it to support the
Congolese authorities in that area.

More generally, the issue of the restoration of State
authority was also raised in meetings with various
officials. The Council welcomes the fact that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
decided to emphasize the eastern region, redeploying
a part of the units to Goma to enforce the rule of
law. In a meeting in Kinshasa with the country team,
the Council also recalled the mandate agreed on in
resolution 2098 (2013) concerning the transfer of
certain tasks from MONUSCO to the country team.
MONUSCO should refocus on its fundamental tasks.
The country coordinator and the Special Representative
have committed to coming up with a road map to be
presented to the Council in December.

A number of speakers felt that the restoration of a
lasting peace would not be possible as long as insecurity
in the east continues, fomented as it is by outside
forces. The immediate objective should therefore be to
settle the problem raised by the M-23, the group that
is responsible for many attacks against the civilian
population in North Kivu for more than a year, which
would then make it possible to tackle the other groups,
in particular the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda and the Ugandan Allied Democratic Forces/
National Army for the Liberation of Uganda. The
Council encouraged the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to continue their discussions
under way in Kampala because the solution cannot be
only a military one. Nonetheless, the Council stressed
that a balance must be established between amnesty
and the fight against impunity for war crimes, drawing
lessons from the past to prevent a recurrence of the
same pattern of violence in the future.

Congolese authorities at all levels thanked the
Council and MONUSCO for their ongoing support.
They presented the progress made with respect to their
commitment in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework . With respect to the Kampala process,
the same authorities said that they wanted to reach an
agreement as soon as possible. The most important
thing would be to prevent a repetition of past errors in
terms of amnesty and reintegration.

The Council's visit also made it possible to assess
the status of resolution 2098 (2013) concerning the
deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade. The
Council was able to see the determination of the new
leadership of MONUSCO, in the persons of both the
Special Representative and Force Commander, to
implement the civilian protection mandate called for by
the resolution.

The Council also welcomed the actions taken by
MONUSCO since its arrival with the Intervention
Brigade and the North Kivu brigade alongside the
armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to bring an end to the M-23 attacks of the past
summer against the civilian population of Goma and
MONUSCO. The representative of the Secretary-
General and the Force Commander showed that they
were determined and committed to implementing the
mandate for the protection of civilians, which was that
of MONUSCO as a whole. The Intervention Brigade is
an instrument that will make it possible to move in that
direction. In meetings with civil society, the actions of
MONUSCO and the Brigade were warmly welcomed.

Finally, in all the aforementioned meetings,
whether it be with the Congolese authorities or with
the supervisors of MONUSCO or humanitarian actors
and civil society, the Council recalled the importance
of fighting against impunity. That was true in the case
of the discussions under way in Kampala, but it is
also true when it comes to the broader issue of all of
those responsible for serious crimes against humanity,
especially when it comes to sexual violence and
violence against children, including child recruitment.

