Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2432
(2018), renewning the targeted sanctions regime for
Mali for a further year. The idea of imposing sanctions
on those who obstruct the implementation of the peace
process in Mali is embedded in the very content of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
was thus endorsed by the Malian parties at the time of

the agreement's signing. The Malian authorities then
sent a formal request to the Security Council in the
light of the many delays in the implementation of the
agreement.

For the past year, the sanctions regime established by
the Security Council has proved to be a useful addition
to the range of tools available to the international
community to promote a solution to the crisis in Mali. It
sends a strong political message of deterrence that has
changed the behaviour of certain actors on the ground
and undeniably played a role in launching the positive
trend of recent months in the implementation of the
agreement.

Nonetheless, all of us around this table have observed
that the progress that has been made is insufficient in the
light of expectations and the commitments undertaken.
The Council recently welcomed the positive trends of
recent months, but at the same time it reiterated its
frustration and impatience with respect to this issue. It
called for urgent mobilization by the Government and
the signatories immediately following the presidential
election, which we have just collectively commended
for its smooth conduct. The Council will closely follow
the implementation of the priority measures laid out in
resolution 2423 (2018), which are to be taken within six
months.

The time for warnings is therefore at an end. The
report recently submitted by the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 2374 (2017) on Mali
shed incontestible light on the actions of certain lead
intermediaries of armed groups on the ground to willfully
undermine the implementation of the agreement
through their open links to criminal or terrorism
activities. France intends to assume its responsibilities
in that regard by proposing forthwith their inclusion
on the sanctions list. It is also important to underscore
that the resolution we have just adopted reiterates the
Security Council's intention to adopt complementary
measures in the framework of the sanctions regime if
the provisions of the road map adopted in March by
the Malian parties are not implemented by the deadline.
The failure to honour commitments freely entered into
by each of the Malian parties in the framework of the
road map cannot go unanswered. Everyone at all levels
must be aware of that.

Finally, like the other members of the Council,
France is fully convinced that sanctions are not an
end in themselves and cannot resolve the situation
alone. They are one of the tools at the disposal of the
international community in its ongoing effort to ensure
the implementation of the peace agreement. The issues
at stake are far too large for us to content ourselves
with the current impasse, The Security Council's

responsibility is therefore to make use ofall the leverage
available to promote peace and security in Mali and the
region. France hereby commits to doing so.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
