Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative Annadif
and Ambassador Singer Weisinger for their briefings.

China strongly condemns the attack on 6 October
targeting peacekeepers from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). We would like to express our
condolences to the family of the peacekeeper killed in
the attack and wish the injured a speedy recovery.

At present, the peace and reconciliation process in
Mali is slowly advancing, preparations for an inclusive
national dialogue are under way and progress has been
made in the intercommunal reconciliation process in
central Mali. However, the security situation in the
country and the surrounding Sahel region still poses a
challenge to the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The international
community should continue to pay attention to the issue
and to help Mali and the countries of the region on the
political, security and development fronts.

First, we should support Mali in advancing peace
and reconciliation. All the parties in Mali should take
the opportunity presented by the national dialogue to
work together for peace and development and resolve
their differences peacefully, through full consultations.
The international community should provide Mali with
constructive assistance and support it in strengthening
its development and governance capabilities. The
Council's Mali sanctions mechanism should abide
strictly by the Council's mandate, and its work should
help advance the political process.

Secondly, we should support Mali in enhancing
its security capacity-building. The Government of
Mali bears the primary responsibility for protecting
its territory and people. The international community
should continue to help it improve its security and
counter-terrorism capabilities so that it can gradually
assume its full responsibility for security. Since
terrorism knows no national boundaries, we must
strengthen regional cooperation and combat terrorism
in and around Mali, with an integrated approach. The
international community should continue to support
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel). Through the African Union, China has provided
financial support amounting to ¥300 million to the G-5
Sahel Joint Force.

Thirdly, we should support Mali in achieving
economic and social development. Development is the
foundation for peace. The international community
should continue to help Mali consolidate its economic
foundation, strive for independent and sustainable
development, and promote development through
cooperation and peace through development. China
calls on all the relevant parties to follow through on
their aid commitment and help the Malian Government
increase investment in development in the country's
northern and central areas. We welcome the progress
made in establishing a northern economic development
zone and hope that all the parties concerned will
continue to advance those efforts and help the local
people share the peace dividends as soon as possible.

Fourthly, we should support the work of
MINUSMA. In June the council adopted resolution
2480 (2019), extending the mandate of MINUSMA
for one year, enhancing its mandated tasks in central
Mali and expanding its support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. We hope that MINUSMA will plan sensibly, use
its existing resources effectively and fully cooperate
with all parties in performing all of its functions.
Given the complex environment in which MINUSMA
is deployed, we hope that the Mission will continue to
take measures to strengthen the safety and security of
its peacekeepers and ensure their effective performance
of their duties. China supports the important role played
by the Mission and Special Representative Annadif in
assisting the peace process in Mali and strengthening
the country's security capacity-building.

China is a major troop-contributing country to
MINUSMA. More than 420 of our peacekeepers are
currently carrying out their duties in the Mission. China
will continue to work with the rest of the international
community to contribute to achieving peace, stability
and development in Mali.

