Mr. Celem (Turkey): Mr. President, let me begin by
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. I am
confident that, under your able guidance, the Council will
carry out its deliberations in a successful manner. I would
also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador Legwaila, the
Permanent Representative of Botswana, for the exemplary
manner in which he conducted the work of the Council in
the month of March.

This special meeting of the Council on the question
of Afghanistan is, in our view, a timely and opportune
occasion for generating renewed interest on the part of the
international community in the deteriorating situation in
that war-stricken country. Indeed, more than three years
have gone by since encouraging changes took place in the
political situation in Afghanistan, after a long and painful
struggle for the liberation of that country. The process
that led to the establishment of an interim government in
Kabul at that time had given us hope that, at long last, all
Afghans would put aside their differences and start the
process of reconciliation. We had hoped that a broad-
based reconciliation process including all groups and
segments of the Afghani nation might start.

However, we have been greatly dismayed at the
resumption and continuation of the armed conflict, which
has taken an enormous humanitarian toll, totally
devastated the economic infrastructure and caused a
deepening refugee crisis affecting not only Afghanistan
but also its neighbouring countries. The continuing
hostilities have also endangered the process of political
normalization. The tireless efforts of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan, headed by Mr. Mestiri,
have yet to yield results in the direction of a peaceful
settlement to the conflict.

From the very beginning, Turkey has been an ardent
supporter of the Special Mission's peace efforts, and we
continue to support its wide-ranging consultations with
the Afghan parties and its proposals to bring an end to the
factional fighting, to set in motion the process of political
reconciliation and to embark on the challenging task of
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Afghanistan.

Our position on the conflict in Afghanistan can best
be summed up as follows.

 
Firstly, we attach great importance to the unity and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan. We believe that this is
the only basis on which a just and lasting solution can be
built.

Secondly, the international community has time and
again expressed its firm position on how best to address the
situation in Afghanistan, most lately through General
Assembly resolution 50/88 of 19 December 1995, whereby
it requested the Secretary-General, inter alia, to continue
his efforts to facilitate national reconciliation and
reconstruction in Afghanistan, in particular by ensuring the
transfer of power. The resolution also envisaged the urgent
establishment of a fully representative and broad-based
authoritative council as the proper mechanism for achieving
this objective. It is our considered opinion that this
resolution contains the fundamental elements of a general
framework for a prospective solution in Afghanistan, and it
enjoys the widest possible international support.

Thirdly, the current fighting in the country should
come to an end once and for all. Political stability and a
cessation of armed hostilities are indispensable if the
reconstruction of Afghanistan is to take place.

Fourthly, all parties to the conflict should strictly
respect the provisions of international humanitarian law.
Millions of innocent civilians have lost their lives; millions
have been maimed. This suffering must stop.

We therefore once again appeal to all the conflicting
parties in Afghanistan, especially the leaders of the warring
parties, to agree, finally, on a national reconciliation process
that would lead to the restoration of a fully representative,
broad-based government, and appeals also for them to
support the international community's efforts in this regard.

In this connection, we attach particular importance to
the constructive role that the Organization of Islamic
Conference (OIC) has been playing to help bring about
national reconciliation between the parties in Afghanistan,
and we fully support its efforts. The efforts of the OIC are
being conducted in close cooperation and coordination with
the United Nations Special Mission, and they are
complementary in nature to those of the United Nations.

The senseless fratricide that has been tearing
Afghanistan apart must come to end. The main
responsibility for settling their differences falls, first and
foremost, on the warring parties. All the international
community can do in this regard is help and support their
political will. To this end, my country stands ready to do all
it can. Inspired by the close historical and cultural bonds
between Turkey and Afghanistan, we will continue to
shoulder our responsibility for promoting peace and
prosperity in that country.

