Ms. Wronecka (Poland) (spoke in French): We
are honoured by your presence among us today,
Mr. President, and we commend cote d'Ivoire for
this initiative. We welcome this important debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission Moussa Faki Mahamat and President
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Commission Jean-Claude Brou for their
very informative briefings.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is based on
complementary advantages. Such cooperation ensures
local ownership and a sense of responsibility. It also
provides all stakeholders with inclusive participation.
All those elements remain crucial for the success of
efforts aimed at conflict prevention and resolution.

Let me focus on three points that Poland finds
particularly vital in that regard: closer cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nation;
the strategic partnership between the European Union
and African Union; and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as an example of
a positive role played by a regional organization in
conflict prevention.

First, with regard to closer cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations, the enhanced
partnership in the area of peace and security between the
United Nations and the African Union is a prerequisite
for long-term effective solutions to the security
challenges in Africa. There is no doubt that, since the
United Nations and the African Union signed the Joint
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security in 2017, tremendous progress has been made
in that regard. I would like to commend all stakeholders
that have been engaging in strengthening the cooperation
between the two organizations. A tangible example of
subregional ownership and responsibility is ECOWAS.
Its involvement in preventive diplomacy, and in peace
and security in general, needs to be highlighted.

Furthermore, when discussing future arrangements,
we should approach the challenges in a holistic way. The
key areas we should be focusing on when drafting the
framework for the next phase of the United Nations and
African Union cooperation are, inter alia, compliance,
reporting, accountability and sustainability. The
roles and responsibilities should be assigned based
on the complementarities of both organizations in the
peace process.

Poland believes that continued United Nations
support to the African Union in its efforts to equip
itself with capabilities, tools and the means necessary
for effective action is critical. It is also of the utmost
importance in enabling both organizations to face new
threats and address complex sources of instability in
Africa. We consider regular interaction between this
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council as an essential instrument in deepening
the partnership.

Secondly, with regard to the strategic partnership
between the European Union and African Union, the
framework of that cooperation was defined in the
Joint Africa-European Union Strategy. One of the key
areas of the cooperation highlighted in the Strategy
is European Union support to the African Union in
conflict prevention and political solutions, including
through substantial financial support. In that context,
by focusing on enhanced performance, the European
Union helps strengthen the efficiency of efforts in
cooperation on training and capacity-building.
Thirdly, the OSCE is an example of a positive
role played by a regional organization in conflict
prevention. We cannot omit the positive role played in
particular by its field operations. Such activities prove
that conflict prevention is more cost efficient than
conflict management. It is that guiding principle held
by the OSCE that put early warning and early action at
the forefront of its endeavours by providing dialogue
facilitation and helping in mediation processes.
Effective interaction facilitated by the OSCE enables a
reaction at various stages of the crisis cycle and, in that
sense, remains an effective conflict-prevention tool. We
see growing space for strengthening OSCE cooperation
with the United Nations. It is urgently needed in places
such as the conflict-affected parts of Ukraine. Such
cooperation should be guided by good practices and
lessons learned, which both the OSCE and the United
Nations could offer.

In conclusion, let me emphasize the great added
value of the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. On one hand, it provides
us with invaluable regional perspective and expertise
to address regional challenges, and, on the other, it
enables the United Nations to share the best practices
and standards in implementing relevant strategies and
frameworks. Let me reiterate Poland's full support for
strengthening closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Let me assure the
Council that we stand ready to continue engaging with
our partners in regional organizations to work together
in the field of conflict prevention and resolution.

