Mr. Zhanibekov (Kazakhstan): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the important issue of children and armed conflict.

Almost 20 years after the World Summit for
Children and 10 years after adoption of Security
Council resolution 1261 (1999), on children and armed
conflict, the issue of grave violations of the rights of
children in armed conflicts is still an important item on
the Security Council's agenda. Moreover, because of
the rising number of conflict situations worldwide, the
data on children affected by hostilities in certain
regions remains daunting.

The Security Council has defined six types of
grave violations of children's rights as crimes under
international humanitarian law: the recruitment and use
of child soldiers, the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other grave sexual violence against children,
attacks on schools and hospitals, the abduction of
children and the denial of humanitarian access to
children.

We believe that by making full use of existing
tools, the United Nations system can promote a
considerable decrease in the number of children
affected by armed conflicts by preventing violations of
children's rights and addressing impunity of violators.
The basic data collection instrument is the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations of
children's rights, as established by resolution 1612
(2005). That instrument is a main source of data for
adequate measures by the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict to address child
rights violations.

Kazakhstan supports activities making use of this
unique tool and highly appreciates efforts of the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict to extend the research
scope of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. We
must acknowledge that this process is a considerable
step towards successful elimination of violations of
children's rights in armed conflicts. Incorporating new
components into the scope of the research of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism could lead to
more balanced and comprehensive protection of
children's rights, including those relating to health.

I would like furthermore to stress the issue of the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former combatants
and children affected by armed conflict. During a
previous Security Council debate, Kazakhstan
underlined the necessity to put in place the conditions
for ensuring the education of children who have been
victims of the consequences of war. The high-quality
education of children is a key to avoiding exploitation,
violence and their recruitment into existing armed
groups. Professional education of children affected by
armed conflict is not a short-term investment.
However, it is vital to draw the attention of the world
community to the possibilities of adequate education
for such children as an intrinsic part of establishing a
post-conflict system. For this reason, an educational
process requires proper financial and technical support
from sponsoring countries.

Kazakhstan believes that lack of education and
the resulting poverty and inadequate level of
development can only exacerbate the condition of the
population in conflict areas. In this regard, we entirely
support the initiative of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, together with
UNICEF, on preparing a thematic collection containing
the best examples of the reintegration of children into
society through education.

In spite of the absence of armed conflict on the
territory of our country, Kazakhstan has acquired solid
national experience in overcoming financial and social
difficulties. A decision not to cut financing for the
educational system was accepted even in the current
difficult period of development. The international
merit-based Bolashak - "Future" - scholarship
system for gifted young people founded by the
President of Kazakhstan has been operating
successfully for 15 years. As a decade and a half of
practice shows, this policy of the Government of

Kazakhstan has paid off. This policy also includes 100
merit-based educational scholarships provided annually
to students from Afghanistan and Tajikistan. Missing
the opportunity to provide young people with a proper
education can lead to the loss of a generation that
should be the foundation for building a newly
fashioned State.

We believe that active discussion during the
current open debate will draw well-deserved attention
from all stakeholders to efforts to overcome the most
destructive consequences of war: the undermining of
the life and health of future generations.

