Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would also like to
convey our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate. I thank the Permanent
Representatives of Turkey, Mexico and Austria for
their useful briefings on the activities carried out by
their respective Committees and teams.

We are pleased with the efforts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), under
the direction of Ambassador Apakan, in ensuring the
effective implementation of that resolution and
resolution 1624 (2005). Through the effective use of
tools such as informative meetings with the wider
United Nations membership, dialogue and cooperation

with Member States and external outreach
programmes, the Committee has contributed
significantly to raising awareness on the need to
implement those resolutions.

We have found very useful the ongoing
constructive dialogue between our Mission, our capital
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) on counter-terrorism matters.
These interactions and political consensus with our
Government have bolstered our counter-terrorism
activities. We thank Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of CTED, and his team for their support and
efforts.

We welcome the discussions in the Committee on
the progress and challenges facing West Africa in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We all now
have a better understanding of the current threats and
challenges in the subregion. We should now aim to
address the identified gaps. With regard to capacity-
building, we are of the View that more will be achieved
by delivering assistance in an integrated manner
through equal focus on all relevant national sectors. At
the same time, we will need a self-sustaining
knowledge transfer aimed at bridging the existing
knowledge gap.

The Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) is Vital in our efforts to promote counter-
terrorism measures within the West African subregion.
That is even more so as counter-terrorism matters
increasingly occupy the agenda of West African States,
individually and collectively. Our hope is that, in the
coming year, the partnership between CTED and
ECOWAS will result in concrete achievements.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) remains a vital tool that enables the
international community to prohibit non-State actors
access to weapons of mass destruction. Nigeria
strongly supports the work of the Committee and
appreciates the efforts made by Ambassador Heller and
the Committee, particularly in improving outreach
programmes and greater visibility for the Committee.
The clearing house role of the Committee in matching
assistance requests and offers needs to be sustained, so
as to promote greater implementation of the resolution
by States.

As its work continues to grapple with the
increasing challenge of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the Committee should not relent in
its efforts to assess and monitor the risk of these
weapons falling into the hands of non-State actors.
Promoting the broader process of international
cooperation should continue to be an area of focus for
the Committee.

We welcome the remarkable contributions of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) under the directorship of Ambassador Thomas
Mayr-Harting. The conclusion of the review of the 488
names on the consolidated list, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1822 (2008), and the
appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost as the
Omnbudsperson are positive steps.

We further welcome the efforts of the Committee
to improve its procedures, including by adopting new
guidelines for its work. In the same vein, the six-month
review of deceased persons' names and the annual
review of names on the consolidated list that have not
been reviewed in three or more years are
commendable. These measures should be strengthened
through regular improvement of the identification and
de-listing process of individuals and entities, as this
will enhance the credibility of the 1267 sanctions
regime. It is important that, at all times, the list remain
as accurate as possible, and the fundamental rights of
individuals adequately guaranteed.

We welcome the close cooperation and
coordination among the three counter-terrorism
Committees. We encourage them to continue their joint
efforts to improve information-sharing, to coordinate
their relationship with international, regional and
subregional organizations and to participate within the
framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force.

