Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for Canada's leadership on this issue.
We are impressed by the stamina you are showing in
keeping up with our arcane procedures in this body and I
think we are going to miss you.

I should also like to express the United Kingdom's
appreciation for the Secretary-General's and Deputy
Secretary-General's personal involvement in this issue,
which is very important, and to pay tribute President
Kellenberger of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), not only for coming to join us this morning,
but also for giving us a speech that we shall have to think
about. On that basis, I am sure that he will be welcomed
back to this Council whenever there is a subject that affects
the ICRC.

The working group on civilians in armed conflict has
worked long and hard to produce the draft resolution which
we will adopt at the end of this meeting. It is a good draft
resolution and the Canadian delegation is particularly
deserving of congratulations. I should just like to add that
our experts recently have done particularly good work on
a number of resolutions. When texts are not coming to
ambassadors for solution, that is a sign that something is
going right in the procedures of inter-delegational activity
here, and that is very much to be welcomed.

But I should like to look forward for a moment. This
meeting needs to set down a marker. Today's draft
resolution is not the end of a process. It will have value
in the world outside only if it is the catalyst for a more
systematic approach by the Council to the protection of
civilians in specific conflicts. Last Friday we took stock
of what happens when the United Nations and the
international community get things wrong. The Carlsson
report on Rwanda and the Secretary-General's own report
on Srebrenica illuminated our collective commitment to
human security; but I am not clear what we would do
tomorrow if Rwanda hit us again.

The concept of security for individuals does not
stand in opposition to that of security for States. It plays
an intrinsic part in the wider objective. When individuals
are protected, and their human, economic, social, political
and cultural rights are upheld, international stability is
consolidated. The goals in this draft resolution lie at the
heart of a sustainable conflict- prevention strategy.

What is the next step for us, the members of the
Council? James Orbinski, President of the International
Council of Medecins Sans Frontieres, made an excellent
presentation to Council members in an Arria-format
meeting last week. He said at one point that

"the central task in achieving protection of civilians
is to clearly define problems and solutions - not to
settle for vague problem definitions that mask
political causes and responsibilities".

I think that President Kellenberger has forcefully made
the same point to us in this debate.

The Security Council's first objective should be to
contain threats to the peace. But we often appear
hamstrung in undertaking actual preventive measures well
in advance of the outbreak of violence. The Secretary-
General this morning pointed to the Central African
Republic and to Prevlaka as welcome exceptions to this,
and Macedonia was another. But national priorities tend
to make us shy of committing resources, and we slip too
easily into a focus only on the immediate causes of
conflict.

 
It is time to take a more professional approach to
human security and conflict prevention. We should be
making a real effort to improve coordination and
information flow within the United Nations system. We
need to strengthen the proactive role of the
Secretary-General, so that coordination with the Economic
and Social Council and the relevant United Nations
agencies can begin to work more naturally. It is interesting
to see that a number of us now are taking up this theme of
the coordination between separate bodies of the United
Nations. We need also to forge operational links between
the regional organizations and the Security Council that can
bear the weight of the work we have to do. Most
fundamental of all, we need to make the psychological leap
to tackling conflicts at their roots - their economic, social,
structural, sometimes personal roots.

We will not always succeed. When we fail,
peacekeepers may well be needed. The report which is
being prepared by Lakhdar Brahimi and his panel will
address the vital question of how we can do better in
deploying peacekeepers. The United Kingdom is keenly
interested in that report and expects from it an ambitious
agenda for us to address. We need reformed Security
Council procedures and reinforced Secretariat structures.
But more than these, we need an improved system-wide
approach that will consolidate the expertise of all relevant
bodies without stifling the capacity of any to do the work
that it does best. We need to produce clear-sighted analysis,
comprehensive and integrated planning and well-resourced
implementation.

As for post-conflict activity, let us think beyond
protection and assistance during conflict and establish
coherent strategies to build peace after the war is over. The
move from crisis to reconstruction needs early thought and
coordination across the United Nations family. We cannot
wait until the peacekeepers and humanitarian teams have
left before putting our plans in place. This is something
which the United Kingdom is trying to do in Sierra Leone.

The draft resolution before us concentrates on the
promotion of physical security. That is the first area where
the Council can make a difference. It contains concrete
commitments which we should strive to keep in practice.
But more significant than that, it states that the targeting of
civilians and the systematic violation of their rights can
constitute a threat to international peace and security - a
wake-up call to the Security Council, if we are listening.

The Secretary-General's report makes clear that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict goes wider than
simple physical security. For example, the international
legal framework has made dramatic strides in recent years
with the Rome Statute and the Ottawa treaty on
landmines, both still awaiting the signature and
ratification of too many Member States.

The European Union statement, to be made by
Portugal this afternoon, goes into greater detail on legal
aspects, on small arms and on vulnerable groups, so I
shall leave United Kingdom comment on these points to
my distributed text. But we regard it as particularly
important that combatants are educated in their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

This is a complex and ambitious agenda in front of
us. It adds up to the mainstreaming of conflict prevention
throughout the United Nations family of institutions. The
Security Council cannot succeed on its own. The United
Kingdom will vote for the draft resolution before us. In
doing so, I encourage the wider international system, both
intergovernmentally and through the United Nations
agencies, to examine how best to make their own
contribution.

And let us not forget the national level. The primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians does not rest
with the Security Council, with the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) or with the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). It is the
responsibility of the belligerents in conflicts: of
Governments, of non-State actors and particularly of their
leaderships. They too must make a commitment and
expect to be reproached by the international community
if they do not - a commitment to, where possible,
resolve their disputes through peaceful means and to
respect the rights and security of civilians. Such an
understanding of the rights of the individual is
indispensable to the sort of step-change that we are
seeking today.

