Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to brief the
Council as outgoing Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) as well as of the
Sanctions Committee on Liberia.

I took over as Chairman of the CTC at a time
when the Committee was just waiting for its new
support structure, its Executive Directorate (CTED), to
be staffed and to become operational. These new
resources gave the Committee enhanced opportunities
to achieve more results through the fulfilment of its
mandate to monitor and promote implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The measuring stick for
evaluating effectiveness has been the degree to which
Member States implement the resolution.

One of the biggest challenges was to get away
from the seemingly endless reporting and towards a
stronger focus on implementation. The reality was that
Member States felt less inclined to work with the
Committee because it was not clear how the
information they provided was used. It appeared as if
providing information led only to requests for more
information. The Committee has now taken significant
steps away from requesting more reports from States.
Instead of always asking States to report, the
Committee will share with the concerned State its
analysis of how far each State has come in its
implementation.

It is up to States to keep the Committee informed
about any new developments. Whatever gaps are
identified will be regarded as shortcomings in the
implementation until the State has provided
documentation to the Committee on how it has taken
steps to ensure that gaps are filled.

The Committee has also worked a lot on how to
enhance its role as facilitator of technical assistance.
3

That is an area regarding which the Committee is
aware that more can and should be done. Personally, I
am not pleased that requests from Member States for
assistance remain unanswered and that there are so few
concrete results to report, as Council members will see
in the report of the CTC published today as document
S/2006/989.

Visits to States have become a regular tool for the
Committee. I would like to thank the States that have
hosted such visits. I encourage States, in cooperation
with CTED, to ensure that visits lead to enhanced
implementation, including through setting priorities
and ensuring thorough follow-up.

Finally, we have expanded work with more
regional organizations, developed best practices, and
provided an overview of States' implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005). Also, it has now become
routine to include human rights aspects of States'
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in the work
of the Committee.

In conclusion, the CTC, with the support of
CTED, has great potential to become a key partner of
States in their implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). That will require appropriate guidance to
CTED from the Committee, a proactive approach from
CTED, as well as due respect for the Committees and,
thereby, for CT ED's mandate.

Let me now make a couple of observations
regarding the Liberia Sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1521 (2003).

My time as Chairman of the Liberia Committee
has been marked by an improvement of the situation in
Liberia after the democratically elected Government
took office in January 2006. The Council can, through
the use of targeted sanctions, create a strong incentive
for concerned parties to change their course of action
in the interests of peace. The Liberia sanctions regime,
which is part of a comprehensive policy, is a pertinent
example of such a positive effect.

Two months ago, the Council decided not to
reinstate the timber sanctions, since Liberia had
adopted the necessary legislation to ensure that
revenues from the timber will not again fuel conflict,
but benefit the Liberians. The work in the Committee
on monitoring the conditions set for the lifting of
sanctions, and the specific wording in resolution 1689
(2006) in particular, have, I believe, been instrumental
in ensuring the swift adoption of effective legislation,
illustrating how the Council's decisions can have a
direct effect on the ground.

Unfortunately, the Council will have to extend
the diamond sanctions, but I feel confident that the
extension will continue to act as a vehicle for reform so
that Liberia can become Kimberley-compliant and the
embargo can be lifted within the next six months.

The value of the Panel of Experts - the
Committee's daily eyes and ears on the ground -
cannot be underestimated. The current Liberia Panel
has accrued an in-depth knowledge of the history of
the sanctions, benefiting the Committee as well as the
Government, which has also profited from the experts'
advice. That is why the Council will, I hope, extend the
current Panel this afternoon. In that context, I appeal
for a constructive look at the administrative procedures
for appointing panels of experts so as to ensure that
those procedures serve the subject matter and enhance
institutional memory.

As Chairman of the Committee, it was my goal to
ensure that positive developments in Liberia also
resulted in adjustments to the individual sanctions. I
have discussed that several times with President
Johnson-Sirleaf, including during my visit in April.
One individual was delisted last week - the first since
the list was established. That sends a key message to
Liberia and the international community that the
Committee is willing to revise its list in light of new
developments. I hope that more delistings will also
follow after I leave the Committee.

In that connection, let me stress my delegation's
consistent position that improved delisting procedures
that live up to the principles of due process would
greatly enhance the credibility and effectiveness of any
sanctions regime. Resolution 1730 (2006), adopted
yesterday, is a step in the right direction. Had I
continued as a sanctions chairman, I would have
suggested new guidelines based on that resolution, but
also building on the established practice in the Liberia
Committee of giving individuals direct access in
exceptional cases.

Finally, let me remind all Member States of their
obligation to implement sanctions adopted by the
Security Council. In the case of Liberia, far more needs
to be done, especially in the subregion, to prevent
flagrant violations of the travel ban and to implement
06-67222
the assets freeze. At the same time, however, and on a
more general note, it is essential that the decisions of
the Council be made and communicated in such a way
that they can actually be implemented by all States
Members of the United Nations.

