Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. My
special thanks go to Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime
Minister of Haiti, for being here and addressing the
Council today.

The earthquake in Haiti was a humanitarian
disaster striking a people living in extreme poverty and
distress. We are truly impressed by the extraordinary
strength of the Haitian people in overcoming the crisis
and looking forward. We commend the Haitian
Government for taking the lead in developing the
national Action Plan for the Reconstruction and the
Development of Haiti.

It is more important than ever that international
efforts for reconstruction be well coordinated, under
the leadership of the Haitian Government and the
United Nations. Despite terrible losses, the United
Nations has done a remarkable job under difficult
circumstances following the earthquake. We would like
to express our full support to the Special Envoy,
Mr. Bill Clinton, and to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr, Edmund Mulet, who are
leading the international efforts.

Immediately following the earthquake that struck
Haiti on 12 January, Norway provided $35 million in
emergency relief. At the international donors conference
on 31 March, Norway announced long-term assistance
to Haiti with an additional $100 million over the next
four years, in within three areas: disaster preparedness
and sustainable rural development; political dialogue
and confidence-building; and protection of women and
children from violence, sexual abuse and trafficking.

I would like to draw attention to a few important
aspects regarding the protection of civilians in Haiti.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the Haitian National Police suffered
great losses in the earthquake. Therefore it is
encouraging to see how well the Haitian National
Police, MINUSTAH and local actors have cooperated
in tackling concrete protection issues after the
earthquake. But the challenges ahead are massive.

Some 2 million internally displaced persons
(IDPs) are living in 1,300 IDP sites now, before the
rainy season and the hurricanes set in. Almost 80 per
cent of these people live in camps without proper camp
management. We have received reports about rape and
other forms of sexual abuse of women and children in
the camps. Simultaneously, large numbers of dangerous
criminals are still at large after the massive prison
escape following the earthquake - criminals who had
been captured following effective MINUSTAH action
before the earthquake. The situation is truly dramatic.

Haitian rule of law structures will have to be
strengthened in order to protect Haiti's population,
including in the IDP camps and sites. The National
Police will continue to need our support in doing this,
and all possible measures should be taken to strengthen
its ability to protect women and children who are
vulnerable to sexual exploitation and violence and
trafficking.

Norway therefore fully supports the
recommendation by the Secretary-General to
strengthen the police elements of MINUSTAH to be
able to confront these massive challenges. As a
concrete measure of support, Norway will provide
substantial financial support to the MINUSTAH-
Haitian National Police programme to strengthen
National Police gender crimes units.

Furthermore, and as soon as positions and
personnel can be matched, we intend to nominate
highly qualified Norwegian police officers with
relevant expertise in the field of sexual and gender
based violence, as well as trafficking issues. A dialogue
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations will
be initiated immediately to match our capabilities with
MINUSTAH's needs on the ground.
As a final point, I would like to underline that all
the efforts the international community undertakes in
Haiti today - even those addressing immediate
concerns - should have an element of capacity-
building in mind. To achieve longer-term sustainability
for the Haitian National Police and other Haitian rule
of law structures, continued and close cooperation
between MINUSTAH and Haiti's authorities will be
needed at all times.
There should be no doubt that Haiti is in the lead,
from early on. It is their country, their future and
ultimately their responsibility that we as the
international community are here to support.

