Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his highly
detailed report (S/2003/ll3) on the situation in
Kosovo. We also welcome the presence among us of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Steiner, whose determination and professionalism
on the ground inspire our admiration.

The management of the issue of Kosovo by the
international community in general and by the United
Nations in particular continues to create hope and
expectations that the region will be rid of its old
demons of war, violence and hatred so that peace,
security, stability, tolerance and reconciliation can
finally prevail. In our view, those are the only elements
that can engender a climate of trust between the parties
and that can restore the conditions for a better life and
for socio-economic growth beneficial to all. Those
elements also create expectations of full cooperation by
the parties concerned in the implementation of
measures formulated to achieve our shared goals.

From 13 to 17 December 2002, the Security
Council visited Kosovo. Following that mission, there
has been reason to ask whether our hopes and
expectations, which I have just mentioned, were
unrealistic. It is true that the action of the international
community in this area has succeeded in preventing the
worst. The deterrent operational presence of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and KFOR have established a certain degree
of peace and security, which are indispensable for any
political, social and humanitarian action in Kosovo.

Having made it possible to prevent a
humanitarian tragedy, the highly commendable action
of UNMIK has, on a daily basis, patiently been laying
the foundations of a modern society and State of the
rule of law in which peace, security and social
harmony prevail. But the socio-political situation in
Kosovo today is characterized by hatred, the rejection
of the other, violence - even if latent - and the
instinct for domination.

The picture presented of the situation in Kosovo
reflects what my delegation saw during the Council's
mission, and I am moved to make a few comments. The
Security Council and the international community
should focus their action not on the medium term but
on the long term. They should also review their overall
strategy and modalities aimed at achieving our
objectives in order to give fresh impetus to our very
approach to the question of Kosovo. That impetus
requires a new vision leading the United Nations to be
even more mindful of the people of Kosovo of all
socio-political backgrounds and to further assimilate
the complex socio-political realities of Kosovo.

In that regard, I welcome Mr. Steiner's comment
in his briefing. He asked, what do the people of
Kosovo want? He himself offered appropriate answers.
We wish to support him with respect to the priorities he
has set for 2003.

Secondly, we need to be mindful of the people of
Kosovo, to offer concrete support for social and
humanitarian action on the ground and, above all, to
commit ourselves now to deep and unhurried reflection
on the final status of Kosovo. The success or failure of
the United Nations presence in Kosovo depends on the
way in which the outcome of that reflection is shaped
and negotiated.

Outstanding achievements of 2002 are
summarized in paragraph 60 of the Secretary-General's
report: the handing over of responsibilities from
UNMIK to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, the extension of UNMIK's authority to
northern Mitrovica, and the holding of municipal
elections in October 2002. We have also seen the
establishment of a stable and operational police force
and a functioning local judiciary, increasingly reliable
public transportation, regional cooperation to combat
organized crime and dialogue with Belgrade. But, as
the Secretary-General says, Kosovo still has a long way
to go to achieve the benchmarks and targets set out in
the benchmarks matrix.

Indeed, obstacles continue to exist on three
levels: institutional, security and economic. Moreover,
these constitute the priorities for 2003. First, with
respect to institutions, in the civil service there are
problems with human resources and difficulties in
establishing a multi-ethnic civil service and in ensuring
equitable representation of minority communities. With
respect to the Assembly, there is deliberate confusion
with respect to the competences that the Constitutional
Framework grants to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government. We also note the problem of the
minorities and difficulties in working together in mixed
municipal assemblies.

With respect to security, we note politically-
motivated acts of violence, violence aimed at minority
communities, acts of ethnic violence and the
destruction of churches. All these problems seem to
stem from the problem of the status of Kosovo. For
further evidence, it suffices to turn to paragraphs 9 and
12 of the report of the Secretary-General.

Finally, with respect to the economic situation,
development and stability are long-term processes
requiring legal and socio-political preconditions,
including the rule of law, peace and solidarity. These
considerations call upon the international community
to make an even greater commitment in Kosovo.

My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to the United Nations, and to international
humanitarian organizations and non-governmental
organizations for their work on the ground. That work
is particularly worthy. Its impact is immeasurable. We
encourage them to persevere despite the many
difficulties that they encounter. We reiterate our
gratitude and encouragement to all those actors and to
the members of UNMIK, who daily and tirelessly work
in the field so that peace may finally prevail in Kosovo.

