Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council has just adopted a
resolution on the latest developments regarding the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Guided by its fundamental
principles, the Russian Federation supported the
resolution.

Russia expresses serious concern about the most
recent spiral of violence in the confrontation in the
Palestinian territories. Israelis and Palestinians,
including women and children, continue to die. We
have noted with concern the events in Rafah, and we
have been particularly alarmed at Israel's destruction of
Palestinian homes, which has resulted in the
homelessness of more than 2,000 people. Simple
people are suffering and innocent victims are being
subjected to collective punishment. New seeds of
hatred are being sown.

We firmly believe that it is absolutely unfeasible
to use force to resolve problems in relations between
Palestinians and Israelis. Lasting peace can be achieved
only on the basis of a political process and through
direct negotiations between the parties on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), which are universally
recognized and legally binding. Both the Palestinians
and the Israelis must bring their actions in line with the
road map for a Middle East peace settlement that they
themselves approved. We have repeatedly pointed out
in this Chamber the obligations of the parties under the
road map.

We condemn terrorism. Any manifestation of
terrorism is abhorrent. Israel has the right to defend its
citizens, but that right must be exercised in observance
of international humanitarian norms, particularly the
Geneva Conventions. The destruction of Palestinian
homes by Israel aggravates the humanitarian crisis in
the Palestinian territories, and that practice must be
immediately stopped. The priority task now is the
immediate end of violence by both sides and renewed
cooperation between the parties on security issues,
however difficult that may be. Only thus will we be
able to return to the path of political dialogue and
implement the provisions of the road map.

As an active participant in the Quartet of
international mediators, Russia is doing its utmost to
help to create a formula to overcome the current crisis.
On the instructions of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Russia, his special representative for a Middle East
settlement is in consultations with regional partners
and will work for the implementation of the decisions
adopted by the Quartet in New York on 4 May this
yean

