Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
holding of an open debate on the "Role of the Security
Council in the prevention of armed conflict" is highly
timely. There is an urgent need to adapt to the new
security environment, since today security is taken to
mean more than arms regulation and disarmament. The
concept of security is broader and more qualitative. For
this reason the organs of the United Nations, with the
goal of protecting human beings, are adapting to meet the
challenges this changing reality presents.
The starting point is democratic institutions, respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, good
governance and development.

The international transformations resulting from
globalization have in the last decade offered new
opportunities. But globalization also means shared risks,
border conflicts, migratory movements, refugees,
organized crime, ecological damage, and the rapid spread
of technologies capable of creating weapons of mass
destruction - to mention but a few problems.

 

It would be impossible for each individual State to
confront these challenges unilaterally. There is a need for
cooperative security policies that strengthen the security of
all.

We must simultaneously confront the immediate, root
causes of conflicts, most of which in stem from lack of
economic opportunities and social inequalities.

It is timely to recall that in parallel with this debate
that is taking place in Seattle a meeting of the World Trade
Organization. The Secretary-General, in his article today in
The Wall Street Journal, and in his comments just a few
minutes ago, states:

"Practical experience has shown that trade and
investment often bring not only economic
development but higher standards of human rights and
environmental protection as well."

In other words, the possibility of access to markets for the
developing countries will be to the benefit of all, since it
will lead to a reduction in the need for assistance. Trade is
less onerous than aid.

As the Secretary-General rightly stated in his report on
the work of the Organization,

"The main short- and medium-term strategies for
preventing non-violent conflicts from escalating into
war, and preventing earlier wars from erupting again,
are preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment and
preventive disarmament." (A/54/I, para. 36)

Likewise, as was already established in 1992 in "An
Agenda for Peace", preventive measures must be based on
timely and precise knowledge of the facts. There is a need
for understanding based on a correct analysis of global
events and trends. It is also essential to have the political
will to accomplish this. The power to adopt preventive
measures in accordance with the Charter resides mainly in
the Security Council. This is where the political will must
be created.

The Charter provides a series of measures whose
timely use can resolve situations of potential danger: for
example, prompt investigation, in accordance with Article
34; conflict assessment; where necessary, the application of
the measures provided for in Chapter VII that do not
involve the use of force; and the possible use of this last
resort.

In this respect, the Security Council should explore
and increase its use of all of the resources of preventive
diplomacy. Among these it is worth mentioning the
Security Council mission to Jakarta and Dili last
September, led by Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia,
which proved to be an effective means of dealing with a
crisis situation.

The Secretary-General is also clearly contributing to
this endeavour. We View as essential the current smooth
collaboration between the Secretary-General and the
Council for early detection of situations that may develop
into a threat to peace and security, so that the Council can
take appropriate measures in time.

We would also like to emphasize the role that can be
played by the International Tribunals in creating
awareness that impunity will no longer be tolerated. This
role will be enhanced when the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court enters into force.

The regional organizations are also called upon to
play their role; it can be extremely useful to coordinate
their efforts with those of the United Nations. Proof of
this can be found in the initiatives of the various regional
organizations in Latin America, Africa and Europe.

In conclusion, we must ensure that in the realm of
international security in the coming decades the interests
of collective security prevail over national, regional and
sectoral interests. Only in this way will it be possible to
avoid conflict and maintain a stable and lasting peace.

