Mr. Filho: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/77l) on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I
am honoured to brief the Council for the first time since
I assumed office, on 28 May.

I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau, with whom I am honoured to share
this platform. I commend his initiative to travel to
New York to personally apprise the Council of his
Government's efforts at this crucial phase in the
country's transition, with legislative elections foreseen
in the very near future.

I would also like to welcome your initiative,
Mr. President, to invite the voice of civil society and
of women of Guinea-Bissau to this meeting, through
Ms. Elisa Tavares Pinto. Her perspectives and insights
will, no doubt, further enrich the Council's deliberations.

As the Secretary-General's report is before
members, I will limit my statement to recent political
developments and the activities of UNIOGBIS. I will
then be ready to answer any questions Council members
may have in the private consultations.

Since my arrival in Guinea-Bissau, the political
and security situation has remained relatively calm.
Authorities and political actors have focused on
preparations for the legislative elections scheduled for
18 November. I have actively used my good offices
with national and international partners to support the
full implementation of the 2016 Conakry Agreement,
with special emphasis on the ongoing preparations
for the elections. I have prioritized engaging national
stakeholders on the electoral process and met regularly
with the President of the Republic and the Prime
Minister to stress that respect for the existing legal
framework and the electoral calendar is indispensable
for sustained stability. I also routinely convened and led
meetings of the group of five international partners in
Guinea-Bissau, working to maintain our unified stance
on the need for the timely holding of elections and to
urge the Prime Minister to adopt a coordinated approach
with national authorities and international partners.

At the regional and international levels, I visited
Lome in June to meet with the Presidents of Guinea and
Togo, in their capacities as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Mediator for Guinea-
Bissau and then Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority
of Heads of State and Government, respectively, to
exchange views on the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and advocate for financial and material
support from the subregion for the upcoming elections.

In July, I attended the Conference of the Heads
of State and Government of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) in Cabo
Verde to discuss the persisting technical and financial
challenges confronting the electoral process, and to
appeal for technical and financial support for Guinea-
Bissau. To those ends, I held bilateral meetings with
the Presidents of Angola, Brazil, Guinea-Bissau and
Mozambique, as well as the Prime Minister of Cabo
Verde and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal.

Later in July, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads
of State and Government discussed the situation in
Guinea-Bissau during its fifty-third ordinary session.
The summit, inter alia, approved funds that contributed
to filling the gap in the electoral budget, and called
for legislative elections to be held on 18 November,
as scheduled. I intend to continue my engagement
with relevant national and international actors as
preparations for the elections enter the final stages.

While key provisions of the Conakry Agreement
have been implemented, a national dialogue round table
for the adoption of a stability pact is yet to be held. The
Government has launched related consultations with
political parties represented in the National Assembly
and intends to broaden consultations to include civil
society so as to have the pact adopted in early October,
before the start of the election campaign. UNIOGBIS
will continue to work closely with the Government and
to strengthen civil society engagement in the process.
We are, however, conscious that the holding of timely
and credible elections is of paramount importance at
thisjuncture. This is a basic short-term goal that must be
accomplished to usher in the new political dispensation
for further reforms and consolidation.

Preparations for the legislative elections continue
to face difficulties. The Government set a 30-day time
frame for voter registration, starting on 23 August, in
spite of disagreements voiced by some political parties,
since the law stipulates a 90-day period for the process.
Moreover, the arrival of biometric kits for the process
has been delayed. The Government of Guinea-Bissau is
working closely with Nigeria, Cabo Verde and Timor-
Leste to expedite the arrival of the kits.

I am pleased to report that a funding gap in the
budget for the elections may have been closed following
pledges by several international partners, including
Italy, Japan and the United States, as well as ECOWAS,
the European Union and the Monetary and Economic
Union of West Africa. UNIOGBIS will persevere in
its efforts to support the Government in the urgent
materialization of such pledges. In that regard, I
welcome the recent disbursement of $500,000 by
ECOWAS to the electoral basket fund.

Steps are also being taken towards ensuring that
elections are conducted peacefully. In that context, and
in response to a request from the Government, ECOWAS
intends to reinforce the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau ahead of both the legislative elections in 2018
and the presidential election in 2019. UNIOGBIS will
continue to provide the necessary and possible support
to efforts to ensure a peaceful and secure environment
for the entire electoral process.

UNIOGBIS continues to work closely with the
ad hoc commission of the National Assembly on
the review of the Constitution and has made efforts
towards enhancing civil society participation in
upcoming consultations. In August, the Mission
provided technical and financial support for a retreat
with the members of the commission to initiate the
review of the draft constitution, which the commission
intends to submit for consideration by the newly elected
National Assembly.

Concerning the fight against drug trafficking and
organized crime, UNIOGBIS, in coordination with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has
reinforced its support to national authorities, including
through the co-location of specialized personnel
from within the mission's existing supports with law
enforcement agencies in Bissau and the regions. Partly
as a result, national authorities have continued to seize
illegal drugs transiting through the international airport
in Bissau, the Transnational Crime Unit has resumed
operations, and cross-border controls have been
strengthened. In response to a Government request,
UNIOGBIS is also providing technical assistance for
the development of a national action plan to combat
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime.
Problems, however, are persistent and much has yet
to be done until the situation can be considered to be
under control.

A significant development relating to gender
equality and women's empowerment was the adoption,
on 2 August, of a gender parity quota law setting
a minimum of 36 per cent for women's participation
in the lists of candidates for legislative and local
Government elections, as well as for appointments to
key decision-making positions. The draft is expected
to be promulgated into law by the President before
the November elections. UNIOGBIS will continue to
support the process.

It is my impression that the recent political
developments in Guinea-Bissau offer a possibility for a
more favourable appreciation of the country's situation.
It seems now more likely than a few weeks ago that
legislative elections will take place as scheduled on
18 November. The consolidation of long-term stability
remains contingent on the successful holding of
legislative elections and on how the country manages the
reform process. F ar-reaching reforms remain imperative
to prevent a future relapse into political and institutional
instability. I therefore urge international partners to
maintain and increase their political, technical and
financial support to help national institutions during
and beyond the legislative and presidential elections.
I also welcome the continued engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission in helping sustain attention
to, and funding for, peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, I would like to commend ECOWAS
for its effective and continued engagement in Guinea-
Bissau in a sustained manner in playing a critical
role in helping national stakeholders find the path
to lasting peace and stability. I also express my
sincere appreciation to all bilateral and multilateral
partners, especially the African Union, the CPLP and
the European Union, together with ECOWAS, for
their continued partnership and commitment to the
consolidation of peace in Guinea-Bissau. I also salute
the contribution of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by my friend
the Ambassador of Brazil. I would like also to convey
my gratitude to the Security Council for its close
monitoring of the situation and continued commitment
to promoting peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. I
will be ready to answer members' questions.

