Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
The catastrophic humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip is keeping the whole international community in a
state of disquiet owing to the disproportionate military
action being carried out by Israel. The Government and
the people of Bolivia condemn and categorically
express their rejection of that aggression, which is
claiming innocent human lives, particularly children's,
from whom the most sacred of human rights, the right
to life, is being snatched. The current situation in the
Gaza Strip is one of pain, bitterness and despair.

Israel's actions once again clearly show its
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law,
international law, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
the human rights conventions. Added to that is the
serious impact on humanitarian issues, which hour by
hour are making it more difficult to meet even the
basic needs of the Palestinian people. Is it possible to
view this acute humanitarian crisis with indifference?

The credibility of the Security Council is once
again being called into question by international public
opinion. Therefore, within the framework of its
jurisdiction, the Council must provide a strong
response with the adoption of a binding resolution that
would reopen the way for peace and put an immediate
end to all acts of violence, which are only aggravating
the crisis. There must be no further loss of human life
owing to the occupying Power's occupation of the
occupied Palestinian territories, which is at the very
root of the crisis.

It is important to renew the peace process with a
constructive and creative dialogue for the benefit of the
region. In that regard, no efforts or initiatives should be
spared to that end within the framework of the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council and with a
view to the recognition of an independent Palestinian
State. Military action is not the way to build a lasting
peaceful solution.

The Government and the people of Bolivia
fervently appeal for the border crossings to be
reopened, to enable humanitarian aid to be delivered to
the Palestinian people, who have our full solidarity.
Finally, I should like to state that Bolivia fully supports
the statement made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement.

