Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.

Let me start by thanking Sweden for convening this
important and timely debate, and the new Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres for outlining his vision for
a renewed focus on conflict prevention. Allow me also
to congratulate Mr. Guterres on his appointment as the
ninth Secretary-General of the United Nations.

We cannot agree more with the Secretary-
General that it is time to put peace first. The ongoing
deep-rooted conflicts, displacements and massive
movements of refugees and migrants around the
world serve as a clear sign that the Security Council
and the broader international community have been
ineffective in giving priority to prevention. The recent
three reviews of United Nations peace-related activities
concluded with the same message - there is an urgent
need to put prevention at the core of the United Nations
work. There is a strong convergence on the need for a
collective recommitment to prevention. Our normative
developments need to lead to a real shift in how the
United Nations addresses peace and security challenges.
I would like to point out several areas of importance for
ensuring more effective prevention.

First, we must develop a political culture of acting
sooner in response to the risk of violent conflict. We
must invest in prevention rather than continue to spend
money on reacting to conflicts. In that context, we call
upon the members of the Security Council not to vote
against draft resolutions on timely and decisive action
to prevent or end mass atrocities.

Secondly, in order to ensure more effective
prevention, it is essential to integrate the peace and
security and the human rights and development
approaches. None of the United Nations three mandates
can be achieved without the other. The promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies, the provision of
access to justice for all and the building of effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels are
essential for achieving sustainable peace and stability.

In that context, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the Sustainable Development Goals. In
order to achieve them in conflict-affected countries, we
need to devote more attention and resources that target
the drivers of conflict. The comprehensive approach
of addressing the interdependence between peace,
security and development should clearly take into
account the protection of human rights, with particular
attention given to women's rights, including through
their participation in peace processes. We must watch
for the first warning signs of conflicts, and human
rights violations are such warnings. Therefore, we urge
all fellow United Nations Members present here today
to be active in supporting and strengthening human
rights initiatives, in particular with a view to ensuring
United Nations-wide efforts to prevent grave human
rights violations and thus future conflicts.

Thirdly, while the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention falls on Member States, international
institutions have to do their part. The United Nations
system needs to work in a more integrated fashion and
develop synergies between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and other United Nations entities, at both
Headquarters and the country level, to implement
the "sustaining peace" agenda. We welcome the
increasing cooperation of the United Nations with
regional organizations aimed at helping them solve
regional problems and to include in solutions the States
concerned. At the same time, regional organizations
should continue contributing to United Nations peace
and security efforts.

Lastly, the Security Council has increased its
focus on peacebuilding to reduce the risk of relapses
into violence. The Council should continue to address
peacebuilding through horizon-scanning briefings,
ensuring that longer-term peacebuilding is considered
in mission mandates and strengthening the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission. We encourage
the Security Council to address peacebuilding as early
as possible.

Let me also highlight the fact that Estonia has
supported the Peacebuilding Fund since 2013, as we
believe that the Fund is an effective peacebuilding
instrument for providing catalytic, fast and flexible
assistance. This year Estonia is a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission. As a member of the
European Union (EU), Estonia fully supports the EU's
new global strategy, which emphasizes the importance
of acting promptly on prevention and the commitment
of the EU to working through the multilateral system,
with the United Nations at its core.

