Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome the President of
the Transitional Federal Government of the Somali
Republic, Mr. Ahmed. We are grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Mahiga, for his assessment of the situation in
Somalia.

In view of the impending conclusion of the
transitional period, achieving the goals of stabilization
and foundation building for Somali statehood requires
more coordinated and vigorous actions on the part of
the international community, as well as a mobilization
of the political will of the Somali authorities. The
country now has a real chance to reach a new level in
its political process. It must take advantage of it and
implement the road map on time on the basis of the
Garoowe principles.

One element of major importance is the
cohesiveness of the Transitional Federal Institutions.
We commend the executive authorities' willingness to
follow the measures agreed on for overcoming the
crisis. The success of such efforts will depend greatly
on the readiness of all political forces to refrain from
settling scores, set aside their personal interests and
mobilize efforts to advance the political process and
strengthen Government authority in the liberated
territories.

It is important to take the views of a broad cross-
section of the Somali people into account and to work
on drafting a new constitution on that basis. This
would be a demonstration of genuine accountability
and the capacity to function during this historically
important period of the country's development. We
believe that the provision of international aid must be
tied to tangible progress in the peace process.

We must not forget the task of crushing
Al-Shabaab as soon as possible. In that regard, we
regret the loss of momentum in attacking the
extremists' positions in the south and centre of the
country. While the extremists are surrendering
positions, they still control a large part of Somalia and
are continuing their active resistance, strengthening
alliances with local and foreign sympathizers alike, as
attested to by the ongoing terrorist acts in Mogadishu.
In this situation, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) remains a key element in the struggle with
the extremists. Its rapid expansion, in accordance with
resolution 2036 (2012), will not only make the process
of ridding Somalia of Al-Shabaab irreversible, but will
also help create the conditions necessary for further
strengthening the Somali security forces, which will
bear responsibility for the country's stability after
AMISOM's departure.

As ever, illegal arms are still entering Somalia
unimpeded, ratcheting up the spiral of violence. It is
more important than ever to strengthen the arms
embargo overall and to cut off the channels that supply
arms to the extremists, including those operating from
Libya and other turbulent regions in Africa and the
Middle East. More thorough verification of compliance
with the embargo is also needed. The acute
humanitarian crisis in Somalia is not diminishing.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing fight against
Al-Shabaab, we cannot expect a drop in the number of
refugees.

As the peace process advances and the extremists
are marginalized, the challenge of economic
development becomes increasingly stark. We hope that
the forthcoming conference on Somalia in Istanbul will
not only help to promote a settlement but will impart
momentum to the country's economic development.
We support measures designed to broaden the presence
and coordinate the actions of the United Nations
entities in Somalia, while taking all security needs into
account, under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Augustine
Mahiga.

Despite some reduction in the number of
successful attacks, pirate activity along the coast of
Somalia is still not declining. Piracy remains one of the
chief destabilizing factors in the region and continues
to inflict significant economic damage on the
international community. A reliable solution to this
problem is possible only through coordinated action on
land and at sea within the framework of a
comprehensive piracy strategy. Integral to that strategy
would be the fight against impunity, through the
creation of an effective mechanism for the criminal
prosecution of pirates with international participation.

The Russian Federation will pursue its policy of
providing comprehensive assistance to Somalia and
participating actively in the international community's
efforts to promote a settlement in Somalia.

