Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, allow me thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for the clarity of his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/9ll). I
would also like to welcome the presence of First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeie, and Ambassador
Citaku, to whose statements we have listened attentively.

My delegation welcomes the coordinated efforts of
the various political parties which, with the support of
the Kosovo Serb bloc in the Assembly, resulted in the
election of an Assembly bureau and the establishment
of a New Government, thereby ending the months-
long political stalemate. Those developments, as
well as the holding of free and transparent municipal
elections with the wide participation of the Serbian
municipalities in the north, represent, in our View,
significant and praiseworthy progress. We therefore
encourage Kosovo's political stakeholders, on the
one hand, to continue their work in maintaining a
peaceful political climate, on which the effectiveness
of the Belgrade-Pristina political dialogue largely
depends, and, on the other hand, Serbian authorities to
strengthen their commitment within a constructive and
calm dialogue with Pristina.

Moreover, my delegation takes this opportunity to
welcome the progress made thus far by the two parties
in the framework of that dialogue under the auspices
of the European Union (EU) to which they must fully
commit in a constructive spirit, with the knowledge that
it remains the only viable way to normalize relations.

In the judicial area, the integration and swearing-in
of 40 judges and 13 Serbian prosecutors from northern
Kosovo before President Thaci, is contributing
to bringing communities together and promoting
peace. Equally encouraging was the high-level
meeting organized by Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, held in Brussels on
31 August, at which the Presidents of Serbia and Kosovo
participated and committed to resuming the dialogue at
the highest level under the auspices of the EU, while
focusing on the implementation of agreements already
concluded within that framework.

The issue ofmissing persons must remain a priority.
It requires that the leaders of both parties show robust
political will to provide families that have been waiting
for a long time with answers.

I welcome the ongoing efforts of the security forces
aimed at countering violent extremism in Kosovo as
well as the constructive avities carried out within the
framework of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), which contribute to strengthening
the achievements made in the fields of defence, the rule
of law, human rights, and the fight against terrorism
and organized crime. Likewise, we welcome UNMIK's
activities in promoting reconciliation, transitional
justice, human rights and support for the process of
normalizating relations between Belgrade and Pristina.

Senegal would like to reiterate its unreserved
support for the joint United Nations-European Union
programme to strengthen inter-community trust
through the protection of cultural heritage. In that
regard, we advocate for greater cooperation in terms of
information exchange.

In conclusion, my delegation would like once again
to pay merited tribute to the Special Representative of
Secretary-General for his wise stewardship ofUNMIK,
while also expressing appreciation to the International
Security Force in Kosovo, EULEX, the European
Union itself, and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for their valuable contributions
to building a peaceful and prosperous society in Kosovo.

