China thanks High Representative Inzko and Ms. Hasie¢ for their briefings. China has maintained a consistent position of respecting Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty, independence, national unity and territorial integrity. We respect the choice of its people in charting the way forward for their country and support its various ethnic communities living in harmony and seeking common development. China welcomes recent positive progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the formation of the State-level Council of Ministers at the end of last year. However, we are concerned at the current trend of political division. Peace and development in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the common interest of the international community and the countries of the region. In that regard, China would like to make the following three points. First, political commitment should be reaffirmed. Political mistrust is an important factor in many matters in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The relevant parties should take the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement as an opportunity to put the interests of the country and the people first by strengthening dialogue and cooperation, increasing mutual trust and avoiding divisive words or actions. Political leaders should work together to unify the country, enhance State- level institutions and improve the efficiency and capacity of decision-makers. Secondly, development should be vigorously promoted. The population drain impedes Bosnia and Herzegovina from fulfilling its development potential. As pointed out in the High Representative's report, over 200,000 people have left Bosnia and Herzegovina since 2013, including some 60,000 in 2019 alone. Youth are the future of a country. All parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina should increase investment in education, health care and infrastructure and promote economic and social development. Only by doing so can an environment conducive to people of all ethnic groups living in harmony be created. Thirdly, the international community should play a positive role. The issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina is complex and sensitive. China believes that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have the ability and wisdom to solve their own problems. The international community should listen with an open mind to the positions and concerns of all parties and take a balanced and prudent approach. We hope that the High Representative will work according to his mandate and contribute to the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We also hope that the European Union-led military operation there will continue to strengthen engagement with the parties concerned and help maintain security and stability in the country. Fighting coronavirus disease is a significant challenge for the entire international community. China commends the relevant parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina for stepping up coordination and cooperation to combat the pandemic. We hope that they will take combating the pandemic as an opportunity to stand in solidarity and enhance coordination and cooperation. The international community should actively support Bosnia and Herzegovina. On our part, China has provided masks, medical gowns and testing kits to Bosnia and Herzegovina since the outbreak there. We have also organized a video conference among our experts to share best practices. We will continue working with the international community to support Bosnia and Herzegovina to the best of our ability and doing our part to help the country achieve lasting peace, stability and development.
