Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan's
determination with regard to the protection of civilians,
including children, in situations of armed conflict is
based on my country's keen interest in contributing
to the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and to the achievement of sustainable peace
and development. That interest also stems from our
practical experience in addressing the devastating
consequences of serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed during
the war of aggression unleashed against my country.

Azerbaijan has strongly and consistently
supported international efforts aimed at ensuring
more effective protection for the rights of children
and improving the situation of children affected by
armed conflict. We welcome the appointment of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. We look forward to
close cooperation with the Special Representative and
stand ready to contribute to her work. We have always
proceeded from the strong belief that international
protection efforts must be free of selectivity and must
address all situations of armed conflict, including those
of a protracted nature and prolonged impact on children,
in particular.

In that regard, our delegation considers it important
that the mandate and the methodology of work of the
Special Representative should clearly reflect that
understanding so as to ensure the comprehensive
protection of children in all situations of armed
conflict without distinction. However, resolution 2068
(2012), which we have just adopted, does not fully
accommodate that approach in a more explicit and
unambiguous manner, and thus has not provided the
Special Representative with the appropriate guidance
to that effect.

The primary objective and purpose of the resolution,
as we see them, are to send a clear and unified message,
not to introduce additional elements of uncertainty. We
regret that the Council was unable to adopt a resolution
on such an important issue unanimously. We hope
that the differences among its members will in no way
damage protection efforts in regard to children affected
by armed conflict.

