Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first of all to express my gratitude for the
statements delivered this morning by the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme. I should like also to
thank the German presidency of the Security Council
for having convened this open debate on a genuinely
global problem whose origins and effects respect no
boundaries and whose consequences for international
security are especially worrying.

In today's world, there are no longer solely
concrete and easy to discern and understand threats,
such as those stemming from an armed conflict or
terrorist acts. Instead, we face amorphous, complex and
multidimensional threats that are rooted in poverty,
lack of development, food and energy insecurity, lack
of access to drinking water and sanitation, global
pandemics and disease and environmental crises and
challenges.

The Security Council has recently devoted a
significant amount of time to issues such as
development and HIV/AIDS, based on the conviction
that they pose a threat to international security. It is in
that same spirit that we ought to address the issue of
climate change, which is a genuine threat to peace that
has enormous consequences not only for countries'
security but also for human security. We welcome the
fact that the members of the Security Council have
finally been able to reach agreement on a presidential
statement on this issue. We hope that it will be possible
to continue down the path embarked upon in 2007,
when the security consequences of climate change
were first identified.

Spain associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to make some additional
comments in my national capacity.

My country is following very closely the threat
posed by climate change. On 28 June, my Government
adopted a new security strategy that considers climate
change as one of the main drivers of increased threats
to security. The strategy foresees potential future

 

conflicts as a consequence of climate change and the
concomitant scarcity of resources and increased
poverty, which could lead to the emergence of failed or
weakened States. It also points out the direct threats to
our country in the Mediterranean region, as well as the
measures to be taken to mitigate their consequences.
The strategy also indicates that this is a universal
phenomenon that can be addressed only through joint
coordination, solidarity and responsibility by all of us.

Spain is therefore committed to continue to
develop the necessary legal instruments to combat this
threat, as well as to participate actively in the various
multilateral forums, in particular the United Nations, in
both the Framework Convention on Climate Change
and other bodies, including the Security Council.

It is difficult to remain insensitive to pleas such
as the one made this morning by the President of
Nauru, who can see that his country is at risk of
disappearing entirely unless the effects of climate
change are halted. This is evidence of the vulnerability
from which no State is exempt, as well as of the need
to work tirelessly to minimize existing threats to
development, security and the very existence of many
countries and territories.

I should like to conclude by once again
reiterating Spain's commitment to combating climate
change, our gratitude to the presidency for its initiative
to convene this timely debate, and our desire that this
body continue to consider this fundamental issue in
future.

