Mr. Elnor (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to comment on today's resolution (2173 (2014), which renews the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). In our View, however, the resolution does
not acknowledge all of the positive developments that
have occurred in Darfur over the past few months, as
detailed in the Secretary-General's report on the subject
(S/2014/515). Much of the report clearly confirms the
ongoing stabilization in the five states that make up
Darfur. In addition, the statement made to the Council
by the Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas
affirmed the same conclusions (see S/PV.7238).

We had hoped that a new resolution would have
focused on the stabilization process and on promoting
the resulting stability, based on implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, as well as
on supporting and promoting UNAMID's activities.
We have stated previously that Darfur has now moved
beyond the peacekeeping stage and into a phase of
stabilization, recovery and reconstruction, which is why
the UNAMID mandate should reflect the requirements
of that phase. The resolution should therefore have gone
beyond expressions of condemnation and concern, in
view of the fact that the security and humanitarian
situations are now stable.

My country entered a new phase since the initiative
taken on 27 January by the President of the Republic
of the Sudan, Mr. Omer Hassan Al-Bashir, to launch
the national dialogue that has now been established
throughout the country, as the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios, has attested.
We appreciate today's resolution, especially those
paragraphs that welcome the national dialogue and
condemn the rebel groups that try to hinder such
dialogue.

While today's resolution renews UNAMID's
mandate for 10 months, we are resolved to achieve
the objectives of our comprehensive national dialogue
before those 10 months are up, particularly in the area
of political inclusivity. We are determined to achieve
the goals of the comprehensive national dialogue before
those 10 months have elapsed, particularly in the light
of the positive political advances. We are determined to
bury the hatchet and let bygones be bygones; it is now
time to begin implementing paragraph 24 of resolution
1769 (2007).

We have turned the page on military confrontation
with certain rebel groups. Beyond our successful efforts
in containing tribal violence, we are determined to end
that chapter through reconciliation initiatives among
the tribes.

In conclusion, political settlement is the best
solution. We are determined to promote inclusive
national dialogue in order to bring the efforts made in
favour of peace and stability in Darfur to a successful
conclusion. I wish to express thanks and appreciation
to all those who have made continuing efforts in recent
days in order to achieve peace and stability in Darfur.
We hope that the Security Council's resolutions will
have a positive impact on the peace process.

