Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
fully endorses the statement to be made shortly by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union.

The situation in Israel and the Palestinian
territories has tragically deteriorated in recent days.
Given the responsibilities conferred upon the Security
Council by the Charter, the gravity of the situation
fully justifies the Council's meeting today to hear the
views of the parties and to carefully review the
situation and respond to it accordingly.

Renewed hopes of returning to the path of
dialogue and peace negotiations have been dashed by
the recent terrorist attacks against Israel in Jerusalem
and in Tel Aviv, which have claimed many innocent
victims, as well as by the terrorist act last week that
deliberately targeted Palestinian schoolchildren in
Hebron. France condemned in the strongest possible
terms these heinous and unjustifiable acts. They
discredit the cause they claim to serve. I reiterate here
in the Council France's solidarity with and condolences
to the families of the victims of these barbaric acts.

Hope was destroyed also by those who, blindly or
deliberately, were unable, or did not wish, to put to
good use the relative calm that had prevailed for almost
six weeks. By continuing its military operations during
that period - when no attacks took place against
civilians in Israel - and in so doing killing many
Palestinian civilians, the Israeli army played right into
the hands of the most extremist Palestinian factions.

Ongoing military operations aimed at the offices
of the President of the Palestinian Authority in
Ramallah are unacceptable. France demands that they
cease immediately, and it has said so to the Israeli
authorities. Meeting violence with more violence,
laying siege to the Palestinian Authority and destroying
its infrastructures can in no way contribute to the fight
against terrorism or to meeting Israel's legitimate
security concerns. Rather, these acts further impede the
Authority's ability to combat the terrorist scourge.
They prevent the implementation of the reforms
entered into with the unanimous support of the
international community and which are essential to
establishing a new partnership for peace. Reforms must
be encouraged, not slowed down. The current operation
against the Palestinian presidency can only delay them.

It is, of course, essential that the Palestinian
Authority use every means at its disposal to prevent
terrorists from acting and to arrest and bring to justice
the perpetrators of, and masterminds behind, terrorist
acts, and punish them as severely as possible. France's
message in this regard is unambiguous.

It is equally essential that Israel realize that the
security imperative - which is entirely legitimate -
cannot serve as its only strategy. I would echo the
words of the Secretary-General, as well as the
statement made by his Special Envoy to the Council
last Friday, in saying that the approach taken, which is
based on security alone - the so-called sequential
approach - has failed. We must rekindle hope. This
will require not only an improvement in the security
situation but also a commitment to, and the
implementation of, parallel progress in other areas and
in the political area in particular.

From this perspective, the most recent meeting of
the Quartet made it possible to chart a course towards
the resumption of the peace process. France, like many
other countries, welcomed this positive development.
The general framework for a three-phase plan leading
to the settlement of the conflict has been defined. The
framework sets out the stages of the plan and the
measures that are expected of the parties as well as a
timetable for their implementation. It gives the Quartet
a key monitoring role.

In the current context of mutual defiance between
the parties, we deem essential the creation of a third-
party mechanism to assess and monitor the
implementation by each party of the measures expected
of it. The early holding of an international conference
could also make a useful contribution to defining
parameters as well as the role of each party, thereby
enhancing the chances of success of future peace
negotiations.

The course set by the Quartet must be maintained
and its various elements further defined. The members
of the Quartet are committed to doing so, and they will
continue to work towards that end in the coming
weeks. But it is the parties themselves which must
demonstrate in the field, above and beyond words and
professions of faith, their dedication to the goals set by
the international community. This will require, among
other things, implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, all of which are equally binding,
in their entirety, upon all parties.
