Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers who are joining us via video-teleconference from Kyiv and the Under Secretary-General. The Minsk agreements provide a road map to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The United Kingdom reiterates its firm support for those agreements and Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity. | welcome the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs here today and thank him for joining us. The United Kingdom underlines its support for French and German efforts to facilitate a negotiated end to the conflict through the Normandy process. We welcome President Zelenskyy's clear commitment to ending the conflict and the important steps that he has taken towards achieving peace throughdiplomatic means, including prisoner exchanges, his acceptance of the Steinmeier formula and progress on disengagement. The Russian Ambassador spoke at length about the failure of others in fulfilling their obligations under the Minsk agreements. His account was largely a falsehood wrapped in a fiction inside a fairy tale. Rather than elaborate on where we believe the Russian account is misleading, I will say simply that I endorse what the German representative said in laying out all the areas of the agreements that Russia has violated. Rather than reining in its proxies in the non-Government-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine, Russia has furnished them with arms and personnel. Russia claims to act only in the interest of the Ukrainians living in those areas but does nothing to ensure the safe delivery of international humanitarian aid so desperately needed by many of the communities there. Russia's only objective in Ukraine is to undermine that country's sovereignty and territorial integrity. It wants Moscow rather than the Ukrainians themselves to define Ukraine's future. We agree with Russia that local elections should pave the way for special status to be granted in parts of the Donbas region, but the local elections can take place only in proper conditions, and these conditions include a comprehensive ceasefire, unfettered access for the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the withdrawal of foreign troops. As we heard, that is a far cry from the reality we face today. Two months since the previous Normandy Four summit, ceasefire violations continue along the line of contact, including the use of heavy artillery. Ukrainian troops continue to die at the hands of separatists armed and sponsored by Russia. As recently as this morning, as other speakers noted, there was a sharp increase in violations of the ceasefire near the Zolote disengagement area. Despite the efforts of international demining organizations like the HALO Trust - an organization that my Government is proud to support - Russia's proxies are planting yet more mines near the Petrivske disengagement area. We heard how the Special Monitoring Mission's freedom of movement is severely limited, and we constantly see the Monitoring Mission's reporting of sophisticated Russian equipment, such as the Zhitel jamming device. In 2018 and 2019, Special Monitoring Mission long-range unmanned aerial vehicles observed military-type tracks on dirt-track roads between the border and a holding site in the non-Government controlled areas on no fewer than seven occasions. The culmination of those Russian actions has had a devastating impact on the lives of Ukrainian civilians. In the six years since the conflict began, more than 13,000 people, including approximately 3,500 civilians, have lost their lives and almost 30,000 have been injured. Some 3.5 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance. Russia bears a heavy responsibility for the ongoing suffering. We therefore invite Russia to immediately cease the practice of sending uninspected "humanitarian convoys" across the border and to focus instead on facilitating the safe delivery of international aid, based on an agreed international mechanism, as foreseen under the Minsk agreements. We also look to Russia to ensure that the International Committee of the Red Cross has full and unconditional access to the detainees held in the non-Government controlled areas - access that, the OSCE has said, was denied as recently as January. Russia claims that it is not party to the conflict. In reality, Russia started the conflict in Ukraine. Russia continues to fuel the conflict in Ukraine, and people suffer because of it. I for one welcome the Russian Ambassador's enthusiasm for Security Council meetings on Ukraine, and we look forward to other future opportunities to ask Russia what Russia is doing to ensure that the agreements are implemented. I would like to conclude by reiterating the United Kingdom's enduring support for Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders and territorial waters. The Ukrainian people deserve peace, and we will continue to hold Russia to account to that end.
