Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, a representative of the honourable people and
Government of Viet Nam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We are confident
that your leadership will make significant contributions
to the urgent issue before us. We thank the delegation
of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya, without whose
participation and initiative we would not be debating
this issue today.

We align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt, current Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement. It was a broad and principled
statement expressing the positions of our Movement on
all key issues related to the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. It was fully in
keeping with my country's principled position, in
particular our recognition that Israel has not abandoned
its policies and practices aimed at perpetuating the
occupation of all Palestinian territories and other Arab
territories occupied in Syria and Lebanon; its ongoing
obstacles to serious peace negotiations in the Middle
East; its continued policy of building rather than
dismantling settlements; its ongoing blockade of Gaza;
its practices in violation of the status of Jerusalem; or
its reprehensible ethnic cleansing of that city's
legitimate Arab and Palestinian inhabitants - all to
prevent the establishment of a Palestinian State and the
achievement of peace in the region.

There is a universal consensus in favour of
reversing this situation on the basis of negotiations and
the establishment of two States. Only Israel is opposed
to that consensus. The Security Council cannot
maintain its passive attitude of the past, allowing Israel
to manipulate the situation in the Middle East and to
perpetuate its occupation, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and all norms of international law.
Israel's latest war crimes, committed during its
12
invasion of Gaza in December, exhausted the patience
of the international community.

In the light of this most recent crime against
humanity, the Human Rights Council, of which
Nicaragua is a member, decided to establish a fact-
finding mission, led by Judge Goldstone, to investigate
all violations of international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law that may have been
committed at any time in the context of the military
operations carried out by Israel in Gaza from
27 December 2008 to 18 January 2009.

The report (A/HRC/ 12/48) concludes, inter alia,
that serious violations of international law were clearly
committed by Israel during the conflict in Gaza and
that Israel committed acts that constitute war. The
report is yet further testimony to all the crimes
committed by Israel.

The recommendations of the Goldstone mission
should be followed by all United Nations organs, in
particular the Security Council, and all possible legal
measures should be taken to put a definitive end to all
of Israel's human rights violations in the occupied
territories. The consideration of the report should result
in unequivocal action by the Security Council that puts
an end to Israel's impunity and its practices and
policies of the past 60 years; it must also ensure the
necessary accountability and justice. The Security
Council would be an accomplice in the crimes
described in Judge Goldstone's report if the decisions
necessary for the implementation of its
recommendations were not adopted.

