Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation was a sponsor of the resolution that
has just been adopted. We voted in favour of it because the
text reproduced the Secretary-General's sound
recommendations.

The extension for six months of the identical mandate
and composition of the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia was indeed justified, both by past
experience, in which UNPREDEP played an essential
stabilizing role, and by the fears that will persist as long as
the peace plan in Bosnia and Herzegovina has not produced
all the beneficial effects we expect of it for peace and
stability in the region. Moreover, this was the wish of the
Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

Progress has certainly been made since the initial
deployment of UNPREDEP. The political, economic and
social situations in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia are more solid. The signing on 8 April 1996 of
the Agreement between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia-
which was a priority for the States members of the
European Union - laid to rest a dangerous state of
uncertainty. Nevertheless, much remains to be done. The
precise demarcation of the common border between the
two countries is a priority.

Finally, concerns remain about a regional situation
that is still unstable and could affect the security and
territorial integrity of the country. As the Secretary-
General's report rightly stresses, it would therefore have
been premature to seek to reduce the weight and authority
of UNPREDEP. On the other hand, there is no reason
why, in six months, when prospects for the future will be
clearer, our Council should not draw the appropriate
lessons from the success that we hope the mission will
achieve.

For the time being, another matter should be of
particular importance to all those who truly wish to act in
support of UNPREDEP, and of all peace-keeping
operations. The arrears in contributions to the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), of which
UNPREDEP is the last component still in operation, today
total $770 million, of which $591 million is owed by a
single contributor. This is a considerable burden on those
States that are in effect advancing these funds or bearing
the consequences of such arrears in their capacity as
troop-contributing countries. A solution must urgently be
found.

