Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Pascoe for his detailed briefing this morning.

My delegation continues hopefully to monitor the
process launched on 17 March, when a National Unity
Government was finally established in Palestine under
the leadership of President Abbas. That was an
important step towards creating a climate of
understanding. Peru endorses the call made by the
Quartet on 21 March for the Palestinian Government in
all its actions to meet its obligations to stem the
violence, recognize Israel and respect previous
agreements and obligations, including the road map.

Effective administration in the occupied
Palestinian territory is needed to contain the violence
and avoid the further deterioration of daily life. That
includes the ability to end the constant firing of rockets
against civilian targets in Israel and to stop arms
trafficking inside Gaza. Such activities prevent the
necessary mobilization of international assistance to
help reverse the serious economic situation affecting
Palestinians in the occupied territories.

For its part, Israel must also take effective steps,
in particular by suspending the construction of new
settlements in the occupied territories and by beginning
to dismantle the separation wall there, the existence of
which is contrary to international law and the spirit of
peaceful coexistence. Israel must also act, without
endangering its own security, to allow the free
movement of Palestinian civilians, which will help to
ease tensions and facilitate economic activity.

The parties absolutely must develop policies
converging on the ultimate objective of the process,
which is the holding of negotiations leading to the end
of the occupation and the establishment of two States
living side by side in peace. In that regard, we
commend the meetings held by Prime Minister Olmert
and President Abbas, who have reached a number of
practical arrangements on humanitarian, security and
freedom of movement issues that build confidence and
promote broader dialogue and negotiation. My
delegation welcomes such positive signals and the
political will of both leaders to set off on a path that
may lead to peace, with the active support of the
United Nations and important international partners.

In that respect, we recognize the Quartet as the
most appropriate mechanism for mobilizing all actors
to seek dialogue and the establishment of firm
agreements. We would highlight the initiatives taken
by the members of the Quartet, in particular the
Secretary-General, whose presence in the region in
recent days and last March has been most valuable and
reaffirms the United Nations resolve to urge the
process forward. The steps taken by the United States
Secretary of State to bring the parties together have
also been useful and opened important channels for
dialogue. Furthermore, it is necessary to continue
encouraging the active and constructive participation
of the Arab States in the process that was relaunched at
the most recent summit of the League of Arab States in
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

With regard to Lebanon, we are concerned at
ongoing activities that hinder the work of the
democratically elected Lebanese Government and its
efforts to restore the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of that country. That has
most certainly impeded the implementation of
substantive elements of resolution 1701 (2006).

We support the activities of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and its guiding
role in preventing any act from turning into undesirable
confrontation. With regard to the area included within
UNIFIL's mandate, success is clearly linked to
continued capacity-building for the Lebanese Armed
Forces. We must not lose sight of the importance of the
arms embargo and of disarming the militias.
Cooperation will be needed from neighbouring
countries and other countries of the region to put an
end to arms trafficking, but it is vital also that the
Lebanese State recover its monopoly on the use of
force in its own territory.

Finally, we trust that following the visit by the
United Nations Legal Counsel it will be possible, in
conformity with Lebanon's internal constitutional

procedures, to approve the establishment of a special
international tribunal to bring to justice those
responsible for the terrorist attack that took the life of
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. Here, it is
necessary for all Lebanese authorities to respect the
commitments that have been undertaken, as they have
been repeatedly requested to do by the international
community.

My delegation endorses Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe's acknowledgement of the important
contribution made by Mr. Alvaro de Soto as Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority. We join in paying tribute to him for his
distinguished service to the United Nations and for his
commitment to the supreme cause of peace.

