Mr. Mansour (Palestine): Let me begin by
thanking the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria for
presiding over today's meeting. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his participation in this
thematic debate on a matter of immense importance to
Palestine. We would also like to commend the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for his
informative briefing and his tireless efforts to promote
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, as well as
the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights for
her principled statement.

Before proceeding, Palestine wishes to align
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt in his capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

This year marks the tenth anniversary since the
Security Council first considered the matter of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Throughout
those 10 years, the Security Council has repeatedly
demanded that all parties to armed conflicts comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law to protect the civilian population. However, the
failure of States and parties to comply with and ensure
compliance with their legal obligations in that regard is
still rampant, and civilians continue to bear the brunt
of war and aggression and their cruel consequences.
Therefore, as we look ahead, we must continue - and
in fact redouble - our efforts to ensure that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is addressed
and guaranteed for all civilians, without selectivity or
inaction based on political considerations.

Unfortunately for Palestine, the selectivity and
inaction of the international community, including the
Security Council, has only allowed Israel, the
occupying Power, to continue its violations of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law against the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

Regrettably, the international community's
repeated failures to hold Israel accountable for its

violations and war crimes has reinforced Israel's
impunity and lawlessness, permitting it to continue
using military force and collective punishment against
the defenceless Palestinian people under its occupation.
In essence, that has not only absolved Israel from
honouring its legal obligations as an occupying Power,
but has also emboldened it to continue its perpetration
of crimes without fear of punishment.

No one needs to be reminded of the tragic
consequences of Israel's military aggression launched
on 27 December 2008 against the defenceless
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip, of whom more
than 1,400 - including hundreds of innocent children
and women - were brutally killed and more than
5,500 injured. Undoubtedly, that was an appalling and
fatal illustration of Israel's complete disregard for the
human rights and right to protection of the Palestinian
civilian population. At the same time, Israel has
continued its unlawful blockade in collective
punishment of the entire population of Gaza, which
continues to live in misery in the rubble of their homes
and communities. Humanitarian access, which is one of
the key components of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, also continues to be impeded, and
much-needed exports continue to be totally prohibited,
by the occupying Power.

In that regard, the investigation carried out by the
United Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict, which was headed by Justice Goldstone, led
to findings clearly confirming that Israel, the
occupying Power, had committed serious human rights
violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, amounting to war crimes and even crimes
against humanity against the Palestinian people. Even
more shocking and deplorable, the report concluded
that the aggression on the Gaza Strip had been planned
in all its phases as "a deliberately disproportionate
attack designed to punish, humiliate and terrorize a
civilian population" (A/64/490, annex, para. 1893) and
included

"wilful killing, torture or inhuman treatment,
wilfully causing great suffering or serious injury to
body or health, and extensive destruction of
property, not justified by military necessity and
carried out unlawfully and wantonly" (ibid. para. 1935)

- all of which give rise to Israeli criminal
responsibility.
The fact that Israel proceeded to unrelentingly
pound the Gaza Strip with its entire lethal arsenal for
22 days enforces the statement made by the Goldstone
Mission that the absence of accountability and -
worse still - the lack, in many instances, of any
expectation thereof are what allow violations to thrive
to a large extent. It is exactly that culture of impunity,
which Israel has enjoyed for more than four decades,
that has not only deepened the injustice and suffering
endured by the Palestinian people, but has also
undermined the credibility of international law and of
the international system as a whole.

In that regard, resolution 64/10 adopted by the
General Assembly last week, on 5 November, is an
important step towards beginning the process of
ensuring accountability and justice. In addition to the
efforts made to address this serious issue in the General
Assembly, we will continue to call on all relevant
United Nations entities, including the members of the
Security Council, to shoulder their responsibility and
on the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention to shoulder their individual and collective
legal obligations and responsibilities in order to
embark on a new era for our peoples based on respect
for international law, the true guarantor of peace,
freedom, security and human dignity. We must bring an
end to this cycle of impunity on the part of Israel and
pave the way for the pursuit of accountability for the
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
against the Palestinian people in the besieged Gaza
Strip by Israel, the occupying Power.

Regrettably, the situation in the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, also remains volatile. In that regard, Israel
continues its raids and arrest operations in the West
Bank, as well as its settlement colonization campaign
and wall construction throughout the territory, in grave
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention and its
Additional Protocol I and in total disregard of United
Nations resolutions, the Advisory Opinion of the
International Court of Justice and Road Map
obligations. Settler violence has also intensified, with
violent, extremist Israeli settlers continuing to harass,
intimidate and terrorize Palestinian civilians, violating
their rights to life, liberty and security of person, and to
destroy Palestinian property and crops. Moreover, in
occupied East Jerusalem, Israel's evictions of
Palestinian families - some of whom we brought to
the United Nations, including the Fourth Committee, a
few days ago - and its demolition of Palestinian
homes have rendered hundreds of civilians homeless,
forcing us to ask the Council: When will the rights of
those civilians, including their right to protection, be
ensured?

As long as Israel continues to flout its legal
obligations towards the Palestinian civilian population
under its occupation, the international community, in
particular the Security Council, must act to uphold its
responsibilities and ensure compliance by Israel with
international law and United Nations resolutions. A
clear and firm message must be sent to the occupying
Power that the international community will no longer
tolerate its illegal actions, violations and crimes
because commitment to the principles of international
law must be above any other consideration that may
make a mockery of our international system. Such firm
intolerance and a principled commitment to the law
will help us break this cycle of impunity and bring an
end to the crimes that have caused so much suffering
and prolonged this tragic conflict, as well as truly
ensure the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population.

In closing, having reviewed the seven pages of
resolution 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, just adopted by the Council, we took
careful note of the applicability of the overwhelming
majority of the provisions of the resolution to the
situation being faced by the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem
and, in particular, the Gaza Strip. We wish to
emphasize, in that regard, the extreme importance of
operative paragraph 4 of the resolution, which
reiterates the Council's willingness

"to respond to situations of armed conflict where
civilians are being targeted or humanitarian
assistance to civilians is being deliberately
obstructed, including through the consideration of
appropriate measures".

We hope that that provision and others will be borne in
mind when the Security Council next deals with the
question of Palestine.
