Mr. Thaci (interpretation from Albanian; English text provided by delegation): Let me first express my
gratitude for this opportunity to address the Council
at its first meeting this year on Kosovo. Today, I will
inform the Council about the progress Kosovo has
achieved in recent months and of the commitments of
the new Government of Kosovo.

This month marks the seventh anniversary of
Kosovo's declaration of independence, the most
important act in the people of Kosovo's commitment
to freedom and democracy. I can say with pride that
the seventh anniversary of independence finds Kosovo
as a consolidated State, inside and out. The recognition
accorded to my country has shown that the State of
Kosovo is an irreversible reality and an indispensable
factor of peace and stability in the region. Kosovo has
been recognized by all neighbouring countries, with the
exception of Serbia, and the vast majority of countries
of the region and the Euro-Atlantic community. The
Republic of Kosovo has been recognized by 108
countries on all continents. I call upon all States
Members of the United Nations, including members of
the Council, to recognize Kosovo and to take the step
ofjoining in the support of Kosovo as an equal and full
member of the international community.

Recently, Kosovo became a member of the
International Organization of La Francophonie.
In December, Kosovo became a member of the
International Olympic Committee. Kosovo was granted
full membership, ending its international isolation. Our
athletes will now have the opportunity to compete in
the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.

Kosovo has achieved concrete results in its goal of
strengthening regional cooperation. The new State has
become a member of all relevant regional organizations.
In accordance with our policy of strengthening regional
cooperation, at the beginning of my tenure I visited
Albania, Montenegro and Macedonia to promote
good-neighbourly relations and to ensure our mutual
commitment to the European future of the region.
In late March, Kosovo will host the six Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Balkans, including the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, at a summit in Kosovo.
We plan to discuss joint investment opportunities and
projects.

We are also continuing to implement the agreements
reached in the process ofnormalizing our relations with
Serbia. The process ofintegrating the four municipalities
of northern Kosovo into Kosovo's institutions is
now successfully under way. The representatives of
citizens who live in the north of the country are now
part of the new Government of Kosovo, and they hold
ministerial positions. Although dialogue at the political
level has been postponed due to the formation of new
Governments, first in Serbia and then in Kosovo, the
dialogue on technical issues has continued. During this
time, we have achieved satisfactory progress in closing
the parallel structures of the Ministry of Internal
Affairs of Serbia in the northern part of our country,
while Serbian personnel have been fully integrated into
the Kosovo police. We have come to agreements on the
implementation of integrated border management and
on energy and telecom issues. Finally, we have enabled
the collection of custom revenues at border crossings in
the northern part of the country.

I must express concern over tendencies on the
Serbian side to avoid or delay the implementation of
the Brussels Agreement, which indicates that Serbia
has not given up its interference in the internal affairs
of Kosovo. The report Dossier: Radnica, published
last week by the internationally respected Serbian
Humanitarian Law Centre, is a very disturbing account.
It accuses the current Chief of the Serbian Army of
having committed atrocities in Kosovo in 1999 and of
hiding in mass graves the bodies of Kosovar civilians
killed in Serbia. According to the report, Serbia has
never initiated or brought charges against any of the
hundreds of officers and police officers implicated in
the atrocities. I invite the Serbian leadership to find the
strength to deal with the past, and call on the Security
Council to request that Serbia heed the report's findings
with due gravity.

Earlier this year, we saw an increase in the
establishment of Serbian parallel structures, such as the
appointment of parallel municipal mayors, including
in the municipality of Strpce, the creation of parallel
posts in the Dragas and Prizren municipalities. We
have noted the obstacles faced by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and local police in
establishing the rule of law and normality in the four
northern municipalities, caused by illegal mayors and
paramilitary and criminal groups that have hampered
the progress of the Serb community in Kosovo during
the past 15 years. We have informed the European
Union of all such developments, and demanded that
Serbia respect the Brussels Agreement in full. I call
on the Security Council today to demand that Serbia
honour the agreements reached.

The State of Kosovo has shown maturity in
consolidating its domestic affairs. One example of
that is the political maturity shown by all political
actors during the months in which we negotiated the
formation of the new Government, following the general
elections. Throughout that period, the political parties
have shown respect for the laws and institutions of
Kosovo. At the same time, the independent institutions,
such as the presidency and the Constitutional Court,
have shown integrity and professionalism. All that has
led to a political agreement that has paved the way for
the creation of the new Assembly and the formation
of the new Government. The new Government is a
comprehensive one in which all communities are
represented, including Kosovo Serb citizens who live
in the northern part of the country.

This week, Prime Minister Isa Mustafa dismissed
a member of the Government who represented the
Serb community. He was removed not because of his
affiliation, but because he did not show professionalism
in undertaking the tasks expected of a representative of
the Government. That incident was used by Serbia to
politically attack Kosovo, but Kosovo is an independent
country and takes its own decisions independently.

Serbia also attacked Kosovo with respect to
the Trepea Mines complex and Serbia's claim to
this industrial giant. It should be noted once again
that Trepea is the property of Kosovo and Kosovo's
responsibility. The solution to the issue was delayed
because the Interim Administration in Kosovo was
not ready to face the political pressure that the Trepca
incident would bring. The institutions of Kosovo
have affirmed that Trepca requires a solution in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations
and with the principle of the privatization of socially
owned enterprises in Kosovo that had begun with the
United Nations Administration and with the consent of
the United Nation Office of Legal Affairs. Trepca is
Kosovo's and Kosovo decides on Trepca.

The crucial evidence of Kosovo's success is its
completion of negotiations in the stabilization and
association process with the European Union (EU). This
is recognition of the substantial progress that Kosovo
has made in the fields of its economy, democracy and
the rule of law.

I would also like to inform the Council of the main
priorities of the new Government of the Republic of
Kosovo. Together with the new Government's partners,
we have created a realistic and ambitious Government
programme for the next four years. We are committed to
a dynamic executive and legislative agenda that should
move the country towards NATO and EU membership.
We are committed to economic development as our
main focus for the next four years, starting with a series
of concrete steps to improve the economic situation and
continue the positive trend of economic growth.

At the international level, I want to reiterate
that the Government of Kosovo will remain strongly
committed to the full normalization of inter-State
relations with Serbia and to continue dialogue that will
be finalized with mutual recognition. Only that step
will enable the building of sustainable peace between
the two countries and the establishment of diplomatic
and good-neighbourly relations in the European spirit.
The commitment will be confirmed in three days,
on 9 February, when the first meeting of the new
Prime Ministers of the two countries will take place
under the auspices of the EU High Representative
and Vice-President of the European Commission,
Ms. Mogherini.

Kosovo, as part of the Western Balkans and the
Euro-Atlantic region, will also continue the process
of integration into the European Union as a priority
for its social transformation and economic and
political development. During its term in office, the
Government is committed to concluding the signing
of the EU stabilization and association agreement in
the first half of 2015 and to begin the implementation
of the agreement. The stabilization and association
agreement is a contractual relationship between the
EU and Kosovo, which will serve to Europeanize our
national policies and modernize the country.

Another issue to be addressed is that of the unfair
and perennial isolation of Kosovar citizens, who are
the only people in Europe that do not have the right
to freedom of movement in the Schengen Area. In this
respect, a key priority is the implementation of the
action plan addressing all the challenges ofrepatriation,
reintegration, document security, border and migration
management and overall security and public order.
Many Kosovars today are fleeing Kosovo due to the
inability to legally migrate to EU countries. Kosovo has
been isolated for too long and our young people want
have freedom of movement within our continent by any
means necessary.

The Republic of Kosovo has consistently shown
that it is a responsible actor in terms of its international
obligations. In the early days of the formation of the
Government, we showed our commitment by finalizing
the draft law that prohibits the citizens of Kosovo from
taking part in armed conflicts outside the country.
Although it is small, our country has shown that it is a
partner and ally in the global war against terrorism. We
naturally aligned ourselves with the global coalition, led
by the United States of America, against the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, and we will remain
active until we have achieved the annihilation of this
phenomenon, which has not only hurt the Middle East,
but affected European capitals as well. The uncertain
world of violence that these terrorists are proclaiming
is not a world that we can accept. Therefore, the
Republic of Kosovo is on the front lines to eradicate
this phenomenon. We know very well what it means to
live with terror in a state of systematic violence.

Kosovo this year will also apply to be a full member
of the Council of Europe. Today, Kosovars are the only
citizens in Europe who cannot seek protection from the
European Court of Human Rights. It is going to be a
key priority for me to put an end to this exclusion.
Kosovo's goal is to be a place that contributes to
collective security, and we are tirelessly committed to
strengthening the peace and security architecture in the
region and beyond. In this regard, we have undertaken a
strategic review of the security sector in Kosovo and are
now making coordinated preparations for the transition
from the Kosovo Security Force to the Armed Forces of
Kosovo. I want to thank the NATO liaison and advising
team, which has been very close to us throughout this
process. I want to assure the Council that the Kosovo
Armed Forces will be a professional and multi-ethnic
force, guided by the principles of democratic and
civilian control, and will gradually integrate into the
Euro-Atlantic framework and be ready to contribute to
regional peace and global security.

I would like to inform the Council that Kosovo
intends to start a new chapter of cooperation with
NATO, moving towards the Partnership for Peace as
the main instrument for full membership, through a
gradual approach and coordination with our Euro-
Atlantic partners.

Let me reiterate that, during the past seven years, the
Republic of Kosovo, thanks to the will and commitment
of its people, as well as the political leadership and
support of the international community, has built stable
and durable multi-ethnic and democratic institutions.
As a result, Kosovo has become a source of peace and
an exporter of stability in the region and beyond. Let
me remind the Council once again that Kosovo is one
of the most successful State-building endeavours in the
United Nations history.

The objectives of resolution 1244 (1999) have
been met for quite some time now, and it is time for
a new chapter in the relations between Kosovo and
the United Nations. Kosovo is forever grateful for
the role and contribution of the United Nations in our
country's State-building process. However, considering
the course of developments since the declaration of
independence, the role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has been
significantly minimized and it now has only a reporting
role.

Bearing this in mind and praising Kosovo's
achievements in the field of security, economic
stability and social and political development, as well
as highlighting the agreement reached between Kosovo
and Serbia, it is time that the Security Council consider
the possibility of a transformation of UNMIK that
would help Kosovo align itself with the specialized
agencies. We also ask the Security Council to help the
Republic of Kosovo in the realization of its aspirations
of joining the United Nations as a member with full
rights and responsibilities.

