First, I would like to welcome the presence of Foreign Minister Claudia Blum. I also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu and Mr. David Cano Salazar for their briefings. Over the past several months, the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia has continued to make progress. The inclusion of the peace elements in the regional development plans is very welcome. Meanwhile, the reintegration of former combatants in many frontier areas has forged ahead, including socioeconomic, educational, political and health. New development programmes have been approved. Reconciliation at the community level is moving forward. The peace agreement is the biggest common denominator of all walks of life in Colombia. China concurs with the Secretary-General's observation regarding the three priorities of this year's work. It is particularly important to strengthen the development aspects, among which are rural reforms, development programmes, substitution of illegal crops, and so on. This is key to ensuring the long-term success of the peace agreement. The Colombian Government has done a lot of work to mitigate the negative impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We appreciate the joint efforts of the Colombian Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun to prevent the spread of coronavirus in the areas where ex-combatants are reintegrating into society. China is trying its best to lend help to Colombia in fighting the pandemic. We recently donated a batch of anti-epidemic supplies to Colombia last week, and we will continue to offer our help in the future. China thanks Special Representative Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, led by him, for their work. They have dedicated great energy to help implement the peace agreement. We hope that the Mission will continue to play its vital role, while respecting the sovereignty of the host country. The safety and security of United Nations field staff is another concern for us. Against the background of COVID-19, we hope that the mission will take care of its staff in accordance with resolution 2518 (2020). As this year marks the fortieth anniversary of diplomatic relations between China and Colombia, China will continue to work hand in hand with the Colombian Government and people in this extraordinary time. I believe that, with our concerted efforts, Colombia will achieve lasting peace, stability and development.
