Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for introducing her seventh
report under resolution 1970 (2011). Luxembourg
fully supports the objectives that the Prosecutor has
presented. I reiterate to her our full support.

After 40 years of dictatorship, building a democratic
nation in Libya will be a lengthy process. The Libyan
authorities have reiterated their commitment to
continuing to democratize the country. We welcome the
progress made during the transition. We also remain
aware of the enormous challenges that persist, in
particular in terms of security.

Ultimately, it is the Libyan authorities who will have
to ensure respect for the rule oflaw in their country. We
call on the authorities to redouble their efforts to create
a stable security environment that guarantees freedom,
justice and respect for individual rights. For its part, the
international community must continue to help Libya
in this crucial phase of transition.

We congratulate the Libyan Government on the
constructive engagement that it has maintained with the
ICC. Despite its difficulties, Libya has asked to try Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi itself.
It is to the Libyan authorities' credit that they want to
shoulder their responsibilities. They complied with the
Rome Statute procedures when they raised objections to
admissibility before the Court. However, a trial before
Libyan courts must not obstruct the proceedings of the
Court. We have no doubt that Libya, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), will respect the final decision
of the ICC in the case of Saif AZ-Islam Al-Qadhafi.
Meanwhile, Libya's compliance with its international
obligations requires it to deliver the accused to the
Court.

Six months ago, we welcomed the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Libyan authorities
and the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC to
promote cooperation and burden-sharing in terms of
investigations and prosecutions. Today, we commend
the first contacts that took place between the Office and
the Prosecutor General of Libya on how to implement
the memorandum of understanding. Ms. Bensouda
has stated that she is continuing her investigation into
the alleged crimes committed in Libya by Colonel
Al-Qadhafi's relatives who may be outside Libya and
may pose a threat to the new authorities. We fully
support her in that task.

The Prosecutor's report notes progress on the
subject of people detained as a result of the conflict.
However, approximately 7,000 people are still being
held by armed brigades without proper trial. Many
of those prisoners have been subjected to torture
and other ill treatment. We call on Libya to ensure
that detainees are under the effective control of the
State, in accordance with the recommendations of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We also urge Libya to ensure that those
responsible for that ill treatment or other crimes, such
as enforced disappearances, answer for their acts in
accordance with the law criminalizing torture, enforced
disappearances and discrimination that was adopted in
April 2013.

More broadly, we encourage the Government of
Libya to develop and implement a comprehensive
strategy to put an end to crimes and impunity in Libya
and that it accept help, when needed, from its main
partners. The Court and the Council should be informed
of progress in that area.

Finally, it is crucial that the Libyan Government
conclude negotiations as soon as possible with the
Court's Registry on the recognition of the privileges
and immunities of the Court's personnel in Libya.
Aside from the security challenges, in order for the
ICC investigations to be effective, the staff of the Court
and the Office of the Prosecutor must be able to work
without hindrance or restriction of any kind.

In referring the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor
of the ICC, resolution 1970 (2011) demonstrated
the ability of the Security Council to act in unison
and quickly to fight against impunity. We must now
ensure the process is carefully monitored. The support
of the Council is vital for the Court, especially as
the jurisdiction of the Court stems from a Council
resolution. More generally, constant and active support
by the Security Council to the ICC is required in order
to encourage States to cooperate with the Court and to
ensure that Court referrals achieve their goal, namely,
delivering justice and maintaining international peace
and security.

