Mr. Goonatilleke (Sri Lanka): We appreciate the
fact that you, the Foreign Minister of Benin, are
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
Your presence at this meeting is certainly an
encouragement for those who are grappling with the
phenomenon of child soldiers.

Sri Lanka commends the Secretary-General for
his report on children and armed conflict (S/2005/72),
submitted under Security Council resolution
1539 (2004).

Since the Graca Machel report of 1996, the
attention of the international community has been
increasingly focussed on the promotion and protection
of the rights of children affected by armed conflict.
Following the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the plight of
children affected by armed conflict has received high
priority from the United Nations. The continuation of
violations of the rights of concerned children, despite
the concerted efforts of the international community,
has forced the Security Council to take a special
interest in the matter, as reflected in resolutions 1379
(2001), 1460 (2003) and 1539 (2004).

The report focuses its attention on two groups of
countries and entities - first, situations on the agenda
of the Security Council and secondly, situations not on
the agenda of the Security Council or other situations
of concern, as reflected in Annexes I and II. Going
through the report, it is clear that progress during the
reporting period has been minimal, and atrocities
against children have continued relentlessly, with the
perpetrators appearing to have nothing but scorn for
the efforts of the international community and the
United Nations.
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) has
been listed in Annex II of the report owing to the fact
that the LTTE has for many years been engaged in
recruiting children for armed combat. The report before
this Council also states that the LTTE has also been
responsible for the abduction of children during the
reporting period, a fact that has been corroborated by
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Sri
Lanka Monitoring Mission, and the University
Teachers for Human Rights (Jaffna), a non-
governmental organization (NGO) based in Sri Lanka.
Such reports are denied by the LTTE. This practice has
to be viewed against the undertaking given by that
entity to Mr. Olara Otunnu in 1998 and the signing of
an action plan for children affected by war by the
LTTE in July 2003 under the aegis of UNICEF. In that
action plan, the LTTE agreed to halt recruitment of
children and release all children within its ranks.
Despite those solemn undertakings, the group has
continued the practice of recruiting thousands of
children, in most cases by force, some of them as
young as 11 years old. Moreover, the LTTE has
engaged in re-recruiting those who had been released
and even those who had escaped from training camps,
through threats, intimidation and physical attacks on
the children, as well as their family members.

According to UNICEF, between 26 December
2004 and 14 February 2005, 60 children either
orphaned or affected by the recent tsunami were
recruited from transit camps to be used as combatants.
As of 31 January 2005, the total number of cases of
under-age recruitment by the LTTE stood at 4,811,
with 1,452 outstanding cases. These figures provided
by UNICEF testify to the widespread child recruitment
by that organization in utter disregard for the human
rights of the victims, as well as for resolutions of the
General Assembly and of this Council.

We are aware that there has been increased global
awareness about this phenomenon, particularly since
1996. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, despite woefully inadequate resources, has
done a commendable job in giving increased visibility
and exposure to the issue, with the assistance of
UNICEF, other United Nations agencies, national
Governments, regional organizations, NGOs and
others. Despite this high visibility and increased
awareness, there has regrettably been no commensurate
improvement in the situation on the ground. The plight
of the affected children continues to remain serious.
The solemn undertakings given by the parties
concerned have by and large remained unfulfilled, and
the practice of naming and shaming offenders does not
seem to have yielded the desired results.

Sri Lanka expected that there would be a
significant change on the ground with the Security
Council focussing its attention on the issue. However,
despite the passage of several years since the adoption
of resolution 1379 (2001), there seems to be little
progress. This situation cannot be allowed to continue.
It has to be arrested and reversed with all the political
will we can muster. Surely, the authority of the
Security Council cannot be allowed to be undermined
in this manner.

Against this background, Sri Lanka is in
agreement with the recommendation of the report that
the Security Council should take measures against
those who fail to cease recruiting child combatants.
Paragraph 77 of the report speaks of "levers of
influence", such as international accountability as
enforced by the International Criminal Court and ad
hoc tribunals to bring to justice perpetrators of crimes
against vulnerable children. Sri Lanka is of the view
that enforcement of these measures on a gradual scale
will have a deterrent impact on all those who willingly
and deliberately violate the rights of children in
situations of armed conflict.

Sri Lanka supports the establishment of a
monitoring, reporting and compliance mechanism to
support the "era of application", focussing on six broad
areas of grave violations, including the killing,
recruiting and abduction of children. Sri Lanka is also
supportive of the View that, whenever possible, task
forces on monitoring and reporting should draw from
the child protection networks on the ground and, where
possible, cooperation of the relevant Government
institutions should be harnessed for optimum results. In
this context, we are pleased to note that the report has
recognized the central role of national Governments
and that the United Nations entities and international
NGOs at the country level should always support and
complement the protection and rehabilitation roles of
national authorities.

