Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation's participation in this debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is based on the
importance that my country attaches to this goal and on
its commitment, alongside the United Nations, to
ensuring its implementation.

Immediately after having suffered the horrors of
the Second World War, the international community
established important legal standards to protect
civilians affected by armed conflict. These include the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, the Convention Relating
to the Status of Refugees and various international
human rights instruments, whose main objective is to
spare civilian populations from suffering, especially
women, children and the elderly. For over 11 years, the
Council has addressed this issue and has thus enriched
the debate and created worldwide support for a
sustained and concerted effort of the international
community on the issue.

Despite this progress, we are unfortunately forced
to note that civilian populations continue to be the first
victims of armed conflict. That reality requires all
parties to armed conflict to abide by international law
and refrain from any actions that cause harm to
civilians. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/579) pursuant to resolution 1894 (2009) notes
a number of positive international developments as
well as the many challenges that remain.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We would,
however, like to address some aspects of the issue
under consideration.

The best way to protect civilians in armed conflict
is to prevent conflicts from erupting and to find lasting
solutions to those that exist. In many situations, it is
important that the parties involved demonstrate the
political will and resolve necessary to finding lasting
compromise solutions to end the suffering of affected
populations. Neighbouring States - which, in a
number of cases, are parties, in name or in fact, to
conflict - must act responsibly to that end.

The Security Council and the international
community must support parties in this process by
creating conditions conducive to putting an end to
these conflicts. Primary responsibility, however, falls
on the nation State to protect its citizens and other
peoples living in its territory. It should do so, of
course, in adherence to current international
obligations, rules and laws.

We commend the Council's efforts to provide
greater assistance to populations at risk. These efforts
are strengthened by the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The effective implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) will undoubtedly help us to provide better
protection for women. Similarly, the fight against the
use of child soldiers must remain a priority of the
international community.

Refugees are the very first to suffer from the
eruption or continuation of conflicts. Host States have
the obligation to ensure that they fully enjoy their
rights, including the right of return. In protecting
refugees, it is vital that the humanitarian and civilian
nature of refugee camps not be compromised by the
presence of armed elements and that refugees be able
to exercise their right of voluntary return in security
and dignity. Finally, in meeting the needs of refugees
while protecting them, they must be counted and
registered without delay. This is a primary, essential
and inescapable obligation.

My delegation strongly condemns all attacks on
humanitarian personnel and convoys and calls for their
protection. We equally condemn the diversion by a
number of armed groups of humanitarian assistance,
which, rather than reaching the populations in need,
serves to enrich the leaders of these groups, who must
be held accountable by the international community as
perpetrators of serious violations of international
humanitarian law.

As the Secretary-General underlines, the
proliferation of non-State armed groups has
exacerbated the difficulties involved in protecting
civilians. When these groups violate international law,
they must be brought to justice by the international
community. In addition, humanitarian agencies must
ensure that humanitarian work is not used by these
groups for political ends.

My country urges the international community to
confront the excessive accumulation of small arms and
light weapons, whose devastating effect on the civilian
population has been clearly demonstrated. These arms
often constitute a genuine threat to the peace and
security of entire regions when they are trafficked and
used by terrorist groups to attack innocent persons and
threaten States and groups of States.

In conclusion, I would like to state that, beyond
United Nations actions to restore and build peace,
preventive diplomacy and early warning systems remain
important tools available to the Security Council for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, the de-escalation of
emerging crises and the prevention of the return of
conflict. They should be used more often and
systematically so as to have a palpable impact on
hotbeds of tension throughout the world.

