I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 27 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, and the European Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, which is a member of the European Economic Area, align themselves with this statement. Let me first join others in thanking High Representative Valentin Inzko and reiterate the EU's continued support for his mission. I also thank Ms. Irena Hasie¢, Executive Director of Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for her briefing. Like the rest of Europe, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been severely affected by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In these difficult times, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been able to count on EU solidarity in practical terms, including through the Union's immediate response - in the amount of €7 million - to the most urgent medical needs, through €73.5 million in mid- and long- term support for economic recovery and €250 million to support macrofinancial- assistance prospects, as well as through unprecedented access to EU civil-protection and health mechanisms and consular cooperation around the world. As we mourn all the victims, we also reflect on this concrete demonstration of the shared interests and common challenges that exist between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the EU. Extraordinary measures taken to protect citizens and overcome the current COVID-19 crisis should be proportionate and temporary in nature and subject to regular scrutiny. They should also respect the principles of the rule of law, democracy and fundamental rights. In December 2019, the Council of the European Union reiterated its unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's EU perspective as a single, united and sovereign country and welcomed the appointment of the Chair of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The EU urged executive and legislative bodies at all levels of Government to start addressing the key priorities identified in the European Commission opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's application for membership of the European Union, in line with the legitimate aspirations of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance towards union with Europe. We acknowledge that, in the current emergency situation, authorities in the country have stepped up their efforts to cooperate with each other, and we hope that this cooperation will continue once the present pandemic has been brought under control. We call on all political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to enable the State-level institutions to resume their work, particularly with regard to the implementation of the Commission opinion, following the recent decision by the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today more than ever, we need counterparts with whom to engage concretely on the difficult reforms that are needed to advance towards EU membership. Beyond words, we now need tangible proof that Bosnia and Herzegovina is willing to do what it takes to become a member of the European Union. We also reiterate our call on all political leaders to refrain from nationalist, divisive or provocative rhetoric. They should instead take concrete steps to promote an environment conducive to reconciliation in order to overcome the legacies of the war. Revisionism, in particular the minimization or denial of the Srebrenica genocide, especially this year, as we commemorate its twenty-fifth anniversary, as well as the glorification of war criminals, contradicts the values of the European Union and is incompatible with the prospect of integration into the EU. The European project was built on reconciliation; Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions and leaders must therefore honour their commitment to sustainable reconciliation. Bosnia and Herzegovina has been clear about its willingness to become a member of the European Union. The publication of the Commission opinion last May, with its key priorities covering the Copenhagen political criteria, demonstrates our strong commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina, provided it addresses the scope of reforms with determination. The European Union strongly underlines the need for the country's authorities to work towards strengthening the rule of law, in particular the independence and impartiality of the judiciary, fighting corruption and organized crime, countering radicalization and tackling migration challenges while preserving access to asylum, guaranteeing the independence of the media and the safety of journalists, promoting youth employment and education and gender equality, and ensuring the full and effective implementation of socioeconomic reforms. The European Union also reiterates that election-related issues, including provisions for holding local elections in Mostar and for the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency, should be addressed as a matter of urgency, taking into account the situation in the country and in line with European standards and decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Union underlines that no legislative or political steps should be taken that would make the implementation of the European Court for Human Rights ruling in the Sejdi¢-Finci case, as well as related rulings, more challenging. Lastly, with regard to the political and security situation on the ground and the importance of maintaining a safe and secure environment, the European Union reiterates its firm support for the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council.
