Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): First of all, I would like
to thank both Ambassador Denisov and Ambassador
Ruperez for today's detailed presentation on the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its
Executive Directorate (CTED).

Today, the incidence of terrorist acts is on the rise
and the damage caused by such acts grows increasingly
more devastating, leaving us far from our goal of
eliminating terrorism. Given the present situation, my
Government welcomes the fact that the CTC is
pursuing its revitalization process under the leadership
of Ambassador Denisov and that the members of the
Security Council have unanimously adopted a new
resolution - 1566 (2004) - to strengthen
international cooperation on counter-terrorism policy
and to send a clear message to the international
community that the Security Council is actively
addressing counter-terrorism issues.

My Government supports the revitalization of the
CTC based on the measures contained in resolutions
1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004). That said, I would like
to make the following three specific points.

First, resolution 1566 (2004) calls for the
establishment of a Security Council working group to
consider measures to be imposed on terrorists other
than those associated with the Taliban or Al Qaeda.
That is an area which to date has not been dealt with
proactively. We support that step, but we also believe
that the relationship between the new working group
and the existing organs, such as the CTC and the Al
Qaeda and Taliban sanctions Committee, should be
thoroughly elucidated at the outset. The establishment
of the working group should not end up merely
producing more hypertrophy of the Organization. Care
must be taken to ensure that the new working group
will actually contribute to the strengthening of counter-
terrorism policy.
My second point has to do with the proposed
visits of the CTC to States, which was included in the
CTC's work programme for the third quarter of this
year. It should be recalled that the Security Council has
also directed the CTC, as a matter of priority, to start
visits to States in its resolution 1566 (2004). My
Government appreciates that the CTC has adopted
general guidelines for conducting CTC visits to
Member States, as well as the procedures for such
visits. We understand that work on the planning of
those visits in regard to actual destinations and other
details is still ongoing. It is my Government's hope
that, after the visits, the CTC will share its views with
Member States, in as concrete terms as possible,
concerning what each visit has achieved and what it is
expected to produce.

Thirdly, my Government appreciates that the
organizational plan of the CTED was endorsed by the
Security Council in August, although the detailed
structure of that organization has not yet been
delineated. My Government strongly hopes that, with
Ambassador Ruperez as its Executive Director, the
CTED will soon be actively at work fulfilling its
mandate so that it may serve as yet another effective
tool in the fight against terrorism. Japan, for its part, is
prepared to actively cooperate in the successful
launching of the CTED.

Before concluding my statement, let me add that
Japan extends its deepest condolences to the families
and relatives of the victims of all the recent terrorist
acts. Terrorism can never be justified for any reason
whatsoever. I wish to reiterate our strong support for
the further strengthening of international cooperation,
with a view to preventing future acts of terrorism. My
Government offers its full cooperation towards the
realization of an effective counter-terrorism policy
through the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

