The Secretary-General: I am pleased to brief the
Security Council today on the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I am grateful to the Russian delegation for organizing
this open debate on a crucially important subject.
This has been an intense period of activity as we
look ahead to 2014. The United Nations is reflecting on
its future role, and we are preparing for the challenges
ahead. Our core priorities should guide us going
forward. We should continue providing good offices,
including support for elections, and maintain our work
for reconciliation and regional cooperation. We must
stand firm for human rights, and we must advance
development. Humanitarian action is also crucial to our
future role. It is especially important in order for us
to address Afghanistan's chronic vulnerability and the
impact of the transition. I would like to speak briefly on
all of those issues today.

Afghanistan's political climate is dominated by
the 2014 elections. Broad participation and a credible
process are essential to reaching the goal of a widely
accepted leadership transition. Let me stress that the
elections are Afghan-led and Afghan-managed. Now
is the time to take critical decisions. The Government
has committed to making the elections an inclusive,
consultative and transparent process. I welcome the
active and responsible participation of all stakeholders
in building a widely accepted electoral framework. I
also welcome President Karzai's emphasis on adopting
electoral legislation at the opening of the National
Assembly. Agreement on an impartial, credible and
independent mechanism for electoral dispute resolution
will be critical. Another core element is the appointment
of a respected, widely accepted chairperson to the
Independent Electoral Commission. That Commission,
along with the Ministry of Finance and donors, will
have to engage seriously on the task offinding solutions
to electoral funding that are realistic and satisfactory to
all.

The Government favours an electronic national
identity card project. That is an important initiative with
wide-ranging potential applications. It should be used,
to the extent possible, in the 2014 and 2015 elections.
At the same time, it is important to understand that
there may be few improvements in voter identification
for elections during those years. That makes other
checks and balances, including generally agreed-on
rules of the game and anti-fraud measures, all the more
essential. The principle of respect for the independence
of the electoral management body in the conduct of its
constitutional duties is vital.
Afghanistan's greatest need is for peace. I welcome
January's joint United States-Afghan declaration
supporting greater coherence in reconciliation efforts.
Expectations must be realistic. Reconciliation efforts
will not be quick or easy. The United Nations is
pushing for a culture of peace, including support for
a second phase of the Afghan People's Dialogue on
Peace. Afghanistan's people must come together, not
only to shun conflict but also to assume leadership and
ownership of the transition process for the sake of a
united Afghanistan. That is essential if we are to end
the more than 30 years of conflict and establish true
and lasting peace.

Our human rights efforts are built on constructive
engagement. We have reported on the torture and ill-
treatment of conflict-related detainees. A presidential
fact-finding commission also heard widespread
testimony of abuse and put forward 11 recommendations
to address the problem. On civilian casualties, the
Government and international forces have taken
measures to reduce the adverse impact of their
operations. Anti-Government groups must now live up
to their public statements and international obligations
and cease targeting civilians, using children in suicide
operations, attacking public places and using victim-
activated pressure-plate explosives. Such actions are
crimes under international law.

I am especially concerned about the 20 per cent
increase in civilian casualties among women and
girls in 2012. UNAMA'S monitoring of civilian
casualties prompted two statements from the Taliban
that perhaps indicate a willingness to engage. I
encourage a meaningful dialogue aimed at reducing
the intolerable, continuing death toll and at protecting
civilians. I welcome the speech President Karzai gave
on International Women's Day, especially his focus
on raising the awareness of gender issues among
men. But I remain deeply disturbed that, despite some
improvements in prosecuting cases of violence, there
is still a pervasive climate of impunity in Afghanistan
when it comes to the abuse of women and girls,
who have the inviolable right to live free of fear or
attacks. Women and girls are key to a better future
for Afghanistan; protecting them is central to peace,
prosperity and stability for everyone in the country.
That calls for strict application of the Elimination of
Violence against Women Law and ensuring that women
and girls can participate more actively in public life.

We have to strengthen the way we provide
development assistance in order to strengthen Afghan
ownership. For its part, the Government must maintain
momentum on putting in place the economic governance
reforms needed to increase the sustainability of security
and political transitions. Tackling the illicit economy is
also critical to boosting economic confidence. The High
Office of Oversight and Anti-Corruption, together with
the United Nations, has documented the scope of the
corruption that is tearing at Afghanistan's economic and
social fabric. I am also concerned that the Opium Risk
Assessment shows an increase in poppy cultivation. But
there have been positive developments on the counter-
narcotics front. Earlier this month, Afghan authorities
made their largest seizure so far this year, taking some
23 tons of heroin, morphine and precursor chemicals.

In addition to counter-narcotics, we face the
continuing challenge of responding to the needs of
returnees and internally displaced persons (IDPs). I
am committed to finding lasting solutions to post-
conflict displacement. We have elements for success in
the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to Support
Voluntary Repatriation, Sustainable Reintegration
and Assistance to Host Countries and in the national
Afghan policy on IDPs.

We must prepare to look ahead beyond 2014. In a
recent meeting with United Nations officials, Afghan
representatives emphasized that they will need not
less United Nations engagement, but engagement of
a different kind. They consistently called for better
coordination in the work of agencies, funds and
programmes, so as to prevent gaps and overlaps, among
themselves and with others. The Afghan representatives
also broadly appreciated the need for a special political
mission, with an evolving focus and scope. The United
Nations must reinforce Afghan efforts. We aim to
strengthen Afghan political processes and institutions.
We want to boost the ability to deliver nationally and
in different regions. We must bring to a close the time
of parallel structures and efforts by the international
community and fully integrate our support for
Afghanistan.

To fulfil its mandate, the Mission must maintain its
ability to reach out across the country and to meet the
many demands it faces during this crucial period. As
such, while the budget of UNAMA for 2013 reflected
significant reductions, I do not envisage additional
reductions for 2014. We can then more realistically
assess the reorientation of the United Nations presence
in Afghanistan after the transition.

The success we have achieved so far comes thanks
in large measure to the dedication of my Special
Representative Jan Kubis and all of the women and
men - national and international - who have worked
with commitment and dedication. We are ultimately
responsible for their security and their ability to support
the Afghan people.

We are approaching a moment of transition in
Afghanistan, a country that has survived decades of
upheaval. Let us work as hard as possible to ensure that
this transition leads to the stable, prosperous and safe
future that the country's people deserve.

