Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Allow
me to express my delegation's gratitude to this month's
Pakistani presidency of the Council for organizing this
brainstorming session on such an important matter. I
would also like to thank the prominent individuals who
were so kind as to participate in our meeting today for
their extremely interesting and valuable contributions
to our debate.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully endorses the statement to be made by the
representative of Greece on behalf of the European
Union.

As Secretary-General Kofi Annan said a moment
ago - and I fully agree with him - the principle of
the pacific settlement of disputes stands at the heart of
the Organization's Charter. Bulgaria is dedicated to this
guiding principle of the United Nations and of
Bulgaria's diplomacy.

Chapter VI of the Charter empowers the Security
Council to play an important though not exclusive role
in the pacific settlement of disputes. The primary
responsibility for the pacific settlement of disputes
rests with the parties to a dispute or conflict
themselves. As some speakers who have spoken before
me have said, the prestige and the very image of the
United Nations are very important in efforts to
encourage parties to a conflict to embark upon the path
of negotiation and peace. The role of the Security
Council within the United Nations system is, of course,
central in this regard. However, experience has shown
that the Council has succeeded when it has acted in
cooperation with other United Nations organs, namely,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.

We believe that the relationship that has been
established over the years between the Secretary-
General and the Security Council is very important. In
this connection, the Council's major role is to set out
clear-cut mandates for the Secretary-General, enabling
him to make the best possible use of all the diplomatic
tools at his disposal. I would also like to point out the
importance and invaluable part played throughout the
years by special representatives of the Secretary-
General, who quite often represent to many countries
and local communities the very embodiment of the
spirit of peace.

Other speakers before me have said that, for
historical and political reasons, the Security Council
has not made equal use of all the tools available to it
under Chapter VI. We must point out that, while some
diversification in the use of those instruments may
perhaps be necessary, a sprit of pragmatism and
common sense should nevertheless always prevail in
the face of the very varied situations confronting the
Council. In that connection, the formulas utilized by
the Security Council should be diverse. I believe that
routine and inertia are two dangers for the Council. I
would also like to emphasize the importance of Article
35 of the Charter, which enables States to have greater
recourse to the Council.

The role of cooperation between the Council and
regional organizations has increased throughout the
years. Such partnerships enhance the capacity of both
the Council and the organizations concerned to
contribute to the pacific settlement of conflicts. In 2004
Bulgaria will chair the most important and inclusive
European security organization: the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Obviously, the principle of the pacific settlement of
disputes, which is at the very heart of that important
body, will be the guiding spirit of Bulgaria's
chairmanship of the OSCE. As I have said before, our
chairmanship will attempt to highlight cooperation
with the United Nations and the Security Council, in
accordance with the framework for cooperation and
coordination signed by the OSCE and the United
Nations on 26 May 1993 and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly,
including Assembly resolution 57/298.

In conclusion, I believe that one cannot speak
about the pacific settlement of disputes without
mentioning the growing importance of the Security
Council's relations with non-governmental
organizations in this field. Their early warning role in
alerting the Security Council is often crucial, enabling
the Council to give early consideration to conflicts and
enhancing its effectiveness.

