Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important debate
and for continuing to involve us in the discussion. We
would like to recognize the presence here today of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and the Ombudsperson, and to thank them for their
briefings and for all the information they have given us.

Today's debate now marks six years since the
adoption, on 15 September 2008 of General Assembly
decision 62/557 launched the intergovernmental
process of reform of this important body. In that regard,
my delegation is concerned that after two decades of
regular debates and engagements, the question of
reform of the Council is still unresolved.

The Security Council remains the principal
guarantor for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The way it conducts its business
is therefore of paramount importance to the entire
membership of the United Nations. As a result, we
place a high premium on the relationship between the
Council and the General Assembly on the one hand,
as well as between the Council and the international
community at large, on the other.

It is regrettable that since the moment of its
creation in 1945 the Security Council has lacked both
geographic and democratic representation of the United
Nations membership. It defies human logic that Africa
still remains the only constituency unrepresented in a
body whose legitimacy and strength must derive from
the totality of its membership.

As we move forward, we would like to see greater
accountability, coherence and transparency in the
Council's working methods. My delegation welcomes
the proposal to extend the mandate of the Ombudsperson
to all Sanctions Committees in order to improve their
efficiency and effectiveness. We also call on the
Council to assume its responsibility for following up its
referrals to the International Criminal Court. Leaving
the financial burden to the Court and the States parties
is tantamount to abdicating responsibility.

My delegation believes it is now time to reform the
character, shape and working methods of the Security
Council in order to bring it in line with the realities
of contemporary international relations. Only then can
the Charter of the United Nations be used, as noted in
its preamble, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, and be able to serve the fundamental
rights of humankind.

The African position, as outlined in the Ezulwini
Consensus, is loud and clear. It is inspired by the desire
to see the continent take its rightful place among the
community of nations in making key global decisions,
and proposes expanding both the permanent and
non-permanent membership categories of the Council.
Furthermore, it views the question of the veto as divisive,
exclusive and subject to abuse by the veto-wielding
Powers. We therefore welcome the French proposal that
calls on permanent members to refrain from the use of
the veto in situations of mass atrocities. We believe that
proposal is genuine and morally appropriate. It must
therefore be embraced.

My delegation looks forward to the resumption
of the intergovernmental process on the question of
the reform of the Council under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Tanin. We have every confidence that,
as we resume those negotiations, we shall take into
consideration all proposals brought forward by various
groups, find areas of convergence and build consensus
on them. As always, my delegation stands ready to
work cooperatively with all parties to ensure that our
collective efforts during those negotiations bear fruit
and achieve good results.

