Lieutenant General Mgwebi: In responding to
the question posed by the representative of the United
Kingdom on the principles of peacekeeping, I would
say that the commanders understand those principles as
they relate to consent, impartiality and the use of force,
and even more so the use of force for self-defence. The
critical challenge is to understand the use of force when
it comes to defending the mandate.

Additionally, the language of the mandate of United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) uses
terms like "terrorist operations", which then creates a
special responsibility for the Intervention Brigade to
act in accordance with the mandate. That situation is
challenging, because when it comes to an armed group
that has a base probably not too far from the mission's
base, what does the mission do if that armed group is
threatening the population, but has not done anything
yet? Does the mission proactively attack the group or
does it coexist with them? At present, the question
of co-location and co-existence with armed groups
is challenging. Even if the Intervention Brigade can
overcome that challenge, it cannot be present all over
the country at the same time.

With regard to intelligence, it is encouraging
that the United Nations has at least accepted the term
"intelligence" and has accepted to bring in technology
in the form of unmanned aircraft, which do help when
it comes to contentious issues. Some of the military
radios at our disposal are not interoperable. With the
use of technology, the various contingents can speak to
each other using their own equipment, which bridges
the gap.

In response to the question from the representative
of the United States about assistance in moving troops,
the Office of Military Affairs has helped by readjusting
and revisiting the areas of responsibility as they
relate to the boundaries of the various contingencies.
Headquarters has granted our request to be able to
move the rapid deployment forces within an area of
responsibility without first seeking Headquarters'
permission, which makes our life easier. We are also
working with the Office of Military Affairs to revisit
the statement of unit requirements so that we can
respond as required.

As for the question from the representative of
Japan about the enhancement of the force in the Kasai
region, I note that, previously, there was no force
stationed there. Recently, with the assistance of the
Office of Military Affairs, we have been able to move
two companies from Pakistan who were in stationed
in South Kivu to the Kasai region. Now, we are only
waiting for their vehicles, so they are ready to move.
Even the boundaries of Pakistan's South Kivu brigade
have been adjusted pursuant to consultations between
the Office of Military Affairs and Islamabad, which
makes life a bit easier. All those efforts are aimed at
being able to cover the Kasai region.

The last question came from the representative
of Uruguay, who inquired about the implications
of MONUSCO's troop reduction. According to
Headquarters, the Mission's strategic review speaks to
the notion of force optimization, which means that we
are looking at a number of capabilities that would give
us the flexibility and versatility to be able to respond
to possible challenges. We are also revisiting the
contract we have regarding unmanned aircraft systems.
We would like to increase our range of coverage and
payloads, so that we can have greater situational
awareness. In that way, small versatile companies can
improve our ability to respond. The challenge, however,
is to secure the necessary assets.
