Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway deeply appreciated
the initiative of the Danish presidency to focus on the
Security Council's contribution to strengthening
international law and to hold an open debate on this
important issue. We welcome the discussion paper
prepared by Denmark, which contains a list of very
pertinent questions.

Our common aim to promote peace, security,
development and well-being for all nations must be
based on a world order respecting the rule of law in all
international relations. The United Nations plays a
leading role in shaping that order, particularly in
maintaining peace and security. As the Security
Council has the primary responsibility under the
Charter for the maintenance of international peace and
security, the task of disseminating respect for
international law must be among its key priorities.

The Norwegian Government is dedicated to
strengthening international law and enhancing respect
for the role of the United Nations in the peaceful
resolution of conflicts. In our view, the most important
contribution to peace and reconciliation is support for a
world order in which the use of force is regulated by
international law.

The United Nations has a varied supply of tools
at its disposal to take on a leading role in pre-conflict,
conflict and post-conflict situations. Those resources
must be applied in a coordinated manner so that the
various bodies of the United Nations can work in the
same direction.

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Norway will contribute to a comprehensive strategy in
which the enhancement of rule of law activities will
play an important role. We foresee a mutually
reinforcing role between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission as regards the capacity of
the United Nations to strengthen the rule of law in
situations of conflict. The United Nations deserves our
full support in carrying out complex peacekeeping
operations. These raise particular challenges in cases of
rule of law vacuums. In such situations, the United
Nations must act as standard-bearer.

Widespread impunity for perpetrators of grave
international crimes represents an obstacle to
reconciliation and is in itself a violation of
international law. When national courts lack the
capacity or the will to bring such perpetrators to
justice, it is for the international legal order to provide
mechanisms that support justice. That is why Norway
participated actively in the establishment of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and exactly why
the ICC should play a part in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We expect the
Security Council to play a major role in international
efforts to end impunity, particularly through the ICC.

While the International Criminal Court has set
high standards for protecting the rights of the
individual, individually targeted sanctions imposed by
the Council have fallen short in providing sufficiently
reassuring access to justice. Norway favours the
introduction of a delisting mechanism that can help
correct the wrong in cases where people are placed on
a sanctions list without just cause. Safeguarding the
rule of law in this context will, in our view, also serve
to increase confidence in the sanctions system as an
important political measure to maintain peace and
security. At the same time, the effectiveness of
sanctions relies, to a significant extent, on their
implementation without delay. We therefore appreciate
renewed efforts by the Council to address problems in
that context. Fairness and respect for human rights
must guide the use of United Nations sanctions
regimes, especially if they are to be effective in the
long term.

