The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Portugal.

The President of the European Union will address
the Council later on in a statement that Portugal fully
supports.

When we consider the situation in Somalia, it seems
easy - perhaps too easy - to succumb to the notion that
the international community can do little more than try to
deliver the most essential humanitarian assistance. The
recent past cautions us to tread carefully. But we must not
underestimate the virtues of persistence. The international
community and the United Nations in particular still have
means at their disposal with which they could make a
relevant contribution to shaping events in Somalia.

Although Somalia is not considered a success story
for the United Nations, the truth is that the final chapters
have yet to be written. We should not give up and deal
with Somalia as if it were a lost cause. Indifference must
not prevail over hope. We concur with the Secretary-
General when he says in his February report on Somalia

"that the best hopes for restoring peace to Somalia
lie in the negotiation of a political settlement
entrusting power to a broad-based Government in
which all the principal factions will be represented".
(S/1997/J35, para. 51)

In Africa and elsewhere other experiences show that
national reconciliation is possible if and when the main
players in a conflict agree on some form of power-
sharing. Therefore, Portugal considers that the Nairobi
and the Sodere meetings are very important steps in the
right direction, and welcomes the proposal for a National
Reconciliation Conference, which is scheduled to take
place in Bossaso. We call upon all the directly interested
parties to participate in this initiative. Failure to do so will
only contribute to prolonging the agony of the Somali
people and to delaying the dawn of peace in their country.

As the President of the Security Council stated on 27
February 1997,
"full responsibility for achieving national
reconciliation and for restoring peace rests with the
Somali people". (S/PRST/J997/8)

 

This simple and fundamental message should not be
forgotten by the leaders of the Somali factions, in particular
those who refuse to revitalize the political dialogue in
Somalia.

In this context, we must commend all Member States
that have contributed to mediation efforts in Somalia, in
particular Italy, Kenya, Egypt and Ethiopia. The
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the European Union,
the League of Arab States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development have also been instrumental in
this process, and fully deserve public recognition. Strict
coordination of these efforts is required. Unity of both
purpose and action is vital if we want to persuade the
Somali factions to walk in the right direction.

If a serious political dialogue is re-established among
the main Somali factions, we sincerely hope that a national
reconciliation package will include the following measures:
respect for human rights, and an end to the appalling
situation still prevailing in the country; the establishment of,
and strict adherence to, the rule of law; the creation of a
national army and a national police force; and the promise
of elections, whenever feasible, to ensure the primacy of
democracy. In our view, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Somalia is also a key element.
Indeed, territorial integrity is an indispensable part of
national unity.

Ideas have been floated with regard to the creation of
a joint United Nations/OAU fact-finding mission to
examine what more could be done to help the people of
Somalia to restore peace in their country, and on the
possible designation of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to support the peacemaking efforts of interested
regional States. We are open-minded about the latter idea,
although a fresh assessment of the situation should be
provided. On the former, we agree with the Secretary-
General that it is not evident that a joint fact-finding
mission would, at this time, add significantly to their
efforts.

I would also like to emphasize the importance the
Portuguese Government attaches to strict compliance with
the embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992) on all
deliveries of weapons and military equipment to Somalia.
The resumption of the political dialogue in Somalia would
certainly enable the international community to respond in
a positive way to the appeals of the United Nations to
ensure continued relief and rehabilitation efforts in Somalia.
As the Sodere declaration states,
"the rebuilding of Somalia is of such a magnitude as
to call for massive international aid in support of
reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction."
(S/1997/l35, para. 42)

The political and economic tasks ahead truly
confront the Somali people with a formidable challenge.
But their leaders must understand that if they act wisely
the results will be too good to miss. Peace will be their
reward.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of the
Netherlands. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

