Mr. Powell (United States of America): Let me
join my colleagues in congratulating you, Mr.
President, on the assumption of the presidency. I know
that you will lead us in these difficult days with great
distinction. Let me also express to my German
colleagues my thanks and admiration for the
stewardship that they provided to the Council over the
past month.

It seems to me that we are meeting today with
one very, very important question before us. Has the
Iraqi regime made the fundamental strategic and
political decision to comply with United Nations
Security Council resolutions and to rid itself of all of
its weapons of mass destruction and all of the
infrastructure for the development of weapons of mass
destruction? It is a question of intent on the part of the
Iraqi leadership. The answer to that question does not
come from how many inspectors are present or how
much more time should be given or how much more
effort should be put into the inspection process. It is
not a question of how many clusters of unanswered
questions there are or whether more benchmarks are
needed or enough unresolved issues have been put
forward to be examined and analysed and conclusions
reached. The answer depends entirely on whether Iraq
has made the choice to actively cooperate in every
possible way, in every possible manner, in the
immediate and complete disarmament of itself - of its
prohibited weapons. That is what resolution 1441
(2002) calls for.

I would like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their reports this morning, which shed more light on
this difficult question. I listened to them very carefully

to see if I would hear that, finally, Iraq had reached the
point at which it understood that the will of the
international community must now be obeyed. I was
pleased to hear from both of those distinguished
gentlemen that there has been some continuing
progress on process and even some new activity with
respect to substance. But I was sorry to learn that all of
it is still coming in a grudging manner, that Iraq is still
refusing to offer what was called for by resolution 1441
(2002): immediate, active and unconditional
cooperation - not later, but immediate; not passive,
but active; not conditional, but unconditional in every
respect.

Unfortunately, in my judgement, despite some of
the progress that has been mentioned, I still consider
what I heard this morning to be a catalogue of non-
cooperation. If Iraq genuinely wanted to disarm, we
would not have to be worrying about setting up means
of looking for mobile biological units or any units of
that kind - they would be presented to us. We would
not need an extensive programme to search for
underground facilities that we know exist. The very
fact that we must make these requests seems to me to
show that Iraq is still not cooperating. The inspectors
should not have to look under every rock, go to every
crossroads and peer into every cave for evidence, for
proof. We must not allow Iraq to shift the burden of
proof onto the inspectors. Nor can we return to the
failed bargain of resolution 1284 (1999), which offered
partial relief for partial disclosure. Resolution 1441
(2002) requires full and immediate compliance, and we
must hold Iraq to its terms.

We also heard this morning of an acceleration of
Iraqi initiatives. I do not know whether we should call
these things "initiatives". Whatever they are, Iraq's
small steps are certainly not initiatives. They are not
something that came forward willingly and freely from
the Iraqis. They have been pulled out - or pressed
out- by the possibility of military force, by the
political will of the Security Council. These
initiatives - if that is what some would choose to call
them - have been taken only grudgingly; rarely
unconditionally; and primarily under the threat of
force.

We are told that these actions do not constitute
immediate cooperation. But that is exactly what is
demanded by resolution 1441 (2002). And even then,
progress is often more apparent than real. I am very
pleased that some Al Samoud 2 missiles are now being
broken up, although perhaps the process of breaking
them up has paused for a moment. And I know that
they are not toothpicks, but real missiles. But the
problem is that we do not know how many missiles
there are and how many toothpicks there are. We do not
know whether or not the infrastructure to make more
has been identified and broken up. We have evidence
that shows that the infrastructure to make more
missiles continues to remain within Iraq and has not
yet been identified and destroyed.

There is still much more to do and, frankly, it will
not be possible to do what we need to do unless we get
the full and immediate cooperation that resolution 1441
(2002) and all previous resolutions demanded. It seems
to me that the intention of the Iraqi regime to keep
from turning over all of its weapons of mass
destruction has not changed. It is not cooperating with
the international community in the manner intended by
resolution 1441 (2002). If Iraq had made that strategic
decision to disarm, cooperation would be voluntary -
even enthusiastic. It would not be coerced and
pressured. That is the lesson we learned from South
Africa and Ukraine, where officials did everything
possible to ensure complete cooperation with
inspectors.

I also listened to Mr. ElBaradei's report with
great interest. As we all know, in 1991 the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was just days away
from determining that Iraq did not have a nuclear
programme. We soon found out otherwise. The IAEA
is now reaching a similar conclusion. But we have to
be very cautious. We have to make sure that we keep
the books open, as Mr. ElBaradei said he would. There
is dispute about some of these issues and some of the
specific items. Mr. ElBaradei talked about the
aluminium tubes that Iraq has tried to acquire over the
years. We also know that, notwithstanding the report
today, new information is available to us and, I believe,
to the IAEA, about a European country where Iraq was
found shopping for these kinds of tubes. That country
has provided information to us and to the IAEA that
the material properties and manufacturing tolerances
required by Iraq are more exact by a factor of 50 per
cent or more than those usually specified for rocket
motor casings. Its experts concluded that the tolerances
and specifications that Iraq was seeking cannot be
justified for unguided rockets. I am very pleased that
we will keep this issue open.

I also welcome the compilation of outstanding
issues that Mr. Blix and his staff have provided to some
of us and will make available to all of us. The United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) put together a solid piece of
research that, when one reads the entire 167 pages,
adds up fact by chilling fact to a damning record of 12
years of lies, deception and failure to come clean on
the part of Iraq. That document is, in fact, a catalogue
of 12 years of abject failure - not by the inspectors,
but by Iraq. We looked carefully at the draft given to
the UNMOVIC commissioners, which will be available
more widely after this meeting, and we found nearly 30
instances of Iraq's refusal to provide credible evidence
substantiating its claims. We have counted 17 examples
of the previous inspectors actually uncovering evidence
contradicting Iraqi claims. We see instance after
instance of Iraq lying to the previous inspectors and
planting false evidence - activities which we believe
are still ongoing.

As members read the document, they will be able
to see, page after page, how Iraq has obstructed the
inspectors at nearly every turn over the years. By way
of example, we have talked about the R-400 bombs.
The report says that, during the period around 1992,
Iraq several times changed its declaration about the
quantity of bombs it had produced. In 1992 it declared
that it had produced a total of 1,200 of those bombs,
with the admission, finally, in 1995, after it was pulled
out of them, of an offensive biological warfare
programme. This number was subsequently changed to
a total of 1,550 such bombs. Given the lack of specific
information from Iraq, the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) could not calculate the total
number of R-4OO bombs that Iraq had produced for its
programmes. Thus, the report says, it has proved
impossible to verify the production and destruction
details of R-400 bombs. UNMOVIC cannot discount
the possibility that some R-400 bombs filled with
chemical weapons and biological weapons remain in
Iraq.

In this document, UNMOVIC refers to actions
that Iraq could take to help to resolve this question:
present any remaining R-400 bombs and all relevant
moulds, provide more supporting documentation on
production and inventory relating to the R-400 and R-
400A bombs it manufactured, provide further
documentation explaining the coding system that it
used with the R-400-type bombs, including the coding
assigned to specific chemical and biological weapons
agents, and provide credible evidence that the R-400
bomb production line stopped after September 1990.

This is just one example of the kind of
documentation that the Council will be seeing. What
leaps out is that these actions that Iraq is being asked to
take, they could have taken many times over the
preceding 12 years. We are not talking about
"immediately"; we are talking about why it has not
been done over the past 12 years, and about how can
we now rely on assurances in the presence of this solid
record of lying and deceit over the years.

These questions could easily have been cleared
up in Iraq's 7 December declaration; there should not
be these kinds of outstanding issues to work on. But
there are, and we will all examine them carefully. The
point is that this document conclusively shows that Iraq
had and still has the capability to manufacture these
kinds of weapons; that Iraq had and still has the
capability to manufacture not only chemical but also
biological weapons; and that Iraq had and still has
literally tens of thousands of delivery systems,
including increasingly capable and dangerous
unmanned aerial vehicles. These are not new questions
being presented for our consideration; these are old
questions that have not been resolved and that could
have been resolved in December with the declaration,
or that could have been fully resolved over the past
four months if Iraq had come forward and done what
resolution 1441 (2002) wanted it to do.

In his report this morning, Mr. Blix remarked on
the paucity of information on Iraq's programmes since
1998. We have all been working hard to fill that gap,
but Iraq is the one that could fill that gap if it were
truly complying with resolution 1441 (2002). It would
be inundating the inspectors with new information, not
holding it back and providing it begrudgingly. The
draft document that we reviewed today in preparation
for this meeting was 167 pages long. If Iraq were
genuinely committed to disarmament, Mr. Blix's
document would not be 167 pages of issues and
questions; it would be thousands upon thousands of
pages of answers about anthrax, about VX, about sarin,
about unmanned aerial vehicles; it would set out in
detail all of Iraq's prohibited programmes. Then, and
only then, could the inspectors really do the credible
job they need to do of verification, destruction and
monitoring.

We have been down this road before. In March
1998, Saddam Hussain was also faced with the threat
of military action. He responded with promises -
promises to provide inspectors at that time with
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access. The
then chief inspector reported to the Council a new
spirit of cooperation, along with his hope that the
inspectors could move very quickly to verify Iraq's
disarmament. We know what happened to that hope:
there was no progress on disarmament, and nine
months later the inspectors found it necessary to
withdraw.

I regret that not much has changed. Iraq's current
behaviour - like the behaviour chronicled in Mr.
Blix's document - reveals a strategic decision to
continue to delay, to deceive, to try to throw us off the
trail, to make it more difficult, to hope that the will of
the international community will be fractured, that we
will go off in different directions, that we will get
bored with the task, that we will remove the pressure,
that we will remove the force. And we know what has
happened when that has been done in the past. We
know that the Iraqis still are not volunteering
information and that, when they do, what they are
giving is often partial and misleading. We know that,
when confronted with facts, the Iraqis are still
changing their story to explain those facts, but not
enough to give us the truth.

So, has the strategic decision been made to
disarm Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction by the
leadership in Baghdad? My judgement - I think, our
judgement - has to be, clearly not. And this is now the
reality that we, the Council, must deal with. Security
Council membership carries heavy responsibility: a
responsibility to the community of nations to take hard
decisions on tough issues such as the one we are facing
today. Last November, the Council stepped up to its
responsibilities. We must not walk away; we must not
find ourselves here this coming November with the
pressure removed and with Iraq once again marching
down the merry path to weapons of mass destruction,
threatening the region, threatening the world.

If we fail to meet our responsibilities, the
credibility of the Council and its ability to deal with all
the critical challenges we face will suffer. As we sit
here, let us not forget the horrors still going on in Iraq.
Let us spare a moment to remember the suffering Iraqi
people, whose treasure is spent on these kinds of
programmes and not for their own benefit - people
who are being beaten, brutalized and robbed by
Saddam and his regime. Colleagues, now is the time
for the Council to send a clear message to Saddam that
we have not been taken in by his transparent tactics.
Nobody wants war, but it is clear that the limited
progress we have seen, the process changes we have
seen, and the slight substantive changes we have seen
come from the presence of a large military force -
nations that are willing to put their young men and
women in harm's way in order to rid the world of these
dangerous weapons. It does not come simply from
resolutions, it does not come simply from inspectors: it
comes from the will of the Council - the unified
political will of the Council - and from the
willingness to use force, if it comes to that, to make
sure that we achieve the disarmament of Iraq.

Now is the time for the Council to tell Saddam
that the clock has not been stopped by his stratagems
and machinations. We believe that the draft resolution
that has been put forward for action by the Council is
appropriate and that in the very near future we should
bring it before the Council for a vote. The clock
continues to tick, and the consequences of Saddam
Hussain's continued refusal to disarm will be very, very
real.

