Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The United States abstained in this evening's voting for one reason and one reason only. After months of negotiations, the text of resolution 2504 (2020) was the only path forward that would reasonably allow for the delivery of any aid at all to the Syrian people. We could not veto such a measure, as we are committed to supporting innocent Syrians to the greatest extent possible. In abstaining, we are lending a voice to the 4 million Syrians whose welfare has been overlooked for far too long, but I want to be inescapably clear about what just happened. What we have seen today from the Russian Federation is shocking - a comprehensive indifference to human suffering. We are left with a watered-down resolution, wholly inadequate to the needs of the Syrian people, because of the unwillingness of our Russian colleagues to maintain current levels of aid flows. Resolution 2504 (2020) needlessly places the immediate futures of more than | million Syrians in jeopardy. It would be easy to say that we were forced into an impossible choice today - a choice between vetoing this measure in a principled stand for aid to all who need it and sacrificing the principle to secure a small measure of aid for millions of Syrians entering the heart of winter. But that would let Russia off the hook far too easily, for it suggests that the Council really had no other options. In truth, we do not find ourselves in this situation because the conditions on the ground no longer allow for aid delivery; as we have heard over and over again from United Nations officials, the existing cross-border aid mechanism is working. Neither are we here because of a lack of willingness among the other Council members to find a way forward; my 10 elected colleagues went to great lengths to find a solution that could provide more food and medicine to people. We find ourselves in this situation because the Russian Federation has decided to use deprivation as a weapon against the Syrian people. This is a crisis of Russia's making. It is theirs to own. Although we are profoundly disappointed by the intransigence of our Russian colleagues, the United States is not willing to play politics with the lives of innocent Syrians. It is the unambiguous conclusion of United Nations officials that the humanitarian situation in Syria is steadily worsening. That is why the United States sought to renew all four of the crossings currently authorized by resolution 2449 (2018) and to add a fifth crossing, at Tall Abyad in north-eastern Syria. That is why we did not obstruct a measure to provide at least some aid to the Syrian people. The record should reflect that any attempts to characterize the humanitarian situation as improving are gross distortions of the truth. I wish to make it clear that consent by the Syrian authorities is not required in order for humanitarian assistance to be provided through the border crossings, as in all other prior humanitarian resolutions on Syria adopted by the Security Council. Although we are proud of our principled stand to help every Syrian, we are bitterly disappointed by the Council's inability to deliver what the Syrian people so plainly need. It is never right to leave even a single life hanging in the balance, but today we have handed down this fate to | million people. Today's action is a body blow not only to the Council's credibility but also to its moral authority. Let us remember that the United Nations asked for - and the United States strongly supported - a 12-month extension. Tragically, in six months we will be here again as a consequence of today's action. Will Russia try one more time to hold the Council hostage? Will we be faced once again with Russian attempts to further erode principled humanitarian action? Moving forward, the United States will do everything in its power to recover the Council's moral authority. We will not fail to remind this body of its obligation to maintain peace and security. We will not tire in our defence of humanitarian principles. And we will not cease in our work to provide every last Syrian woman, man and child with the resources that they need to survive.
