Mr. Oh (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to join previous speakers in
thanking you for having convened this open debate on
the situation in Afghanistan.

Given that the Bonn process has just been
completed, and that the new framework for partnership
between the Afghan Government and the international
community has been forged at the recent London
Conference, the subject of today's debate is especially
timely.

The recent London Conference was an important
occasion for the international community to renew its
commitment to providing political, security and
financial assistance in support of the Afghan
Government's priorities. We welcome the launching of
the Afghanistan Compact, which establishes a
framework for future progress and will play an
important role in energizing the international
community and mapping its support efforts. We hope
that the Compact will be faithfully implemented.

While the Compact was launched for the recovery
of Afghanistan, much more remains to be done in order
to bring this about comprehensively. Among other

concerns, a deteriorating security situation, coupled
with uncontrolled violence and criminal drug
trafficking, hamper not only the reconstruction process,
but also the implementation of the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy.

As for the security situation in Afghanistan, we
are deeply concerned about the continuing instability in
some areas of the country. Security throughout the
country should be improved, and the Afghan security
forces should be further strengthened to help in
achieving that good. In this regard, we welcome the
recent adoption by NATO of a revised operational plan
allowing the continued expansion of the NATO-led
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) across
Afghanistan and providing training and operational
support to Afghan security forces.

We are also concerned by the increasing threat
that drug trafficking poses to the national security,
social development and governance of Afghanistan.
Unless the Afghan people can find other sources of
income, many will be tempted to engage in that
criminal business. We therefore share the view that the
international community and the Afghan Government
should work together to deal with this serious problem,
which affects almost every aspect of Afghanistan's
security and development. My Government welcomes
the updated national drug control strategy presented by
the Afghan Government at the London Conference and
stands ready to join the international support for the
strategy by contributing to the Counter-Narcotics Trust
Fund.

To deal with these ongoing challenges, active
efforts by the Afghan Government, in a spirit of
Afghan ownership, must go hand in hand with
unceasing assistance from the international community.
In this regard, we note that many countries, including
the Republic of Korea, announced new financial
assistance for Afghanistan at the London Conference.
We believe that these announcements demonstrate
donors' continuing confidence in Afghanistan. This is a
credit to President Karzai's leadership and to the clear
vision evident in the Interim National Development
Strategy.

The Republic of Korea has been a strong
supporter of the reconstruction process of Afghanistan.
Building upon our contribution of approximately $60
million in grant aid to Afghanistan over the past four
years, Korea plans to expand its assistance to
Afghanistan in line with the new Afghanistan
Compact. We have set aside $20 million for the next
three years in order to further our projects in the areas
of human resources development, agricultural and rural
area development and public administration efficiency.
In addition, reconstruction and medical units from my
country have been contributing to the Afghan
reconstruction process since their deployment in
February 2002. We pledge to maintain our commitment
to the reconstruction, development and stabilization of
Afghanistan in the years ahead.

