Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin this statement by congratulating
you, Mr. President, and your delegation on having
convened and on presiding over this important debate
on the prospects and challenges that security sector
reform faces in Africa.

I would also like to express my gratitude for the
briefing given by Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations. I would like to
take this opportunity to welcome him and to wish him
every success in his duties.

Security sector reform is one of the crucial
aspects of peacebuilding and the stability of countries
emerging from a conflict. We are called on to analyse
the many dimensions determining the success of any
strategy to achieve an institutional framework that
provides security and guarantees the enjoyment of
citizens' rights.

My delegation believes that we should begin by
recognizing a fundamental principle - that initiatives
to reform the security sector are part of broader
objectives, such as strengthening the rule of law,
respect and promotion of human rights, and the
establishment of conditions conducive to a country's
economic development.

The scope of such tasks certainly requires long-
term work and commitment, in which all relevant
actors assume their responsibilities and activities with
a view to gradually achieving viable and realistic
goals. The political leadership of the national
authorities and the sustained and predictable support of
the international community are also needed in order to
implement the reforms.

Security Council activities in security sector
reform are limited to the specific cases on its agenda.
Such experiences have taught us various lessons,
among which I wish to mention the following.

The first lesson is the important role played by
peacekeeping operations and special missions in
supporting the achievement of national objectives
leading to security sector reform. The second lesson is
the need to provide adequate tools and resources in
order to achieve the outcomes established in the
mandates. Thirdly, activities of the peacekeeping
operations must include sustainable and long-term
goals; and fourthly, dialogue, consultation and
coordination with the national authorities on the
development and implementation of the priorities set
by the national authorities must be improved in order
to achieve effective and appropriate security sector
reform.

Given that there are clear links between security
sector reform, conflict prevention, peacebuilding, the
rule of law and economic development, this debate
should aim to move forward the ongoing dialogue and
coordinated work of the bodies and agencies of the
United Nations system connected with the topic, within
the context of their respective responsibilities and
mandates. The General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission are
bodies called on to play a central role in defining the
conceptual and legal frameworks, under which the
Organization can work comprehensively on all aspects
of security sector reform and in harnessing resources
and strengthening ongoing and constructive dialogue
with the national authorities in order to define common
proposals and objectives.

National ownership is certainly the linchpin and
guiding principle on which all activities that the
Organization, in general, and the Security Council in
particular, undertake on security sector reform must be
based. As the Council has said on many occasions,
security sector reform is a sovereign right and the
primary responsibility to determine the modality and
national priorities in that regard falls to the State
concerned. In implementing the principle of national
ownership, there must be a social dialogue, channelled
through the national legal and institutional machinery,
which provides the overall framework and sets the
priorities and objectives on which State authorities can
base the reforms that they believe relevant. It must be
underscored that democratic values, principles and
methods are part of the tools on which the legitimacy
and viability of any reform is built.

Likewise, for successful security sector reform
processes, it must be acknowledged that respect for the
law, monopoly of the use of force by the legitimate
authorities, and subordination of the security apparatus
to the civil authorities are decisive factors in States
achieving stability and a sustainable peace.

No formulas can be applied to every case. The
institutional and legal security arrangements must be in
line with the conditions and particularities of each
situation. That is one of the reasons that explains the
importance of the principle of national ownership,
given the fact that historical, cultural, social and
economic contexts determine the forms and the scope
of the institutions in charge of providing security in
States that are emerging from conflict. They also
justify national ownership of the process.

It is up to every national authority, as a legitimate
representative of its society, to determine the scope, the
means, the forms and the sectors upon which the
support of the international community will be
required. Furthermore, national efforts will fall short if
the international community does not have sufficient
tools to help in this effort through measures that
promote transparency in decision-making and
strengthening the fight against terrorism, transnational
organized crime and illicit arms trafficking.

In the final analysis, assistance must be provided
with a view to improving the capabilities of national
institutions in each of the stages of security sector
reform, helping to find the mechanisms and approaches
that are adapted to the special conditions of every
situation, without imposing areas or conditions that
would be counter-productive for the national leadership
of the process to establish and build peace in the long
term.

