The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We are grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for South Sudan, David Shearer,
for the information he has provided on developments
in South Sudan and on progress in the peace process
in that African country. We commend the role played
by the Blue Helmets at this pivotal time in South
Sudanese history.

We would like to point out the notable progress
in the implementation by the parties to the conflict
in South Sudan of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, of 12 September 2018. It is important that
they have demonstrated their willingness to engage
in dialogue and to overcome their differences by
finding compromise solutions. In that regard, the
significance of the three-day talks between President
Salva Kiir and former First Vice-President Riek
Machar in Juba, facilitated by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and Khartoum,
cannot be overemphasized. We are confident that the
meeting will give new impetus to the South Sudanese
reconciliation process.

The decision of the South Sudanese parties to
the conflict to extend the pre-transition period to
12 November was difficult but justified. We sincerely
hope that the parties to the revitalized agreement will
make additional efforts to meet the agreed deadlines
and form a transitional Government of national unity.
As for the non-signatories, we call on them to join the
State-building process as soon as possible.

We consider it important that regional actors to the
South Sudan settlement maintain a united approach. We
welcome the efforts of IGAD and Khartoum to closely
accompany the peace process as it demonstrates once
again the implementation, in practice, of the principle
of African solutions to African problems. Furthermore,
there is still potential for effective cooperation among
the United Nations, the Security Council and regional
organizations. We believe that this can only benefit the
national reconciliation process.

We also note that the structures and mechanisms
provided for in the revitalized agreement are functional.
We are pleased that the level of armed violence is
decreasing, as is the number of human rights violations
in the country. An increasing number of refugees and
internally displaced persons are returning to their
places of permanent residence. We link this to the roll-
out of confidence-building measures and to contact
between the opposing parties on the ground.

We share the concern expressed in the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2019/722) about the diversion
of peacekeeping forces to the protection of civilians
sites. We believe that as we move forward on a political
settlement, it will be possible to ensure that those South
Sudanese who wish to return home enjoy the necessary
security conditions and that the social contract is
restored. We believe that only full and comprehensive
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
parties will help to increase mutual trust and prevent
the mistakes of the past from being repeated.

We are convinced that progress on the settlement
in South Sudan was not facilitated by greater sanctions
pressure on the country or by the imposition of an
arms embargo. The most important element was the
contribution of regional mediators. Moreover, at some
stage the embargo made it more difficult to implement
regional security initiatives in support of the settlement
process. We trust that the South Sudanese will soon
agree on the entire range of issues, which will give us
every reason to review the sanctions regime with the
aim of adapting it to the realities on the ground.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.

