Mr. Alexandre (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me express my appreciation to the Security
Council, and to you, personally, for the impeccable
way in which you are conducting your work as the
head of this important body. Let me also commend the
Secretary-General for the special interest he is giving
and has been giving for some time to the situation in
Haiti.

On behalf of the Government of Haiti, we would
like to express our appreciation to the Security Council
for the opportunity to make a presentation to the august
membership gathered here on the situation in Haiti.

The situation in Haiti is urgent and serious. Now,
more than ever, it requires all the attention of the
international community. Since 5 February 2004, the
country has been engulfed by an armed insurrection
which has already caused more than 60 deaths and
hundreds of wounded. These actions have been
committed by armed groups made up of former
members of a repressive paramilitary force, designated
as the Front for the Advancement of Progress in Haiti
(FRAPH) and which committed atrocities against the
Haitian people during the coup d'etat of 1991, as well
as former members of the armed forces that were
dissolved in 1995, and convicts who have escaped from
prison.

The insurgents currently control the northern part
of the country, where police stations, radio stations and
public buildings have been plundered and burned. They
have benefited from this to carry out summary
executions of persons identified as loyal to the
Government. They have also released prisoners who
have already been tried and convicted, among other
things, for violent crimes and illegal drug trafficking.
They have also plundered storage sites and the
residences of peaceful people. An example to be noted
is the plundering, in Cap Haitien, of the World Food
Programme (WFP) warehouse, which had more than
800 tons of food.

The attacks of the armed groups jeopardize the
stability of the country's institutions, and particularly,
the survival of the population. Beyond the loss of
human lives already mentioned, roads and ports have
been cut off. It is therefore becoming impossible to
supply the northern portion of the country with fuel,
food and medicine, which is leading to a chaotic
situation.

The latest report of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), of
25 February 2004 (OCHA/GVA-2004/0029), is more
than alarming. This dangerous path of armed violence,
against the backdrop of poverty, is not an option. It is a
serious threat to the region. Disorder and violence
stemming from these armed attacks, threaten to plunge
the country into an unprecedented humanitarian
disaster and destroy its fragile institutions. Now is the
moment that the international community must step
forward.

To escape the violence and poverty, Haitians are
again taking to the sea on makeshift craft, risking their
lives. Just yesterday, the United States Coast Guard
intercepted on the open seas a number of our
countrymen who are fleeing our troubled country. The
same kind of situation in 1991 led more than 40,000
refugees to the coast of Florida.

Politically, it is urgent that a solution providing
for an end to the crisis be found immediately in order
to restore conditions for normal life, including respect
for constitutional law, because brutality is rampant, and
the terror of the armed bandits prevails. In this context,
President Jean Bertrand Aristide on 21 February 2004
welcomed and consented to the plan providing for a
solution to the crisis that was presented by a high level
delegation from the international community, led by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Bahamas, and
which included representatives of the United States,
Canada, France, the European Union, CARICOM. and
members of the special mission of the Organization of
American States in Haiti and of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.

That plan for a political settlement to the crisis,
as endorsed by the international community, and which
provides, inter alia, for a government of international
consensus, while respecting constitutional norms, was,
unfortunately, rejected by the political opposition
which is challenging the international community. The
steadfast refusal of the opposition further worsens the
crisis. Haiti risks being plunged into the abyss of a
civil war, with all of the consequences that entails.
Maintaining public order and avoiding chaos and
anarchy are major challenges because the National
Police, the only legal force, is no longer capable of
ensuring the security of the lives and property of the
citizens, given its lack of strength and its limited
means.

The Government reiterates its call to the
opposition to contribute to restoring peace and
dialogue in order to find a negotiated political
settlement. It reaffirms its faith in the democratic future
of Haiti and it will do everything necessary to
consolidate and strengthen the rule of law.

Faced with the intransigence of our brothers and
sisters of the opposition, how many women, elderly
and children will fall to gunfire and the blows of
machetes before we are aided by a force that is capable
of helping to restore and maintain a stable
environment?

Given the inflexibility of the main players in the
opposition, who continue to believe that the solution
must entail overthrowing the head of a constitutional
State that has been democratically elected, how many
wounded or dead will be found in Haiti before the
international community comes to our assistance to
avoid a bloodbath or massive exodus of refugees? Must
we see an eventual battle in Port-au-Prince before
action is taken? Sir, it is better to prevent, than to treat.

The Haitian Government fully associates itself
with the position of CARICOM, which requests that
the Security Council be seized of the issue in Haiti, and
that it do its utmost to send urgently an international
force to help restore peace, while conforming to the
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

The Government of Haiti wants the Security
Council to reiterate its condemnation of the acts of
violence, signify its refusal to accept any form of
Government resulting from an anti-democratic and
anti-constitutional process, and demand that the
opposition accept a political compromise to resolve the
cr1s1s.

At this time of deep crisis, the issue of human
rights deserves to be specifically addressed. The
Government welcomes, with satisfaction, the
appointment of a special adviser to the Secretary-
General and welcomes the initiative to establish, in the
country, an office of the Commission on Human
Rights. It also anticipates international technical
cooperation to professionalize the police, strengthen
democratic institutions - in particular judicial
institutions - to disarm armed groups and to provide
security for elections.

After 32 coups d'etat in Haiti, it is clear that a
democratically elected president must hand over power
to another democratically elected president, as is done
in all democracies. It is time that the Haitian political
class understood that it can accede to power only
through elections and without the resort to threats or
the use of force. The Government of Haiti is counting
on the international community, in particular the
countries of the region, to promote a lasting and
democratic solution.

