The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
18 December 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2000/1206, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
on Monday, 18 December 2000, with regard to
the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now resume its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. Members of the Council have before
them document S/2000/ll7l, which contains the text
of a draft resolution submitted by Bangladesh, Jamaica,
Malaysia, Mali, Namibia and Tunisia.

The first speaker on my list is the representative
of Israel, to whom I now give the floor.


