Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I welcome your Foreign Minister's
presence in the Security Council today, and I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
contributions to this debate.

As we enter 2014, we are at a moment ofopportunity
for the Middle East peace process. Entering back into
direct negotiations last year was a bold step forward. It
was a welcome move towards peace in a troubled area.
It is the responsibility of all of us here to support the
parties, led by the United States, to capitalize on this
opportunity.

My Government continues to put its full support
behind Secretary Kerry and his team, and we urge the
Israeli and Palestinian leaderships to continue their
admirable focus and commitment.

This year started on a positive note, with the
implementation of Israel's brave decision to release
the third tranche of Palestinian prisoners. The United
Kingdom firmly believes that such steps, despite their
difficulty, are important to achieving a lasting peace
and security.

However, we are very concerned by Israel's
decision to announce further settlement-building in
East Jerusalem and the West Bank. My Government
condemns these announcements and considers such
actions as a serious threat to peace. We urge Israel
to avoid any further illegal settlement activity and to
reverse the advancement of plans. The United Kingdom
has also been clear that for this process to be a success,
the people on the ground, both Israelis and Palestinians,
need to see the real and tangible benefits of peace.
We therefore remain deeply concerned about the 663
Palestinian-owned homes and livelihood structures
demolished in Area C and East Jerusalem in 2013.
Demolitions and evictions are harmful to the peace
process and in all but the most limited circumstances
are contrary to international humanitarian law.

Reports of price tag attacks, including on a mosque
in Deir Istiya village on 15 January, are also of serious
concern. We condemn such acts and urge the Israeli
authorities to bring those responsible to justice. We are
also concerned about rocket fire from the Gaza Strip
into Israel and, in particular, condemn the rockets fired
at Ashkelon on 16 January in violation of international
law. All parties must respect the 12 November ceasefire
agreement in full. The people of Gaza and Israel will
only lose from further Violence.

There will be difficult decisions in the months
ahead, but we urge all those involved to keep their
shared goal in mind - a negotiated two-State solution
leading to a sovereign, viable and contiguous Palestinian
State living in peace and security alongside a safe and
secure Israel. The United Kingdom stands ready to do
its part. That is why we strongly back the European
Union's readiness to offer an unprecedented package of
political, economic and security support to both parties
in the event that a final status deal is reached.

On Syria, the Secretary-General has made clear
that the aim of this week's second Geneva Conference
on Syria is to assist the Syrian parties in ending the
Violence and achieving a comprehensive agreement for
a political settlement, implementing fully the Geneva
communique (S/2013/523, annex), while preserving
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria. As the permanent members of the Council
agreed on 30 June 2012, and as was endorsed by the
full Security Council in resolution 2118 (2013) last
September, that means agreeing to the establishment
of a transitional governing body in Syria with full
executive powers formed by mutual consent to meet the
aspirations of the Syrian people.

Yesterday, the Secretary-General announced that
he was extending an invitation to Iran to attend the
opening of the Conference at Montreux on the basis
that it acknowledges that the Conference's purpose
is the full implementation of the original Geneva
communique. Ifthe Iranians are to attend, it is now vital
that their Government confirm publicly and clearly that
they share that understanding. We have also urged the
United Nations, as mandated by the Security Council
in many resolutions, including resolution 2122 (2013)
of October 2013, to ensure a full role for women in the
Syrian peace negotiations.

It is important to remember that those negotiations
will be a process, not a single event. We should not
underestimate the formidable challenges ahead, and
we must not lose sight of the desperate situation that
Syrian civilians are facing on a daily basis. The Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights now puts the death
toll at over 125,000 people. In Aleppo and across all
of Syria, we have seen the regime continue to attack
its own civilian population with barrel bombs. That
indiscriminate bombardment is yet another war crime
on the part of the regime, and Al-Assad and those
around him should have no doubt that the world will
hold them to account. The situation in Syria should be
referred to the International Criminal Court.

The humanitarian crisis has reached catastrophic
proportions. Eleven million Syrians are in desperate
need of urgent assistance, particularly in besieged and
hard to reach areas. It is an unparalleled crisis, and the
world needs to respond accordingly.

We welcome the $2.4 billion ofpledges made at the
Kuwait pledging conference last week. My Government
announced a further pledge of $163 million in
humanitarian assistance, bringing our total contribution
to nearly $1 billion * the largest sum that the United
Kingdom has ever committed to a single crisis. The
funding is going towards meeting the basic life-saving
needs of Syrians affected by the conflict, both inside
Syria and in Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq. We
pay tribute to those neighbouring countries, including
Jordan, for the burden they are carrying to help alleviate
the suffering of the Syrian people.

But increased funding can make a difference
only if there is progress on access and protection for
humanitarian actors in Syria, where 21 United Nations
staff members remain in Government detention
and 47 humanitarian workers have now been killed.
Progress on implementing the Council's presidential
statement of2 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) remains
extremely limited. It is unacceptable that humanitarian
organizations are being deliberately obstructed by the
regime from delivering aid. The regime has shown that
it can facilitate access for chemical weapons inspectors;
it needs to show the same commitment to ensuring aid
reaches those most in need.

