Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
It is my pleasure to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab
States. I would like to congratulate the friendly country
of Sweden on its accession to the Security Council and
on assuming the presidency for the month of January.
I fully trust that Sweden, given its principled positions
on international matters and its remarkable record at the
service of international peace and security, will play in
an effective role not only this month but throughout its
mandate in the Security Council.

I also wish to congratulate the delegations of
Ethiopia, Bolivia, Kazakhstan and Italy on their elections
as members of the Security Council. Furthermore, I wish
to praise Angola, Venezuela, Malaysia, New Zealand
and Spain for their distinguished service during their
mandates as members of the Security Council.

The Arab Group is pleased by the remarkable
action that the Security Council has taken in adopting
resolution 2334 (2016). That resolution condemns
Israeli settlements on occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The resolution also calls
on all States concerned to distinguish between Israel
and the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
with particular regard to agricultural and industrial
production. It recognizes the need to not allow Israel,
the occupying Power, to exhaust the natural resources of
the Palestinian territories, or to create obstacles on the
road to a peaceful, fair solution that would put an end to
the Israeli occupation and enable the independence of
the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital
on contiguous Palestinian territory - which has been
occupied since 1967 - and lead to the development of
an equitable solution for the Palestinian refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 1948.

We encourage the Council to move on from the
adoption of resolutions to taking practical steps to
implement the aforementioned resolutions. That
is a major responsibility of the Council in its new
composition, in accordance with the agreed international
references, in particular the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and the Madrid Conference, including
the principle ofland for peace, the Quartet road map, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the principles set forth by the
Secretary of State of the United States on 28 December
2016. We also subscribe to the statement adopted by the
Paris Middle East Peace Conference.

The Council must continue to push towards an
internationally recognized political solution. The
Council must not remain unmoved in the face of Israeli
intransigence and Violations. We must not lose sight of
a very clear reality, namely, that peace in the Middle
East and in the entire world cannot accommodate
the persistent occupation of Arab and Palestinian
territories. Peace cannot be achieved in the absence
of a fully independent and sovereign Palestinian
State. International cooperation and the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism must be based on
mutual respect. We also reaffirm the fact that the
complete Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Arab
territories, the occupied Syrian Golan and usurped
Lebanese territory must take place and must include the
lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip.

I shall continue now in my national capacity.

Saudi Arabia intends to participate actively in
all international efforts to reach peace and stability
in the kindred country of Syria. In that connection,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2336 (2016),
adopted on 31 December 2016, which affirms the
need for real peaceful political transition in Syria in
accordance with the Geneva communique of June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex), as well as the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016).

Saudi Arabia also reaffirms the importance of
General Assembly resolution 71/203 of 19 December
2016 on the situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as General Assembly resolution 71/248
of21 December 2016 on the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We call
for the implementation of those two resolutions and of
all international decisions regarding Syria, particularly
those relating to facilitating access to humanitarian aid
for all who need it, without preconditions, while lifting
the blockade and ending the attempts of the Syrian
authorities to defame their own people.

Saudi Arabia believes that the Syrian people is not
about to end its struggle for liberty and dignity, and
that the oppression by the Syrian regime, conducted
with the support of its Russian and Iranian allies, the
terrorists of Hizbullah and other armed militias, such as
the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, must end. The Syrian
people must be allowed to determine their political
future as they see fit and in full independence.

