Mr. Al Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure to begin my statement by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I am confident that your wisdom and wide
experience and your ability will lead to the desired
success of our work. I also wish to express my deep
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Martin
Andjaba of Namibia, for the skilful way in which he
guided the work of the Council during his presidency. I
also wish to express my thanks to you, Mr. President,
for convening this emergency session at the request of
the Arab Group and the Movement of the Non-Aligned.

The convening of this meeting at this time to
grapple with the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is an expression of the keen interest of the
Council and of its perception of the gravity of recent
events that pose a threat to our area. This is indeed
another link in the cycle of violence and bloodshed.

His Majesty, King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein,
warned of such events and of their implications for the
peace process. They bear witness to the need in the
Middle East for peace and the need on the part of the
Palestinian people to rid itself of the yoke of
oppression and occupation that has lasted so long.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan strongly
condemns the violence perpetrated against the
Palestinians in the occupied territories as reflected in
the occupation and the oppressive practices on the part
of the occupation forces of Israel.

Israel has escalated its acts of aggression and
bombarded, by land, sea and air, the Palestinians and
Palestinian institutions and civilian installations. There
was also an act of aggression against the office of the
Jordanian representative in Gaza. This incident is
indeed regrettable. Jordan regrets the death of civilians
on both sides.
What is taking place in the occupied territories
nourishes excesses and provocative acts. Such acts at
the hands of forces that reject peace in Israel against
the Palestinians could embroil the entire area in more
violence and tension and thus undermine the peace
process and could return the area to conflict, to
violence, hostility and enmity.

The Jordanian Government calls upon Israel
immediately to stop all acts of violence, to lift the siege
from Palestinian towns, to implement existing
agreements and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949. It views as
necessary the prompt dispatch of a fact-finding mission
and the creation and deployment, under United Nations
auspices, of an international observer force in the
occupied territories.

The King, the Government and the people of
Jordan reaffirm their support for the fraternal
Palestinian people in its endeavour to gain its
legitimate rights and to establish an independent State
of its own on its national territory, with Al-Quds Al-
Sharif as its capital.

On behalf of my Government, I convey our
heartfelt condolences to the Palestinian leadership and
to the fraternal Palestinian people with respect to their
martyred brethren.

