Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman, Ambassador Adamson and,
of course, Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi for his report,
as well as for his excellent work as Facilitator. We
welcome the Secretary-General's report (8/2017/1030)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The
continued implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) is of crucial importance. The
agreement has ensured the exclusively peaceful nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme, which contributes
to stability in the region and indeed beyond. It also
contributes significantly to strengthening the global
non-proliferation architecture.

We welcome Iran's continued compliance with its
nuclear-related obligations, as verified by International
Atomic Energy Agency reports. It is important that Iran
continues to provisionally apply the Additional Protocol
to its Safeguards Agreement and we look forward to
its early ratification of the Additional Protocol. It is
promising that the Procurement Channel process is
working according to plan. We also agree with the
Secretary-General's recommendation that more efforts
be made to engage various actors, including the private
sector, in efforts to increase the economic benefits
of the agreement, especially for the Iranian people.
Despite those positive trends, however, we continue
to be concerned about the reports of violations by Iran
of the arms embargo and the travel ban. We are also
concerned about previously reported ballistic-missile
launches, which we believe to be inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).

Regarding information on possible transfers by
Iran of missiles or missile technology, we note that
the Secretariat is still analysing the information and
that it should verify any new information pertinent to
these cases. We expect the Secretariat to report back
to the Council as soon as possible and we welcome the
suggested joint meeting in the 2231 format between
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) and the Security Council.

The agreement on the JCPOA represented a
milestone and illustrated the potential of dialogue
and diplomacy in advancing global non-proliferation
efforts. We echo the Secretary-General's call on all
States to act in accordance with the agreement and to
avoid provocative actions and rhetoric. We also welcome
his clear call to all participants to remain committed
to the JCPOA in a spirit of cooperation, compromise,
good faith and reciprocity. All actors must now work
to find peaceful solutions to the ongoing conflicts and
crises in the region. We urge them all to act responsibly
and to refrain from exacerbating the tensions in the
region. It is important to separate discussions on
challenges in the broader region from those concerning
the implementation of the JCPOA.

