Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to New York to preside over
today's debate. We are also grateful for Jordan's role in
the region. As for your country's generosity in hosting
Syrian refugees, we feel that Jordan has been a positive
force on the Middle East peace process.
Today I will focus my statement on Syria and
the Middle East peace process. On Syria, there is a
chorus calling for a political solution. With Yarmouk
resembling a death camp and many parts of the country
witnessing unimaginable human suffering, that call is
as important now as it has ever been. It is also just as
difficult to achieve.

We welcome the efforts of Special Envoy de Mistura
to freeze the fighting in Aleppo. We will hear from him
in a few days on how that proposal is progressing, but
we understand that, given the modest possibilities, the
prospects are not good. We also support the efforts
of Russia and Egypt to reinvigorate a political track.
However, it is important that all those efforts be
coordinated under the United Nations umbrella and that
they be based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Until there is a political solution - and there
must be one day a political and not a military
solution - Syrians will suffer, and Minister Judeh's
country of Jordan and Syria's other neighbours will
strain under the refugee burden. As with the Middle East
peace process, the Council should bring its significant
experience with peace processes gained elsewhere to
developing a lasting solution in Syria. We admit that it
is difficult to apply experience from other situations to
Syria; there are so many interests at stake and multiple
parties to the conflict. However, of themselves, those
differences are not unique; we encounter them in every
situation. Moreover, we all know the broad outline of a
political transition; it is set out in Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

Let us therefore talk about it. We should sit around
a table and develop a plan for the next few months. The
price of inaction is high, and it is being paid by ordinary
Syrians. We would welcome the views of other Council
members, but also those of others in the Chamber,
many of whom are affected by the Syrian crisis. Permit
me to pose a question to all who speak today, whether
or not they are members of the Council. What would
representatives propose as pragmatic, concrete next
steps that the Council can take to alleviate the carnage
in Syria? The Council is listening; certainly, it should
be listening to those present.

On the Middle East peace process, I said in
January that New Zealand supported in principle
the idea of a suitably balanced Security Council
resolution, and I outlined the five points that guided
New Zealand's approach to the Middle East peace
process (see S/PV.7360). I said that the Council did
not just have a responsibility to remain seized of the
matter, it should also go further and actively promote
negotiations leading to a just, sustainable, long-term
peace agreement. Agreeing on a role for the Council is
not going to be easy, but New Zealand believes that it is
essential. We will also need to overcome the concerns
of some who feel that the Council should not play a role
at all.

While it is clearly for the parties to reach a final
agreement, we believe that now is the time for the
Council, with its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, to use its moral and
legal authority and the practical tools at its disposal
to shift the dynamics back to productive negotiations.
Again, that will not be easy. If it is to assume that role,
the Council will have to form a collective opinion on
issues that are sensitive, nuanced and weighed down
with historical baggage. We must respect the significant
investment that many countries have made over decades
and the direct national interest of many States in the
final outcome. We also need to convince stakeholders
to take difficult, politically costly decisions in the
interests of peace and long-term stability. That is not
easy, but it is necessary. We will be told that it is not
the right time, but it is always "not the right time".
There will never be a perfect time. We cannot continue
to kick the can down an endless road, as outgoing
Special Coordinator Serry said in his briefing to us last
month (see S/PV.7417). We all know that if the Council
addresses only the symptoms and not the root causes of
the conflict, there can be and will be no lasting peace.

It is our view that there is a finite window of
opportunity for the Council to set that process in motion.
In the January open debate (see S/PV.7360), New
Zealand committed to exploring options for the Council
to inject new momentum into those negotiations, once
elections were concluded in Israel. That time has come.
It is appropriate that the Council take action, now
that those elections are over and before other election
campaigns begin. New Zealand's friendships with
Israel and with the Palestinians motivate us to make
a constructive contribution and to work for progress.
New Zealand wants the Security Council to focus on
a practical outcome. We have therefore been working
on a draft text that might serve the purpose of getting
negotiations started. That is the important next step - to
get negotiations started. It will require that both sides
step back from their optimum or preferred outcomes
and that they both put any preconditions aside. There
has already been reference to the fact that France is
working with others on a parameters draft resolution.
We know how difficult it will be to achieve nine votes
in favour and no veto, but we remain convinced that
the Council must discharge its responsibilities. We have
not seen the latest French text, but if it has a chance of
succeeding, New Zealand stands ready to engage and
to be helpful.

Friends in the region have told us that a second text
would complicate the process. Therefore, at this stage,
New Zealand is prepared to wait to see how current
efforts play out. But we firmly believe that for success
and buy-in, it is important that any text be considered
through an inclusive and transparent process. We must
break the cycle that has undermined previous Council
attempts to support the Middle East peace process.
Therefore, New Zealand stands ready to work with all
members to ensure that the next draft resolution that
comes to the Council has a genuine chance of bringing
the parties to the negotiating table.

Like the Ambassador of the United Kingdom, this
is the last time I will speak in the Council's monthly
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I would like
therefore to add some further remarks.

I have talked today about the need for the Council
and other stakeholders to get around the table to talk
about Syria. As we sit here in New York, one must be
struck by the fact that discussions in the Council are so
formulaic and often disconnected from reality. We exist
in a world of diplomatic niceties, carefully avoiding the
elephants in the room, and usually, I might add, in a
Chamber deliberately screened from the world. We
endorse resolutions to protect civilians in Libya, but we
cannot stop the salvo of barrel bombs in Syria. We talk
of populations besieged in Syria, as we have today, but
we find it much harder to talk about the same in Gaza.
Even when we can discuss the most sensitive issues,
key players are often left out of the discussion.

New Zealand is a strong believer in the United
Nations and in the Security Council. We deeply
appreciate that so many in the United Nations
membership had the faith in us to elect us to the
Council for a two-year term. In seeking that mandate,
we promised we would say what we believe and that
we would listen and consult with all. We meant what
we said.

And so I end with a call for us all to deliver on
our responsibility - our collective responsibility - to
work together to end conflicts such as that in Syria
and that between Israel and Palestine. We have the
blueprints, including the Geneva communique for Syria
(S/2012/522, annex), the decades of work and the
known parameters for the Middle East peace process.
We have said that we have the will. What is left is for
this Council to find the way.

