Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): Please allow me briefly
to respond to several statements we heard in various
interventions. I am very surprised that some of the
participants ofat this meeting have said that we inserted
nationalist rhetoric into the discussion. I simply raised
the issue of Serbian cultural heritage, its protection and
the devastation of our monuments - monuments tht date
from the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
That has nothing to do with nationalist rhetoric. What
do members of the Council think? Should we applaud
such acts of violence?

I am certain that we have the right to say something
in our own defence. To everything that I have presented
and demonstrated, Mr. Thaci responded with the
word "genocide". No, he first started with "fascism",
"racism", "genocide", "rape" and "nationalist rhetoric".
Those were the words he used. First of all - to the
representatives of the United States, the United
Kingdom and France - in both World Wars Serbia and
Yugoslavia were your allies and fought on your side
in the coalition against fascism. We can never be on
the fascist side. We fought against Albania in the First
and Second World Wars. As members of the Council
know, when it comes to Albania, after the World Wars
Yugoslavia was an advocate of friendship between
Enver Hoxha and Tito. Those allegations of genocide,
racism and fascism are absurd. Mister Thaci mentioned
thousands of rapes. I am not against a court delivering
a judgement against someone accused of allegedly
committing a crime. But regarding that number, those
thousands of rapes that were actually mentioned and
the alleged rapes of young men - Mr. Thaci cannot
apply double standards in regard to us.

I expect the great Powers to corroborate everything
that we did in past centuries, and not remain silent in
the wake of the accusations that we are facing a that
we are fascists, engage in racial rhetoric, that we are
rapists. I do not know what kind of words they are, but
UNESCO proclaimed four sites under its protection
to be in danger. From whom are they in danger? Not
from our side. That is why we object to Kosovo's bid for
membership in UNESCO.

Eight out of 15 countries here have recognized the
independence ofKosovo, but I would like members to be
circumspect and to refrain from calling other countries
to recognize the independence of Kosovo. I listened to
the statement made by the representative of Jordan, and
I must say that Jordan has not had diplomatic relations
with Israel because ofPalestine. I hope that there will not
come a time when its territorial integrity will be called
into question, and then having to wait for everyone else
to make a decision in regard to its territorial integrity.
I hope Jordan will not experience that first-hand. We
cannot applaud those and similar decisions.

We wish to have excellent relations with the United
States ofAmerica, as we deem it to be ofkey importance
for our future. But I would like to raise one question
because the United States called on all Member States
to support Kosovo's bid to UNESCO. Can I ask the
United States of America, where were its principles
when it asked Member States a couple of years ago not
to vote for Palestine? I recall that President Obama said
that all countries should refrain and wait until Israel and
Palestine reach an agreement before they recognized
Palestine. Now the United States of America is asking
for the recognition of Kosovo and the admission of
Kosovo to UNESCO. But the same principle was not
applied in the case of Palestine.

Members of the Council know that at our latest
meeting in Brussels we were not able to reach an
agreement because the Albanian side was not willing to
accept all the agreements put on the table before us. The
Albanian delegation, which also included Mr. Thaci,
refused this. He now mentions propaganda and all
pictures that I brought with me here of devastated sites.
Can he respond to those pictures - whether they are
genuine or not? Who is this person who demolished the
cross on the Orthodox church? Was he arrested? Does
the graffiti at this protected UNESCO World Heritage
site not say "ISIS", "there is no god but Allah" and
"the Caliphate is coming"? I would just like to hear a
response to those questions.
I genuinely desire good relations with Pristina, and
Mr. Thaci and I have established things on the right
footing and have initiated this in all good will. But I
must regretfully say that the same double standard
that has been applied to Israel and Palestine is being
applied to Kosovo. I am here as the representative of
the Republic of Serbia, and my task is to defend its
interests and those of the Serbian people. When we are
speaking of propaganda, I would like to point out that
Kosovo has apparently already become a member of
the United Nations. We should note that Mr. Thaci's
statement is presented as that of Mr. Thaci, the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Kosovo. Have we thus recognized Kosovo
at this meeting of the Security Council as a Member
of the United Nations? We have witnessed this kind of
thing for years now and have tolerated it because we
do not want to exacerbate the issues. But why are we
being accused ofbeing fascist or racist when we discuss
reconciliation? How can our words be condemned when
we are speaking and showing our concern about our
cultural heritage? What is wrong with my statements?

I would like to clarify that issue. I am genuinely
trying to find a sustainable solution to the Kosovo
issue, because in the status quo we are in, while Serbia
is said to be acting constructively, behind our backs
preparations are being made to recognize Kosovo as
a unilaterally proclaimed State. What is the difference
between that unilateral act of Pristina and the situation
of Israel and Palestine? I ask any country what it would
do if it experienced such a thing on its territory. That
is why it is important to uphold principles, and in our
case every principle has been flagrantly infringed and
violated. But double standards are something we will
never accept. As an example of this, I can cite two
statements by Hashim Thaci recorded today, the first
to the effect that our cultural heritage has never been
better protected than it is today in Kosovo - when I
have shown the Council the pictures of what remains
of the Serbian cultural sites and monuments - and the
second saying that Albanians have always constituted
the majority population in Kosovo.

I should note that we wish to continue to cooperate
well and to maintain our dialogue in Brussels. We are
a very small country, and we cannot exert influence
on the work of the Security Council. Since it has been

stated that resolution 1244 (1999) is still in force, and
yet other countries are being urged not to comply with
or uphold that resolution, I believe we should hold a
meeting to discuss whether it is still in force and why
double standards are being applied in that regard.
Instead of reacting to these photographs with a concrete
response, some have spoken of fascism, racism and so
on. I find myself compelled to ask why I am here and
why the Council wants to have a dialogue with us. Why
are the great Powers saying that Serbia is a leader in the
region and a factor in its stabilization? I do not wish to
hear other countries insult my country, and that does
not contribute to reconciliation. On 27 August Austria
is organizing a meeting in Vienna, even proposing
a soccer match between the countries aspiring to
membership of the European Union (EU) and EU
member States, and we are required to show concrete
examples of such things as the preservation of cultural
heritage, to demonstrate our willingness to cooperate.

I have nothing against other ethnic and religious
communities speaking on the situation in Belgrade or
other cities and towns in Serbia. We do not want to
be told we are fascists or racists. Twenty years have
passed since the war and armed conflict. Many things
had changed significantly 20 years after, and since the
end of the Second World War. Yet 20 years after the end
of our conflict, we are still experiencing the same state
of affairs and the same conflicts. I simply wished to
explain my reaction to this and I will not repeat it again.

