Dr. Fallah: I express to you, Madam President,
and the members of the Security Council, my profound
gratitude for giving me this opportunity to bring
to participants a story on behalf of the voices of the
communities, a story that has done us very well because
we have zero cases this morning. It is a story that is due
to maverick changes made by the people. It is a story
that has three parts: where we were one year ago, where
we are now, and where we have to go.

I would say that this story is tied to the miracle of
West Point. In June 2014, we had the second wave of
Ebola. It was devastating and revealed human suffering
and misery. People were left in rooms with dead bodies;
we could not treat people in a timely fashion. They saw
that their friends and neighbours were dying slowly
and that nothing could be done because our system was
inadequate. There were instances where we took people
to the Ebola treatment unit but we had to wait for others
to die and remove their bodies, before we moved in new
patients.
In August 2014, Ebola struck West Point. West
Point is a slum where 70,000 people live in 5,000
houses deprived of sanitation, with one clinic and one
little school. This was a slum bearing a distrust for
institutions. This was a slum that was characterized by
secret burials and hiding of the sick. It was a daunting
and impossible task. To address Ebola treatment, we
needed to open a transit centre - a holding centre.
However the holding centre was ransacked by the
community because it did not understand that there was
no trust.

How did that sad story then became an experiment
and a story today? We realized that, in order to win the
fight against Ebola, we had to involve the community
and give them ownership. We therefore approached the
community to let them know that it was our fear for
survival. It was their threat. They knew the community
better than us and we wanted them to lead us. They
came together and they joined us in the fight against
the threat. They helped us to find all of the missing
contacts. The very holding centre that they had looted
became the holding centre that they supported. They
moved the sick to the holding centre; they supported us.

Within two weeks we saw a dramatic change, such
that the Minister of Health asked us to replicate the
experiment in our communities where there were there
were outbreaks. Wherever we went, we would listen to
the communities. We recognized the leaders and we
gave them the ownership and they led us. We decided
to hunt Ebola one community at a time. Initially we
were on the defensive. But with the involvement of the
community, we then got on the offensive to begin to
strike at Ebola one community after another. We let
them lead us.

That led to the birth of the Community Based
Initiative. We felt that we were being led by the
community and we followed the community, with
banners from other international donors, like the United
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
media shows and the United Nations. We finally arrived
at the long-awaited zero cases. But the story that we
have to tell is the story of the community members, the
old people, the young people, the teachers who stood
with us in the communities.

Where are we today? This is based on a story about
our recent outbreak, in Margibi County, Liberia. On
29 June we received information about a new Ebola
case. We moved into Margibi County. In 48 hours we
mobilized the community. We formed an Ebola council
led by community members. They were able to track
all of our contacts, wherever they went. Many of them
had no relationship with Ebola, but they understand it
involved human beings. We went to the Ebola transit
unit and we took photographs of the survivors of their
family as they were recovering and we brought that
back to the community. Working together with the
response team, within 23 days, we were able to work
down and contain the outbreak. It was a time of joy. The
community took the leadership role and we supported
them.

There is an important lesson to learn for the future.
Doctor Nabarro said it so well, as did Dr. Chan. An
important lesson to learn is the power of the community
to survive, to overcome challenges. In fact, all of us
who seek to avert future challenges that threaten us
as humankind must give them the power. We must
recognize the structure of the communities. We must
recognize the leadership, and we must support them. If
we support them through routine health services, they
will be able to protect us when crises come tomorrow.
That is an important lesson that we must learn.

An important lesson we will learn is that we must
build relationships and trust within the communities so
that during the low points they can support us, or carry
out testing where data might be needed. It is based on
trust. It is based on relationship. It is based on the fact
that we are responsive to their needs and must give
them the leadership. I cannot overemphasize the need
to build public-health capacities, so that our hospitals
do not become graveyards but places that will prevent
the next Ebola outbreak by instituting measures that
enhance diagnostic capacity. We are developing the
next generation of public-health practitioners, building
that capacity and importing it in the context of the
community, to every member, so as to ensure recovery,
empowerment and the leadership that has protected us
and will protect us from future outbreaks.

I wish to thank you, Madam President, the
Ambassador of the United States and Mr. Nabarro
for giving me this opportunity to make the voices of
the communities heard. Community-based initiatives
assume that indeed we will work with communities and
give them the support and the tools they need so that
we human beings are able to overcome whatever threats
come our way.

