Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Swedish presidency for having
included this meeting in the programme of work for
January an issue of such great importance to Colombia,
the American continent and to the international
community in general. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his thorough briefing.

To begin, I would like to congratulate the
Government of Colombia as well as the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia * Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) for having given us once again an
example of a commitment to peace in signing a new
Final Peace Agreement on 24 November in Bogota,
which was ratified by the Colombian Congress, thereby
beginning the process by which the FARC-EP will
lay down its arms. The Agreement is the result of a
successful negotiation that included various national
actors from the political, social and religious sectors, as
well as victims. We wish to extend our congratulations
to them all. We note that the task was not a simple
one, and that there are still many challenges along this
complex path. However, the firm will to conclude the
conflict and to build a stable and lasting peace, which
has been evident in different aspects of the process,
gives us hope that the implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement will also be successful.

The six points of the Agreement are a sign of the
breadth and the complexity of the tasks that remain
ahead. The establishment of the truth and verification
commission for the Final Agreement as well as
the framework plan for the implementation of the
agreements are important measures that were planned
in order to guarantee the implementation of all that was
agreed. We are pleased to note the announcement that
the framework plan will include, as a matter of priority,
the practical and strategic needs of women, and we
congratulate the protagonists of the process for paying
special attention to the fundamental rights of women as
well as of vulnerable social groups.

The latest report (S/2016/837) of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict in Colombia
indicates that there has been a decrease in the number
of violations committed against children since the
beginning ofthe peace process in Colombia in 2012. At
the same time, it highlights the work that has been done
by the Government of Colombia in order to strengthen
the framework designed to prevent and put an end to
violations committed against children and adolescents,
and also to respond to them via legislation and public
policies. The report points out that the Peace Agreement
has been the most important achievement in the area of
the protection of children. Among its many provisions
in this area, worthy of mention are those that refer to
the reintegration of minors who left FARC-EP camps
at the beginning of the peace talks, as well as those
who who will emerge through the end of the process of
laying down arms. Minors will be the object of special
protection measures that take a differentiated approach
to guarantee the restitution of their rights, prioritizing
their access to health and education, their return to
their families whenever possible, as well as their
final placement in their communities of origin. The
Agreement also establishes that the implementation of
all the provisions refering to children guarantees the
protection of the higher interests of children, as well as
their rights and the prevalence of their rights over the
rights of others.

Uruguay places very high priority on the protection
of civilians in situations of conflict and in post-conflict
situations. We are of the view that the provisions of the
Peace Sgreement in Colombia, among which we find
those referring to the protection of women and children,
can serve as a model for other peace agreements to be
implemented in other parts of the world.

With the same spirit and hope with which a year ago
we adopted resolution 2261 (2016), we take note of the
fact that the FARC-EP and the Government of Colombia
have agreed that they will require the international
support of various countries as well as international
entities when it comes to implementing the agreements.
In that respect, we will accord particular attention to
any request made to the Security Council, as well as
the regional organizations, such as the Union of South
American Nations.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the support
and the commitment of Uruguay to peace in Colombia,
and to highlight the importance of the principle of
sovereignty in each stage of the process, given the fact
that - as we said earlier - this is a process that was
initiated and led by Colombians themselves, and one
that belongs entirely to them. We trust that the peace
agreements in Colombia, along with international
support from the United Nations, will soon become an

example of good practice or a success story, as referred
to in recent days by the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, and that it can be presented as such.
