Mr. Al Hussein: I thank the Council for giving
me this opportunity to voice my concern about the
deterioration of the human rights situation in Burundi.
An escalating pattern of politically motivated violence,
coupled with the country's history of recurring
bloodshed and atrocities, should alert us to the potential
for serious crisis. Already, more than 145,000 people
have fled to neighbouring countries, and this movement
has increased drastically in recent days. As they pack
the few belongings they can carry and abandon their
lands and homes, what the people of Burundi are
telling us is that they fear their country is on the brink
of devastating Violence. The risk to human life and to
regional stability and development is high.

The crisis arising from President Pierre
Nkurunziza's decision to run for a third term of office
has undermined a decade of steady progress in building
democratic institutions and the precious gains achieved
in the sense of a common national community. In the
past six months, members of opposition parties, civil
society activists and media figures who called for the
President to respect the Arusha Agreement and the
Constitution by standing down after 10 years in office
have been targeted for intimidation, severe harassment
and arbitrary detention. Peaceful protests have been met
with unwarranted use of force, including lethal force,
in violation of Burundi's obligation under national and
international law to guarantee the right to freedom of
assembly. Demonstrators have been imprisoned and
subjected to torture and ill-treatment. We have also
received reports of extrajudicial killings. To date, these
violations have not been investigated, prosecuted or
sanctioned.

Apparently determined to ignore every warning
signal, the Government pushed through parliamentary
and local elections on 29 June, despite pleas by the
Secretary-General, the East African Community, the
African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and multiple other international
actors, including the most recent international team of
facilitators, for a delay to allow space for dialogue and
inclusion. The elections were boycotted by opposition
parties and took place in an atmosphere that was far
from conducive to a free, fair and inclusive vote. There
have been outbreaks of violence, including small
arms and grenade attacks, and tension is palpable.
Burundians appear to be braced for an explosion of the
murderous Violence, which has so frequently engulfed
the country.

I travelled to Burundi in April and met with the
President and top officials of the Government, the
Constitutional Court and other key bodies. I noted then
the widespread and alarming violence attributed to the
Imbonerakure militia, which has been linked to the
President's political party. Immediate action must be
taken to curtail those assaults and to stem incitement to
Violence and hatred. In line with the recommendation
made during the third emergency summit of Heads of
State of the East African Community on the situation
in Burundi, I urge the Government to disarm the
Imbonerakure militia immediately. All political parties,
the President of the Republic, the police and the military
should place the well-being of their country above their
own political ambitions and interests and take the path
of peace and rule of law.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights field office - which
we have reinforced - has documented dozens of
killings in the past two months, most of them shootings
of demonstrators and human rights defenders by
members of the Imbonerakure militia and security
forces. I draw the Council's attention in particular to
the assassination, on 26 May, of Zedi Feruzi, a vocal
opposition leader who opposed a third term for the
President, and to the attempted assassination of the wife
of Agathon Rwasa, another leading political opponent.
Some security personnel and Imbonerakure militia
members have also been killed.

Contrary to some recent reports, the massive
outflows of refugees appear to have been sparked not
by rumour but by precise and targeted campaigns of
intimidation and terror. Refugees interviewed by my
Office in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, Rwanda
and Tanzania continue to refer to the Imbonerakure
militia as the main threat, but some have also stated
that militants from other groups are also employing
Violence - a new and disturbing development.

My Office has also documented over 300 cases of
arbitrary arrest and detention of demonstrators, human
rights defenders, political opponents and journalists,
some of whom have since been released. We have
noted numerous cases of torture and other forms
of ill-treatment in detention. A severe crackdown
on independent media has led to the closure of most
private media and radio stations, with some being
burned down. Large numbers ofjournalists have fled
Burundi for fear of reprisals, as have many human rights
defenders. Recently we have also seen key members of
the President's own political party and Government
fleeing the country.

Frequent grenade attacks in public neighbourhoods
and a campaign of intimidation of ordinary people
by Imbonerakure militia members have created an
atmosphere that is grim with fear and panic. Many
hard-won gains in inclusive services, institutions
and freedoms for the public are also breaking down.
Numerous schools have closed, and, in any case, lack
of security prevents schoolchildren from attending.
The humanitarian impact of the crisis now includes a
cholera outbreak among refugees in Tanzania.

Since the 1960s, repeated cycles of uncontrollable
violence have devastated Burundi. Although all the
country's communities speak the same language and
have for centuries lived together in the same hills and
communes, these recurring spasms have, in recent
decades, laid down a pattern of mistrust, bitterness
and pre-emptive violence. In a concerted effort to
rebuild social institutions that can effectively mediate
differences and address grievances, the international
community and regional and national actors came
together in Arusha 15 years ago to rebuild an architecture
of sustainable peace, with emphasis on the rule of law,
observance of human rights, access to effective judicial
and other institutions, and participatory democratic
governance. Slowly, the country has inched back
to greater confidence, more openness and far more
inclusion.

Today, however, that effort is in peril. After years
of deep work to weave together the fabric of society,
communities are reverting to fear. The Secretary
General's Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, has noted the risk that what
has, to date, been primarily a political crisis could
escalate to a level that would pose a high risk of atrocity
crimes. The nightmares of Burundi's recent past are
close at hand, and among them we must count the
massive impact of past episodes of violence on regional
development and security.

The people of Burundi and the region deserve
far better than these recurring cycles of impunity,
suffering and destruction. They have a right to go
about their lives peacefully, in freedom, equality and
dignity, without fear, and with equitable access to their
country's many resources and opportunities. They look
to the Council to exert its authority to ensure a speedy
political solution to this dreadful crisis.

I ask Council members to bring to bear all possible
influence to restore a sense of responsibility among key
actors in Burundi. Accountability for all gross human
rights violations, including those that have occurred
over the past six months, must be ensured. Justice must
be served and reason must prevail so that Burundi can
return to the path of the rule of law and democracy,
stability, confidence and peace, including through
elections that are inclusive, transparent and fair. The
Arusha Agreement sought to reconstitute a society
in which differences, whether political or communal,
could be accommodated, and in which the protection
of the State could be counted as secure for all. That is
the path of development and hope, and it is Burundi's
future. To close off that path would be a monumental
error that would be remembered for generations.

