At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on the situation in Palestine. I would like also to welcome with us this morning Minister Riad Mansour, Permanent Representative of the Observer State of Palestine, and Mr. Dany Danon, Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations. Through its many resolutions, the Security Council has expressed its views on all aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The General Assembly has done the same. Through those resolutions, the cardinal principles that should pave the way for dialogue and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians have been clearly defined. The occupation by force and annexation of Palestinian land is illegal and must end, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016). The continuation of Israel's colonization policy, which has been established as a system of administration of the Palestinian territories, is likewise illegal. The disproportionate use of force against often unarmed Palestinian civilians, including women and children, is unacceptable and contrary to international law. With resolution 1515 (2003), inter alia, the Council, together with the international community, further enshrined the two-State solution - of Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security, on the basis of the 1967 borders - as the basis for the resolution of this conflict. What progress have we achieved since then in resolving this crisis? Not very much, I would say. On the contrary, Israel's policy of annexation of Palestinian land makes the two-State solution almost illusory, and the prospect of the annexation of a large part of the settlements in the West Bank and the Jordan Valley does not encourage us to be optimistic. Faced with this situation, the Niger believes that we must do everything possible to support all initiatives that could enable us to help the countries and the peoples of this tormented region of the world to find benchmarks for reconciliation, peace and peaceful coexistence. As former South African President Nelson Mandela said, "to make peace with an enemy, you must work with that enemy and that enemy becomes your partner". Perhaps it is this spirit that has led Israel and Palestine to establish cooperation, which we welcome, in the context of the fight against the coronavirus disease pandemic. Indeed, the realization that neither walls nor checkpoints could protect the populations on either side from the virus is a step in the right direction. We hope that the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority will use that cooperation to overcome their differences and return to the negotiating table, in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions. At this particularly difficult time for all the peoples of the world, we urge the Palestinians and the Israelis to respond favourably to the appeal of the Secretary- General to build a framework for cooperation and to pool their efforts in order to effectively combat the spread of the coronavirus and its disastrous consequences for populations already exposed to various deprivations. May this blessed month of Ramadan strengthen this nascent dynamic of cooperation between Israel and Palestine, and may it enable the peoples of this region, the cradle of the three great religions, to enjoy peace, security and development.
