Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for demonstrating your
leadership and for convening this important debate on
counter-terrorism. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his introductory briefing.

First of all, on behalf of my country, I would like to
extend my deepest condolences to you, Mr. President,
your country and the bereaved and distressed families
who suffered from the hideous terrorist attacks in
Quetta last week.
Over the past decade, the international community
has made concerted and cooperative efforts and achieved
progress in countering terrorism, such as significantly
weakening Al-Qaida's core group in Afghanistan.
However, terrorism continues to be a serious threat
to international peace and security. Al-Qaida is still
a source of security concern, as its regional affiliates
continue to expand their influence in such regions as
northern Mali and the southern Arabian peninsula.
There is also the growing threat of home-grown
terrorism. Moreover, terrorist organizations have now
begun to build a nexus with other transnational criminal
operations, such as drug trafficking, kidnapping, the
illicit trade in arms and piracy. Terrorist organizations
are becoming more sophisticated and constantly finding
new ways to extend their reach through the use of the
Internet and other information and communication
technologies. Furthermore, the fear that terrorists may
acquire weapons of mass destruction lingers.

Terrorism can strike in any region and any country
at any time. Individual States alone cannot cope with the
scope, diversity and constant evolution of the terrorist
threat. Effective counter-terrorism efforts require
strong international cooperation in law enforcement,
information-sharing and the suppression of terrorism
financing. It is also crucial that Member States
provide support to other States in capacity-building
and technical assistance. Taking effective measures to
tackle terrorism is impossible without strengthening
the capacity and preparedness of all Member States.
The United Nations has played central roles in leading
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted unanimously by the General
Assembly in 2006, has provided a solid foundation
for comprehensive and systematic counter-terrorism
activities by the international community. As stressed
during its third review in the Assembly, last June, it is
imperative that all Member States fully and faithfully
implement the Strategy in an integrated manner.
The Republic of Korea welcomes the role of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate in implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions, coordinating individual
States' efforts, promoting their cooperation and
contributing to the capacity-building of Member States.

We also acknowledge the continuing efforts of
the Secretary-General in maintaining a consistent
and results-driven United Nations approach to
counterterrorism. We commend the improvement
in international coordination through the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The recent
establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre and its active operation are also laudable.
My Government supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation, contained in his report last year, to
appoint a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.

We are of one mind that terrorism cannot be
countered by military means or law enforcement alone,
and that a comprehensive approach is the only way
to deal with new manifestations of terrorism and to
address the conditions conducive to its spread.

First, it is necessary to tackle socioeconomic and
environmental conditions. We need to deal with the
diffusion of violent extremism by marginalized groups.
We need to solve unemployment problems and expand
educational opportunities. Our concerted efforts to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals, including
poverty eradication and sustainable development,
as specified in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, would be a big step in the right
direction. Furthermore, we need to strengthen dialogue,
understanding and tolerance among civilizations,
cultures, peoples and religions.

Secondly, it is essential that the effort to combat
terrorism be in accordance with obligations under
international law and fundamental values such as the
protection of human rights and the rule of law. We
need to ensure that countering terrorism and protecting
human rights are not contradictory, but complementary.
Only then can we win the hearts and minds of those
who are exposed to terrorism's lure.

Thirdly, it is imperative to deal with the new trend
of using the Internet and social media to incite, recruit
and finance terrorist movements. We need to deny
a virtual safe haven for terrorists and prevent such
misuse of cyberspace. We look forward to in-depth and
constructive discussions on this matter at the Seoul
Conference on Cyberspace, to be held in October.

Fourthly, halting the flow of terrorist financing is
one of the fundamental measures to be taken. In that
regard, we acknowledge the roles of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) and related regional bodies.
As a member of the FATF, my Government is active
in global efforts to halt the financial flows that fuel
terrorism. We have managed training courses and
shared our own experience in establishing a financial
intelligence unit with other Member States.

Last but not least, we would like to emphasize
that the prevention of the terrorist use of weapons of
mass destruction is the top priority for international
security in the twenty-first century. In March 2012,
the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit produced the Seoul
communique, which provides highly comprehensive
and practical measures for the prevention of nuclear
and radioactive terrorism. We encourage the full
implementation of the commitments under the
communique. It was with that imperative in mind that
the Secretary-General convened the high-level meeting
on countering nuclear terrorism, with a specific focus
on strengthening the legal framework, in September
2012.

As the new Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the Republic of
Korea will work together with Member States to
enhance global efforts to prevent the terrorist use of
weapons of mass destruction. During our term, we
plan to continuously strengthen the Committee and
qualitatively assist Member States in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004).

Through this open debate, I hope that we will
improve our understanding of the terrorist threat and
be reminded of the urgency of promoting cooperation
in countering terrorism. The Republic of Korea
stands ready to actively participate and cooperate in
implementing our comprehensive strategy to counter
terrorism.

