Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): First of all, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for his important briefing on the recent developments in the situation in Yemen. I share his optimism stemming from the recent de-escalation. I also thank the Director of the Coordination Division of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for his briefing on the humanitarian situation in Yemen. This morning, the Security Council is considering the situation in Yemen following the unanimous adoption, on Monday, 13 January, of resolution 2505 (2020) on the extension of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Supportthe Hodeidah Agreement (see S/PV.8701), which is to be commended. My delegation welcomes this development, as the consensus that was reached attests to the international community's awareness of the need to resolve the humanitarian crisis that the Yemeni people, particularly women and children, are enduring with a level of resignation that must compel us to act. Although complex in nature, the conflict in Yemen and the parties involved require the Council's special attention until a definitive and lasting political settlement is reached. The decrease in violence in recent days, and the consequently reduced number of victims, is good news on which to build. Attention must be paid to respecting international humanitarian law, in particular the protection of personnel responsible for delivering assistance to those in need throughout the country. In that regard, my delegation would like to stress the need to provide substantial support for the implementation of the Mission's mandate in order to ensure the unimpeded delivery and distribution of humanitarian assistance to the population. The Niger hopes that the positive developments since the signing of the Riyadh agreement, as noted in the two briefings, which have led to a decrease in the level of violence in the south of the country, will be consolidated so as to serve as a stepping stone for the full pacification of the country. Finally, we strongly urge the parties to the conflict to resume dialogue and to apply the various provisions of the Stockholm Agreement. The exchange of prisoners is a welcome step in the right direction. In conclusion, we support the Special Envoy in his tireless efforts to help Yemen find through dialogue the peace and security that it enjoyed not so long ago. We also call on OCHA to continue its excellent work to ensure that the current acute humanitarian crisis in the country does not thwart the return to normalcy that we all wish to see.
