Mr. Spatafora (Italy): Through you, Sir, may I
offer a very sincere welcome and express my strong
appreciation to Mr. Miliband for his presence here. I
must say that his presence here is intended to flag the
fact that today is not business as usual. This is a very
special debate, and we are grateful to the United
Kingdom Government for the political vision that is
behind it.

Listening to the statements that have been made
so far, I would say that, at the end of the day, what is at
stake here is how to make the Council, and through it
the Organization and the other stakeholders in the
private sector and civil society, more relevant on the
ground so as to make a difference and offer a concrete
horizon of hope to people who have suffered and are
suffering, as recalled by you, Sir.

What we want to have today is, I think, a wake-
up call, as was said so eloquently by Minister Bangura.
We have also heard a very strong wake-up call from
Mr. Brahimi - a distillate of operational and political
wisdom, a backdrop that we have to keep in mind in
our decisions. I would go further and say that, if we do
not have the caveats that were so eloquently
highlighted by Mr. Brahimi clear in our minds and in
our behaviour on the ground, we will certainly be
heading towards failure or, at best, ineffectiveness and
irrelevance.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Slovenia on
behalf of the European Union, so allow me to make
just a few additional remarks.
In the crucial phase immediately after the
cessation of a conflict and before the deployment of a
peacekeeping mission, there is still no established
intervention mechanism that can lay the foundations
for reconstruction and assistance to national
authorities. Italy is a firm supporter of developing
greater rapid-deployment civilian capacities at the
United Nations. We support a strong rule of law
standing capacity, consisting of experts in areas crucial
to the success of a stabilization action, especially
juries, judges, administrators and political advisers.

However, with respect to that issue, we must of
course keep clearly in mind what Mr. Brahimi has told
us and the caveats that he has put forward, which I will
not repeat. Such a capacity could be modelled on the
standing police capacity, which would benefit from an
increase in staff. We believe that the international
community should collaborate on the formation of a
nucleus of rapidly deployable civilian peacekeepers,
who would partner with local authorities - who would
be at the core of the effort - to draft a civil and
economic reconstruction strategy in every area and lay
the foundations for the work of the peacekeeping
operation. Interested Member States could contribute
by establishing inter-ministerial teams of peacebuilding
specialists, including non-governmental organizations
and other members of civil society.

At the same time, we need to strengthen the
civilian component of peacekeeping missions and
better integrate the military and civilian instruments.
To that end, it is essential to adequately structure and
update professional training, on which Italy has
focused in the framework of the Centre of Excellence
for Stability Police Units and through its hosting of
various United Nations and national institutes
dedicated to the training of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding professionals.

Italy supports the United Nations central role in
peacebuilding. We thus hope that the development of
the international community's intervention capacities
will be accompanied by a more incisive United Nations
role, particularly through the strengthening of the
functions of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as has been said by others. The goal
is to foster greater coordination among the various
United Nations system bodies and other stakeholders -
such as donors, international financial institutions,
regional organizations, the private sector and civil
society - in such a way as to address post-conflict
needs, starting on day one after the cessation of
hostilities. A good start would be to launch, for
example, a database and to create a network between
organizations that are already active in the area.

Allow me to make a final consideration.
Populations tormented by conflicts need concrete and
immediate dividends on the ground that can provide
relief for suffering and foster the gradual return of a
secure, socially organized life governed by the rule of
law and sustained by economic prospects. In most
cases, at least one year goes by between the end of

hostilities and the beginning of appropriation from the
trust fund created for the reconstruction of a country,
apart from the most urgent humanitarian interventions.
That is too much time, considering the urgency of the
needs and the broad array of actions needed. More
rapid and flexible financing mechanisms are required
to address that crucial initial phase. I will not repeat
what has been said by Mr. Brahimi, the Deputy
Minister of Belgium and others on that issue.

The obvious choice would be to strengthen and
give greater centrality to an existing instrument - the
Peacebuilding Fund - rather than to create new
mechanisms that risk making intervention even more
complex. Here, I fully endorse what was said in
particular by the Minister of Defence of South Africa,
as well as by my colleague from Costa Rica. In the
months to come, we will have to review the
Peacebuilding Fund's terms of reference in the light of
past experience. It is our hope that the review will be
conducive to making the Fund more effective and more
consonant with the need for immediate intervention
implicit in the original conception, and above all to
strengthening the catalysing function of intervention
financed by other donors, so that resources are not
distributed haphazardly and indiscriminately.

