Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand
congratulates the people of Afghanistan on the
completion of the Bonn Agreement. The inauguration
of a fully elected National Assembly in December last
year marked a major achievement in Afghanistan's
path towards stable democracy.

New Zealand was pleased to participate in the
London Conference and the launch of the Afghanistan
Compact in February. The Conference provided an
important opportunity for the international community
to affirm its commitment to Afghanistan for at least the
next five years. Looking ahead, it will be important to
ensure that those commitments provide the appropriate
combination of security and development assistance to
the Afghani people.

In response to Security Council resolutions in
2001, New Zealand was one of the first countries to
send military forces to Afghanistan as part of the
international campaign against terrorism and is one of
the largest per-capita contributors. The New Zealand
contribution represented an important part of our
commitment in support of international efforts for
global security.

Over the last four years, hundreds of our defence
force personnel have served in Afghanistan at a cost of
around $130 million. We believe that capable and
effective Afghan army and police forces are key to
ensuring Afghanistan's long-term stability. To that end,
New Zealand contributes to army and police training
initiatives and to developing facilities in Bamyan
province for effective policing.

In that context, New Zealand would like to
applaud the contribution that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
Member States have made in assisting in the
restoration of peace and stability in Afghanistan. The
job is not yet complete, and New Zealand looks
forward to resolutions to extend the UNAMA mandate
later this month. It is important that the UNAMA
mandate complement the Afghanistan Compact already
agreed at the London Conference.

New Zealand remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan in its progress towards political and
economic stability. We have increased our development
assistance by $15 million over the past three years. The
New Zealand contribution is targeted at projects or
programmes carried out by non-governmental
organizations and by United Nations agencies, with a
focus on sustainable rural livelihoods, governance,
human rights and maternal and child health.

New Zealand continues to support the work of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
Human rights, including the rights of women, remain a
principal area of concern for New Zealand. In that
regard, we commend the increased level of
participation by women in the September election as a
significant step forward and encourage further
initiatives to consolidate their participation in
Afghanistan's political life.

Let me close by reiterating our admiration for the
distance that Afghanistan as a nation has travelled in
such a short time. But significant challenges still
remain, and the role of the international community in
supporting the efforts of the Afghan Government and
people to overcome those challenges remains crucial.

Alongside others here today, New Zealand
reaffirms its commitment to supporting the
development and security needs of Afghanistan and to
working with the Afghani people to create a safe,
secure and more prosperous country.

