Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): In the past
few days, we have witnessed horror and barbarous acts
directed against the Palestinian people who have been
besieged by Israel in Gaza. Those actions can be seen
only as part of the continuous Israeli aggression that
kills innocent people and commits atrocities, such as
the massacre in Shujaiya, where most of the victims
were children. We condemn all of the acts of aggression
committed by Israel, which violate international
humanitarian law and human rights.

Israeli aggression against Gaza is not a way of
defending Israel against the Palestinian people. How
can one kill hundreds of women, the elderly and children
in order to defend a population? Security cannot be
achieved through military might or by targeting innocent
civilians, as Israel is doing today. Such aggression will
push everyone towards confrontation by all means and
destroy any hope of peace in the region. Such actions
will not lead to the security to which the people aspire.

Those who consider that the assault against Gaza
is justified by the killing of the three Israeli youths are
wrong. The Israeli authorities should have conducted
an investigation to find the culprits, given that the
crime took place in territory under the control of Israel,
which, as the occupying authority, must, according to
international law, be held responsible for the crimes
committed against unarmed Palestinians. What has
been taking place in Gaza is collective punishment and
State terrorism that requires a clear response by the
Security Council, given that the number of victims and
the dead continues to grow after the land invasion and
the air and sea assault. What is taking place in Gaza
is not in response to terrorism, and the people of Gaza
are not terrorists. They are a people who are strong and
who seek to regain the rights that have been stripped
from them over the past decades.

For some time now, the international community
has sought to broker peace between the Palestinians
and the Israelis. Palestinian unity was considered a
propitious environment for peace. However, the current
Israeli actions are a real impediment to that peace. With
regard to the daily tragedy for the people of Gaza and
the siege against over 1.5 million Palestinians, there
has been a violation of the November 2012 agreement
between the Israeli and Gazan authorities. There also
has been a violation of the agreements concerning the
exchange of prisoners. Israel is responsible for all those
violations.

Qatar spares no effort to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace, and we will continue to
support our brethren, the Palestinian people. We are
committed to stopping the violence. We also commend
international efforts to reach a humanitarian truce and
ceasefire. We have encouraged negotiations, including
those in Cairo. We urge the international community
to reach a just and lasting agreement, a ceasefire and
respect for international law and human rights, thereby
guaranteeing the security of the Palestinian people.

The Security Council has a special responsibility
to prevent any attempt to endanger the security of the
Palestinian people. It needs to demand that Israel put an
end to the assault so that humanitarian assistance can
reach Gaza and so that a solution can be found.

With regard to Syria, the Syrian authorities have
continued to attack their own people by targeting
civilians. The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/427)
clearly points to the use of bombs against civilians,
sieges, the infliction of famine on civilians and the
refusal to allow access to humanitarian and medical
assistance. The situation in Syria has reached such a
state as a result of the paralysis of the international
community in regard to meeting the needs of the
population.

The Security Council's adoption of resolution 2165
(2014) clearly points to the international community's
desire to promote the well-being of the Syrian people
and to implement resolution 2139 (2014) so as to put
a halt to the crisis, which will only deteriorate until a
solution is found that will guarantee the rights of the
Syrian people and condemn crimes against humanity.

We congratulate Mr. de Mistura and the Deputy
Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Ramzy, on their
appointments. We hope that that will make it possible
to reach a settlement of the crisis.

