Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would to join
other speakers in welcoming you, Sir, to the Security
Council today. We thank you for presiding over this
important debate and for your important remarks. We
also appreciate your commitment and that of your
country to the cause of intercultural dialogue for peace
and security. We are also grateful to the Secretary-
General for his participation and his statement.

In an increasingly interconnected world, the need
for nations to promote peace and prosperity through
dialogue, understanding and tolerance has become ever
more important. In order to help prevent conflict, we
must do everything we can to improve understanding
among different cultures and religions, both at the
global level and within our respective countries and
regions. Dialogue aimed at enhancing mutual
understanding must involve respect for different values
and beliefs. At the same time, dialogue must be based
on the full respect for all universally accepted human
rights and fundamental freedoms and on the principle
of the rule oflaw.

Important work has been done by various United
Nations bodies to underline the importance of and
enhance intercultural dialogue. We also wish to
acknowledge the initiatives taken by the Secretary-
General and by individual Member States. The United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations, initiated by Turkey
and Spain, has become a significant global forum for
intercultural exchange and the enhancement of mutual
understanding. Austria has been an active member of
the Alliance from its very inception in 2005 and will be
represented by Foreign Minister Spindelegger in the
upcoming third annual Forum in Rio de Janeiro. We
look forward to hosting the fifth annual Forum,
scheduled for 2012 in Vienna.

Austria has a long tradition of dialogue initiatives
between cultures and religions. Our activities focus on
areas Where we believe that we can find common
ground, such as the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. We also attach great importance
to the promotion of social, cultural and religious
pluralism and successful management of diversity.
Fostering equal rights and opportunities for women and
promoting their role and leadership in interreligious
and intercultural dialogue are among the priority
objectives of Austria's engagement in this field. In this
context, in 2008 Austria and Lebanon successfully
initiated a joint project entitled "The Role of Women in
Dialogue: Empowerment and Consolidation".

Dialogue with Muslim communities and Islam
has rightly attracted attention in recent years, in
particular in Europe. I have to say that my country has
specific experience in this area. In 2012, Austria will
celebrate the centennial of legal recognition of Islam in
our country, the first decision of this kind to be taken
historically in Western Europe and a step that is of
course linked to the historical experience we share with
our neighbours at the Council table, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Just a few days ago, the Third
Conference for European Imams and Religious
Advisers took place in Vienna, with the support of the
Austrian Government. Later this year, we will host the
first Arab-European Young Leaders Forum, which aims
at encouraging emerging leaders from Europe,
including Turkey, and the Arab world to develop
partnerships for better understanding and enhanced
cooperation.

Together with Indonesia and Singapore, we have
started a series of bilateral dialogue programmes.
Based on the first diplomatic staff exchange in the field
of intercultural dialogue with Indonesia, Austria will
continue such exchange activities with other countries
in cooperation with the League of Arab States. We
would be happy to see other countries join this
initiative.

In your remarks, Sir, you touched upon the
conflict in the Middle East, which is clearly one of the
areas where a meaningful dialogue between both sides
is essential and indispensable in the search for common
understanding. To that end, dialogue efforts should be
concentrated on concrete goals and objectives in order
to contribute to building trust and to generate real
added value. We obviously also share the View that
Jerusalem, with its unique heritage and tradition, can
and should play a key role as a place of dialogue and
encounter among cultures and civilizations.

We believe that the Security Council can make
important contributions to promoting dialogue among
cultures and civilizations with a view, in particular, to
enhancing international peace and security in relation
to relevant situations on its agenda. The Council could
more actively encourage steps towards meaningful
dialogue to help prevent and manage conflict and to
build sustainable peace, both in international and intra-
State conflicts, where appropriate.

Effective dialogue will normally result in
compromise solutions that balance the interests of
various actors. That being said, the Council needs to
insist at the same time that the principles of the rule of
law, the needs of transitional justice, human rights and
fundamental freedoms be respected. Intercultural
dialogue as a means of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding can be truly effective
only if all sectors of the societies concerned are
included.

The Council should therefore stress that women's
contributions need to be integrated into dialogue
efforts, pointing to the vital role women can play in
re-establishing post-conflict societies, fostering
tolerance and building sustainable peace.

When considering the promotion of intercultural
dialogue as a means of conflict prevention and
mediation, conflict resolution or peacebuilding, the
Council could also intensify cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, which in many
instances have the advantage of being well acquainted
with local and regional dynamics.

In conclusion, I wish to thank you once again,
Sir, for this opportunity to reflect upon the issue of
intercultural dialogue for conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacebuilding, as well for the
important insights you have shared with us based on
your country's unique experience in this field.

