Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We regret
having had to abstain in the voting on draft resolution
S/2018/520, submitted by the United States. That
decision was reached after considering the method by
which the draft was immediately put to the vote without
prior negotiations. It was also reached after considering
its substance. The text does not reflect a balanced and
impartial view of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict within
the framework of internationally agreed parameters
of international law and of Council resolutions. The
text reflects but one of the many causes of the crisis in
the Gaza and does not provide a response or solution
to the tragedy afflicting Palestinian and Israeli
civilian populations.

That said, we share the concerns expressed in the
text, given the activities of Hamas and other armed
groups on the Gaza strip. We firmly condemned the
firing of rockets into Israeli territory on 29 May and
hope that the Security Council also condemns such
activity. More generally, France was ready to support
several paragraphs of the draft submitted by the United
States, starting with those that condemn the firing of
rockets from Gaza, which call on Hamas to refrain from
committing violent acts, in particular those targeting
civilians, and demand that it cease all activities that
harm civilian populations close to the separation barrier
between Israel and Gaza. I can also list other examples.
As we have already underscored with regard to other
draft texts, we believe that the Council's responsibility
is to provide a general response to the crisis in Gaza,
which is not reflected in the text we have before us.

Despite the discord I just mentioned with regard
to the overall imbalance of the amendments presented,
once again we stood ready to engage in constructive
discussions with a view to sharing our opinions and, if
possible, drafting one text on which we could vote. But,
as I explained earlier, because of the method by which
the text was put to the vote and its substance, we had no
other option but to abstain in the voting.

All in all, today's meeting is another missed
opportunity for the Council. It is regrettable, of course,
but the Council can count on France, as a friend of
Israelis and Palestinians, to never give up.

