I thank the Special Coordinator for his briefing and extend our thanks to him for his tireless work over the past five years as Special Coordinator, as well as our warm congratulations on his new position. Almost four years after the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), France regrets that the Security Council's call to reverse the negative trends on the ground has not been heeded and the two-State solution is more in danger than ever. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1234) is unequivocal: over the past four years Israel has advanced or approved 28,000 housing units in the West Bank and East Jerusalem and has issued tenders for another 12,000 units. France regularly condemns Israeli decisions on settlement activity, which as they stand only increase the risk of the de facto annexation of Palestinian territories. In that regard, my country has condemned the recent announcements with respect to Givat Hamatos. Together with our European partners, we called upon Israel to reverse that decision and all other unilateral measures that undermine the viability of a future Palestinian State. I reiterate that urgent call today. We are also very concerned at the sharp increase in demolitions and the seizure of Palestinian structures, some of which have been funded by international donors, including France and the European Union. France urges Israel to effectively implement the freeze on demolitions in the context of the pandemic and, when necessary, to compensate those affected. France also reminds Israel of its legal obligations as an occupying Power under the Geneva Conventions. France will not recognize any changes to the 1967 lines apart from those agreed between the parties. It also recalls the obligation for all States, in their relevant dealings and exchanges, to distinguish between the territory of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. That distinction must be made in particular in bilateral agreements and in all trade - for example, through the differentiated labelling of products from the West Bank and East Jerusalem settlements. The continuation of settlement activities at an accelerated pace threatens the two-State solution more than ever, which is why it is more urgent than ever today to relaunch a political process. The parameters of the settlement for the Israeli- Palestinian conflict are well known and are constantly recalled in the Security Council: two States, living in peace and security, within secure and recognized borders based on the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital. Those parameters have been defined in order to bring about a fair and lasting peace in the region. They guarantee Israel's security and respond to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians, in accordance with international law. It is our responsibility to work together to make them a reality. To that end, we must first work to restore trust between the parties. Accordingly, France welcomes the resumption of cooperation between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, in particular through the resumption of the payment of tax clearances to the Palestinian Authority, following the Israeli authorities' commitment to respecting the adopted bilateral agreements. We call on the parties to go further, to work together to implement the recommendations of the Special Coordinator referred to in his socioeconomic report of 10 November. In particular, it is urgent that Israel ease the restrictions in the Gaza Strip in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Finally, there is an urgent need to strengthen the cohesion of Palestinian governance. That will require the organization of long-overdue elections. In that regard, we regret the absence to date of an agreement between the Palestinian factions. It is more necessary than ever that everyone act responsibly and demonstrate political courage. France will continue to work with its German, Egyptian and Jordanian partners to recreate a climate conducive to dialogue between the parties. It will spare no effort to promote the resumption of a credible political process, in consultation with all the stakeholders concerned, and will continue to give its full support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
