Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Permanent Representative of Australia, Ambassador
Quinlan, for his briefing and for his efforts to promote
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). China has always valued
the Committee's work and will continue to actively
participate in it, and hopes that the Committee will
continue to fulfil its mandate in a pragmatic, steady and
balanced manner.

China has consistently maintained that the relevant
Council resolutions should be fully and accurately
implemented. Sanctions are only a means and not the
end of resolutions, and do not constitute a criterion for
measuring the work of the Committee. In the current
circumstances, the work of the Committee and the
Panel of Experts should contribute to diplomatic efforts
to find a settlement to the issue.

We hope that the Committee will continue to
handle appropriately isolated cases of violation and that
it will strengthen the monitoring and instruction of the
Panel. The Panel should act in strict accordance with
the mandate of the resolution, fulfil its responsibilities
according to the principles of neutrality and objectivity,
and refrain from any measure that violates the spirit of
the resolution, thereby affecting the work of the Panel.

Since the beginning of the year, the Iranian nuclear
issue has enjoyed positive developments. In July, the
sixth round of negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran
on a comprehensive agreement made some progress on
certain agenda items thanks to intense consultations.
There were also differences. The parties agreed to
extend the negotiations to 24 November. China supports
that decision. It will help the parties to move towards
a comprehensive, long-term and appropriate settlement
of the issue.

It is of vital importance that a comprehensive
agreement be reached on time at the next round oftalks.
The six countries and Iran will hold a new round of
dialogue in New York this week. China hopes that the
parties concerned will intensify their diplomatic efforts
and that they will be flexible and pragmatic, stay the
course of consultations on an equal footing so as to
meet each other halfway, and work for a comprehensive
agreement that is equitable, balanced, mutually
beneficial and win-win. In the meantime, we hope that
the international Atomic Energy Agency and Iran will
continue to strengthen their cooperation.

The Iranian nuclear issue bears upon the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime, as well
as on peace and stability in the Middle East. In the new
circumstances, China stands ready to work with all
parties to actively promote negotiations so as to make
an additional contribution to finding a comprehensive
resolution of the issue.

