Mr. Miyet (spoke in French): I will endeavour to
respond to the various points and questions addressed
to me. Let me begin with the two questions posed by
the representative of France.

First of all, on the future of the judicial system
assessment programme, its means of financing and its
coordination with other programmes, let me say that
this particular programme has always been and will
continue to be part of a broader programme covering
the whole of the judicial and system and involving
various regional organizations - the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as well as
the Council of Europe, which bears some responsibility
in this regard. All of this falls under the coordination
and authority of the High Representative. Of course, it
will be for the High Representative himself, following
consultations with the parties and international
organizations, to determine how to pursue the
assessment programme that was undertaken initially by
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). The Special Representative and his team
have constantly cooperated with the High
Representative and continue to do so. Mr. Jacques
Klein recently travelled with the High Representative
to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg to discuss
matters relating to the follow-up of the implementation
of the programme from the standpoint of a transfer of
activities.

With respect to the means of financing, it is clear
that that responsibility will no longer be a United
Nations responsibility; it will no longer be an activity
financed from the UNMIBH peacekeeping budget. It
will be up to donor countries and the High
Representative to determine how this activity will be
funded in future. This no longer falls within the
responsibility and jurisdiction of the Secretariat, and I
am convinced that, in the framework of the follow-up
conferences to the Dayton Agreements, this matter,
upon the initiative of the High Representative, can be
discussed. For our part, we will provide the whole set
of documents that have been prepared and will make
the necessary proposals so that the staff who have
worked for UNMIBH can, depending on their own
personal wishes, be transferred on negotiated terms to
the High Representative's Office.

The second question raised was a more specific
one concerning the returns of refugees and internally
displaced persons. I do not have with me specific
figures, canton by canton, or community by
community. I will ask our Mission on the ground and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), to provide more
specific figures; but what is clear is that there are
returns of Serb families to areas with a majority of
Croat or Bosniac families, as well as returns of Bosniac
families to majority Serb or Croat areas. This is
actually not really the case for Croats, who so far are
not moving from one area to another. Despite the
agreement established between the Croatian
Government and that of Bosnia and Herzegovina, there
has been no Croat movement across the border in order
to return to Bosnia and Herzegovina. So, essentially,
for the time being, two of the communities are
benefiting from these movements, but not the other.

I would also note that this movement of displaced
persons has expanded since the time it became, in fact,
more spontaneous. There had been a lot more
resistance on the part of the receiving populations,
communities or municipalities when the international
community tried to organize, as the case dictated, a
rather strong-armed approach to the return of refugees.
But it seems now that families are returning
spontaneously to their original communities, and this is
taking place in a way that appears to be more
acceptable and more flexible. I think this is a lesson for
the international community and the Mission to learn.

(spoke in English)

There was also a serious question raised by
Jamaica on the question ofillegal occupancy. It is clear
that the return of refugees and how one tries to promote
it are key problems.

As has been said, on the more general matter, we
can record about 30 or 50 evictions - I would say,
forced evictions - a week in order to vacate
accommodations that are illegally occupied. But this is
done when the eviction is backed up by the capacity to
find new accommodations for the families that we want
to leave the apartment. So I would say the difficulty is
more closely linked to the availability of
accommodations and trying to move people as
humanely as possible.

As concerns more assertive measures in a very
particular area, we are right now, as I have said, trying
to promote the process of registering police officers. In
particular, we are trying to promote the redeployment
of police officers to the locations where they are from
in order to push the policemen themselves to try and
respect the law.

With regard to where we are now in the process
of registration, we are identifying police officers who
are "double occupants". They are given two choices:
either to leave the police force or to vacate their
apartments. In a way, I would say that, at least for these
institutions, we are trying to promote a situation in
which we create the conditions for the policemen
themselves to see to it that these laws are respected.

Through the International Police Task Force, we
are also following very carefully what the local police
forces are doing with regard to the issue of double
occupancy in order to determine whether decisions are
followed up once they are taken.

The OSCE is also employing a similar measure
during the registration process of persons wishing to be
candidates in elections. Persons who are double
occupants also have two choices: either to be struck
from the list of candidates or to vacate their illegally
occupied apartments.

So I would say that this is a way to try to have a
policy at all levels that is also respectful of the social
and human problems. But at least those persons who
have an official role or image to uphold try to respect
this rule.

The last question was raised by Ambassador
Eldon and pertained to what he called an exit strategy,
although I myself would not use that term. I would use
the term "implementation strategy". I would say that
this is more of a tentative date than it is a formal one,
and it is a way to try to see how we can achieve the
objectives and determine the desired end. This is what
was discussed at the retreat of Security Council
members, and we have tried to keep it in mind. So it is
a way to try to anticipate and determine what might be
the objectives and the benchmarks.

On this first point, it is clear that for us the
objectives and the benchmarks are linked to the
mandate of UNMIBH and its specific mandates relating
to the police. I will not go into detail, but I think this
would be linked to the status of registrations and to the
professionalization of the police to ensure that every
officer has been trained and equipped and that he has
behaved in the right manner, as well at to ensure in
particular that everyone has been checked in
connection with war crimes.
In terms of benchmarks, one also wants to have
the mechanisms necessary to ensure that a level of
minority recruitment is reached that is acceptable to the
international community. More generally, I would say
that one would also want to have in hand the elements
that will allow for a minimum level of transparency
and accountability mechanisms within local police
forces. We will also have all the sectoral plans and
know how the police forces in each entity and the
common policy institutions are functioning. So I think
all these elements will have to be in place. I am sure
that the Council will have the other elements when a
new report is presented at the end of December.

The second aspect that Ambassador Eldon
referred to has to do with the fact that the achievement
of the objectives of UNMIBH cannot be seen in
isolation from the efforts made in other areas. Here he
referred to cooperation with other organizations
involved in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In our minds it is
clear- and in this regard we always refer to our
colleagues in the Stabilization Force - that there is a
link between civilian and military activities. As the
Council knows, at some point we also wondered what
the exit strategy might be for the military component
and what the impact of that would be on the civilian
component. So what we do on our side must be closely
linked to, and we must have close cooperation and
discussions with, the military component.

As was referred to in the questions pertaining to
the judicial system, we will also have to interact with
civilian regional organizations that are dealing with
elements closely connected to what we do. This is
clearly the case with the Council of Europe, the
European Union and the OSCE. A benchmark here
might be similar to our achievement in Eastern
Slavonia, where we transferred ultimate responsibility
for the police to another organization. I would say that
the exemplary transfer of responsibility that took place
in that case might, at some point, also be something
that could be envisioned if necessary. I do not know
what the situation will be.

There is just one more point that will also have to
be taken into account. It is clear that what we will have
to do in Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be seen in
isolation from what happens in the region. It is clear to
everyone that the situation and developments in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have a real impact on
the pace of reform and on the constitution of the
Bosnian State. I would say that this may either
facilitate that process or create hurdles for it. So we
will also have to try to keep this point in mind. I am
sure that the members of the Council will follow those
developments with great interest.

In conclusion, I would just like to praise Mr.
Jacques Klein and his team for the excellent work that
they are doing in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would say
that the stamina and energy demonstrated by Jacques
Klein since he has been there is impressive. I would
also like to praise his creativity in what has been a
success story. Ibelieve it is a very good move that he is
now trying to put together a mixed contingent of
peacekeepers made up of policemen from Bosnia and
Herzegovina to go to East Timor. I think this is due to
his forceful nature. I was there in July to spend a day at
the Mission. It is true that when one goes to different

missions one can feel each one's atmosphere. 1 have There are no further speakers inscribed on my
found in Bosnia and Herzegovina the same kind of list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
cohesiveness, energy and enthusiasm thatlexperienced present stage of its consideration of the item on its
with him in Eastern Slavonia. agenda.

