Mr. Yuchengco (Philippines): It is my pleasure,
Mr. President, to address the Security Council at this
historic meeting under your able stewardship. I wish to
thank you for convening this important meeting.

I also wish to convey my Government's profound
felicitations to President Xanana Gusmao on his
overwhelming victory in the first presidential election
of East Timor. The unwavering support conferred by
the Timorese on his leadership is phenomenal and well
deserved. The peaceful and orderly conduct of the
elections speak well of those behind it, especially the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and its leadership, the International
Electoral Commission and, not least, the Timorese
people, to whom we pay tribute and admiration for
their determination to chart their own destiny.

In less than a month, the international community
will welcome a new nation. We have witnessed the
transformation of East Timor from conflict to an
independent State. In this regard, we commend
UNTAET, in particular the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. But,
above all, we must laud the Timorese for their great
efforts. However, much remains to be done. We
welcome the new Special Representative, Mr.
Kamalesh Sharma, who will continue the excellent
work of Mr. Vieira de Mello.

The Secretary-General's report presented a
graphic scenario of the state of play in East Timor and
of the direction in which it is sailing. The report
indicates that while the road to East Timor's birth was
smooth and that some fundamental structures are in
place, the challenges ahead are daunting, as with any
new State. If there is any common thread that can be
drawn, it is the fact that the international community
more than ever must stay on course in supporting East
Timor, at least for the next few years. The areas in
which the international community could offer
assistance are vast, and the Secretary-General has
identified them, notably the eight programme areas for
reconstruction, as outlined in paragraphs 43 to 57 of
his report.

My Government has continuously expressed its
support for a strong United Nations presence in East
Timor after its independence and has supported the
Secretary-General's proposals for a successor mission
made last January. Today we reaffirm that support,
specifically with respect to the structure and
programmes of UNTAET's successor mission, the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

The proposed gradual downsizing of the civilian,
police and military components in a span of two years
and the hand-over of their functions to the Timorese
fall squarely with the "ownership principle" and the
capacity-building we envisioned for East Timor.

In a bilateral context, my delegation is pleased to
inform the Council that a human resources
development package for the Timorese is being worked
out between my Government and other donor nations.
The Philippine Government is also participating in
regional cooperation projects to assist East Timor
within the framework of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations.

If we are to see the completion of what has been a
United Nations success story, the international
community must remain vigilant in demonstrating and
sustaining its support for East Timor, bearing in mind
that its security is fragile and that nation-building is a
complex process.

Finally, allow me to thank the Secretary-General
and his representatives for their continuing
commitment to peace and democracy in East Timor.

