Ms. Haq: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/522) on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering the period
from 21 January to 20 September 2010.

At the outset, I would like to pay special tribute
to Mr. Takahisa Kawakami, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Security
Sector Support and Rule of Law and my dear colleague
and friend, who passed away last March in Dili. He
made an important contribution in advancing the
causes of peace and stability in Timor-Leste.

As the report notes, the security and political
situation continues to be stable, allowing State
institutions the space to focus on the country's longer-
term challenges. This can be observed in the political
debate, which has generally moved beyond backward-
looking discussions on how to move past the events of
2006, to forward-looking discussions on how to build
on the gains made and ensure the future prosperity and
stability of Timor-Leste. This trend, thus far, has not
been much affected by the resignation of Deputy Prime
Minister Mario Carrascalao or the indictments recently
prepared against two members of the Cabinet.

Many plans, strategies and institutions have been
developed with a longer-term focus in mind. These
include the Anti-Corruption Commission, the Justice
Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste, the package of
national security laws and the draft Strategic
Development Plan. These are critical initial steps on
the road ahead. However, their implementation and
sustaining momentum in efforts to tackle systemic,
institutional and political fragilities are the challenges
currently faced by Timor-Leste.
10-59199
I am pleased to note that the national leaders of
Timor-Leste continue efforts to ensure inclusive
consultation and dialogue on these long-term efforts. In
that regard, I would highlight the retreat involving
seven national leaders organized by the Catholic
Church on 21 and 22 August to discuss current
challenges facing the country, including sustainable
development, and to nurture and support a new
generation of future leaders. I understand that this
initiative will continue, and I encourage participants to
continue their mutual engagement in this and other
national forums. Future such initiatives will have
increasing opportunities for women and younger
leaders to participate.

Similarly, the Prime Minister has reached out to
the entire population on the draft Strategic
Development Plan, conducting a series of visits over
many months to each of the country's 65 subdistricts.
Given the Plan's long-term nature, it is important that
it reflect the aspirations of all the people in Timor-
Leste. I look forward to the Government's continued
engagement with all relevant actors on the Plan.

I also congratulate the Governments of Indonesia
and Timor-Leste for reaching an agreement on border-
crossing authorization cards. The presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Marty
Natalegawa, at the inauguration ceremony indicated
the existing goodwill between the two countries.

The National Police Force of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) and UNMIT police deserve much of the credit
for the current security and stability of the country.
Good cooperation with the international security forces
from Australia and New Zealand continues. I am
pleased to note that there has been no significant
change in the security situation in those districts where
the PNTL has resumed primary policing
responsibilities. I would like to highlight the fact that
Liquica, where the PNTL resumed primary policing
responsibilities on 7 September, is led by the first
woman PNTL district commander. This, I hope, signals
increasing opportunities for women to advance within
the PNTL.

Since the closing date of the report, the PNTL
resumed primary policing responsibilities in Aileu
district on 21 September, Manufahi district on
27 September, and in the Interpol Office, the
Immigration Department and the Border Patrol Unit on
28 September. Resumption is pending in only three
10-59199
districts and six units, with Dili remaining perhaps the
most challenging area, and I will speak on that in a
moment.

With the sustained momentum of the jointly
owned resumption process, the Government and
UNMIT are working in close cooperation on strategies
to guide the post-resumption challenges of continued
PNTL capacity-building and institutional
strengthening. UNMIT police created five new position
profiles, tailored to reflect a growing focus on their
role as mentors and trainers. I encourage police-
contributing countries to provide officers who meet
these new profiles and can effectively transfer skills to
their PNTL counterparts. Applications for 19 civilian
posts to work with the PNTL as mentors and trainers
are also currently being assessed.

Meanwhile, capacity-building continues under
the coordination of the PNTL Police Training Centre in
areas such as equipment maintenance, vehicle fleet
management, and basic and specialized police training.
The Government has stated that the 2011 State budget,
due to be presented to Parliament by 15 November,
will include significant allocations to address
outstanding logistical needs of the PNTL, including
additional vehicles, communications equipment and
generators.

One concern arising from the resumption process
is that the number of uncertified PNTL officers
remains high, at 202, and many have been transferred
to Dili district. We have urged the Government to
process these cases in order to conclude the
certification process. The Government has informed
UNMIT that it has created a mechanism within the
Secretariat of State for Security, which has assumed the
functions of the Evaluation Panel, and that this new
mechanism would complete sorting out all the
outstanding certification cases into two categories of
discipline and criminal tracks by the end of the year.
So far, this mechanism has yet to take any action on
non-certified officers. This slow action with regard to
uncertified PNTL officers is detrimental to the overall
integrity of the police service over the long term and
requires expeditious remedy.

Meanwhile, overall action plans have been
developed to prepare Dili district for resumption. Close
collaboration between the PNTL and its UNMIT police
colleagues on their implementation will help the
district meet the mutually agreed criteria for
3
resumption before the next assessment of the joint
technical team. This next assessment could take place
before the end of the year, depending on the district's
readiness.

During this reporting period, the Government
clarified that municipal elections would not take place
until after national elections, currently projected to
take place by mid-2012. Those national elections will
be the first significant test of the PNTL's ability to
provide security around a large and multifaceted event.
Bearing that in mind, it is advisable to maintain a
robust presence of UNMIT police and UNMIT formed
police units of about 800 and 490 respectively, through
the crucial period of national elections. In the
meantime, UNMIT police will focus on the capacity-
development of the PNTL specialized units that will
eventually fully assume the role of UNMIT formed
police units. This includes the prioritization of training
for new officers, whose recruitment is projected to
address personnel shortages in units such as Border
Patrol and Close Protection. Emphasis will also be
placed on basic and advanced training for the Special
Operations Company and the newly established
Weapons and Explosives Unit. Improvement of their
capacities will increase the PNTL's ability to maintain
public security after the withdrawal of UNMIT.

There has been steady progress in strengthening
the justice sector. One sign of this is that the transition
of international legal actors from line functions to
advisory roles is gaining pace, with the number of
national actors in the sector now increased to 49,
including 18 women. A case management system for
the Office of the Prosecutor-General is expected to go
live by the end of this month, and the downward trend
ofpending cases in the Office continues.

The Justice Sector Strategic Plan for Timor-Leste
provides an instrument to guide and coordinate the
work of justice sector institutions. The challenge lies in
ensuring that the Strategic Plan's implementation is
effective and contributes to public confidence in the
justice sector. Similarly, while the adoption of the law
against domestic violence was a major milestone, the
United Nations system is supporting efforts to ensure,
in a coordinated manner, that the public, in particular
rural populations, understands the legislation and that
State institutions increase their capacity to implement
it.
Public confidence in the State's willingness to
support the rule of law and human rights can be
adversely affected if the public perceives that
individuals involved in high-profile cases are given
favoured treatment. I expressed this concern to the
President with regard to his decision to commute the
sentences of those convicted for involvement in the
11 February 2008 attacks against him and the Prime
Minister, and of the three soldiers of the Falintil-Forcas
de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) convicted of
homicide and attempted homicide in the shooting
deaths of eight PNTL officers in 2006. The President
acted within his constitutional prerogatives and
consulted widely on this decision.

However, I hope that future such decisions will
be guided by the need to bolster the public's
confidence in a system that ensures accountability for
criminal acts. Also, I am troubled that, as of
15 October, the three F-FDTL soldiers appeared to
have resumed work, although I am encouraged by the
President's assurance in a meeting on 18 October with
my Deputy, Mr. Reske-Nielsen, that he had asked the
Chief of the Defence Forces to take action on this
matter.

There have been a number of positive
developments related to gender mainstreaming during
the reporting period. Most notably, on 28 June, Maria
Helena Pires - who has been playing an important
role in women's empowerment in Timor-Leste - was
elected as one of 23 experts to serve on the United
Nations Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women.

On 21 September, the plenary of Parliament
began consideration of the draft laws on reparations
and on the institution to follow up on the work of the
Commission of Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
and the Truth and Friendship Commission. Parliament
engaged in a consultation process that incorporated a
range of actors, including other State institutions, civil
society, religious leaders and victims' organizations.

Unfortunately, on 29 September Parliament
postponed the debate, and I hope that all parliamentary
benches will come to the consensus necessary to
expedite further consideration of the bills. These drafts
are important because of their substance and because of
the process that guided their development. Parliament
made efforts to ensure that the wide range of views was
taken into account, holding public hearings with
groups including other State institutions, religious
faiths, victims' organizations, human rights

organizations, community representatives and other
civil society organizations.

On 20 September, in a speech made at the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) review
summit (see A/65/PV.4), President Jose' Ramos-Horta
highlighted some of the gains Timor-Leste had made
towards the MDGs and spoke of the need to fast-track
achievement towards the MDGs. These gains have
been underpinned by macroeconomic stability and high
growth rates. Hopefully, the Strategic Development
Plan will be an instrument to further promote human
development and pro-poor growth, as well as to
minimize inequalities between urban and rural areas.

In our discussions with Timorese authorities, we
continue to emphasize the need to address the issue of
high youth unemployment and the need for their
absorption, initially by the public sector. The President
has taken up issues of sustainable development in the
international sphere, including his 16 February
proposal with the Government of Maldives for climate-
change initiatives that will contribute to sustainable
development and poverty eradication in Asia.

On 17 September, I held a meeting with President
Ramos-Horta and the Government at which we agreed
to the establishment of a joint mechanism that will
guide UNMIT's transition planning. Its first quarterly
meeting will be held in late November. This
mechanism is intended to ensure that the transition
process is consistent with Government strategies, such
as the Strategic Development Plan, and that there is a
smooth transfer of UNMIT functions to State
institutions, United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, other international partners and civil
society. I understand that Prime Minister Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmao will brief the Security Council at its
next meeting on Timor-Leste in February 2011. That is
a strong indication of his Government's commitment to
working together on planning the future activities
related to the transition of UNMIT.

I want to emphasize that transition is a
reconfiguration of the Mission's activities within its
mandated areas to ensure that, when UNMIT does
withdraw - and it will - it has done everything
possible to ensure the future success of State
institutions. This will include a growing emphasis on
capacity-building, not only in policing but in all areas

of UNMIT's mandate. Capacity-building by our
partners will help facilitate the transfer of UNMIT
functions to State institutions and civil society.
Capacity-building for UNMIT's national staff will help
prepare them to contribute to the future of Timor-Leste.
UNMIT is already implementing capacity-building
strategies for national staff with this goal in mind.

Another issue to be addressed by the high-level
mechanism is the possible transfer of UNMIT assets to
State institutions. If that does take place, it will require
coordinated planning in order to ensure that
appropriate systems and budgets are in place for the
continued maintenance of assets. The mechanism will
also examine ways to mitigate any possible negative
economic impact of UNMIT's withdrawal.

Timor-Leste is entering a crucial period that will
help determine whether it has overcome, in a
sustainable manner, the political and institutional
weaknesses that contributed to the events of 2006.
Given the progress to date and the steadfastness
demonstrated by the national leaders of Timor-Leste, in
particular the President and Prime Minister, I believe
that work is under way that will contribute to Timor-
Leste's stability. In that regard, the responsible stance
of the opposition is also noteworthy. UNMIT's
transition plan through 2012 will be an essential part of
this.

I wish to thank the Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Finn Reske-
Nielsen and Shigeru Mochida, and all of the personnel
of UNMIT and the United Nations country team, who
have made such important contributions to Timor-
Leste's progress. I also wish to thank the international
security forces for their continued support to UNMIT,
including with respect to the maintenance of a stable
security situation in Timor-Leste. Of course, none of
this progress would have been possible without the
continued determination of the people of Timor-Leste.

