Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. We also welcome Prime
Minister Thaci and Prime Minister Dacie back to
the Council, and thank them for their statements. I
commend the Prime Ministers for their dedication to the
dialogue process and their resolve to address, quickly
and constructively, matters of contention as they arise.
Their leadership has shown the inherent value of direct
communication as a way to reduce tensions and increase
cooperation among States.
Let me extend the deepest condolences of the United
States to the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the family of the customs officer
who was killed in northern Kosovo on 19 September.
EULEX plays an invaluable role in Kosovo, and the
officer paid the ultimate price for the prospect of peace.

I would like today to address the recent elections,
the continuing implementation of the agreement on
normalization of relations, and progress made on
European Union (EU) integration.

First, the United States congratulates Kosovo,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and all of the individuals and organizations
that contributed to the success of the 3 November
municipal elections, and applauds Kosovo and Serbia
for their efforts to encourage voter participation. The
elections were orderly, transparent and credible in
most areas, and an important step in facilitating the
participation of all communities in Kosovo's political
and administrative infrastructure. We are heartened to
see that voters felt free to report sporadic irregularities
to Kosovo's authorities, reflecting both their respect for
Kosovo's institutions and a genuine commitment to the
democratic process.

All people in Kosovo should be able to exercise
their right to vote for their representatives without fear
and intimidation. We therefore condemn the incidents
of violence at several polling stations in northern
Kosovo. We must not let the actions of a few dampen the
progress Kosovo has made on the path to democracy. In
that light, we were encouraged by the turnout in orderly
voting in northern Mitrovica on 17 November. Those
elections have demonstrated that Kosovo is capable
of conducting future elections that are consistent with
international standards and its European aspirations.
We now look forward to the peaceful conduct of the
run-off polls on 1 December.

Secondly, the United States supports the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
which is crucial for stability and reconciliation in
the region. We are pleased by the progress that both
countries have made in the EU-facilitated dialogue.
The municipal elections in Kosovo are just one albeit
highly vital element of the 19 April agreement. We
look to the Governments of Kosovo and Serbia to move
forward with the full implementation of all aspects of
the agreement and all previous agreements, including
on integrated border management.

We commend both Governments for concluding
additional agreements in recent weeks, particularly
with regard to telecommunications and energy. The
Prime Ministers and EU High Representative Ashton
deserve our praise and continued support for their
efforts. We also thank EULEX and NATO for their
support in implementing the dialogue agreements.

Finally, the United States views the elections and the
progress of the dialogue as positive steps on Kosovo's
and Serbia's respective paths towards EU membership.
We strongly support Serbia's commitment to joining the
European Union and, with the full implementation of
the 19 April agreement, look forward to the European
Council's vote on starting accession talks with Serbia.

We also welcome the 28 October start of
negotiations between the European Union and Kosovo
on a Stabilization and Association Agreement. That
milestone demonstrates the progress that Kosovo
has made both on internal reforms and towards
normalization of relations with Serbia. So does Kosovo's
growing number of recognitions, which now represent
a majority of States Members of the United Nations.

The United States stands ready to support
Kosovo's efforts to implement the reforms necessary to
achieve its Euro-Atlantic integration goals, including
strengthening the rule of law and the fight against
crime and corruption, the protection of minority rights
and the development of a strong market-based economy.

