Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The occupation by Israel of Palestinian, Syrian
and Lebanese territories, the displacement of peoples,
the confiscation ofland and settling strangers on it based
on the conviction of a takfiri Zionist belief constitute
terrorism beyond description. Worse than that, double
standards have become characteristic of some Member
States in the Security Council that claim to defend
human rights, international law and the principles set
out in the Charter of the United Nations. They call for
hysterical meetings almost daily, on matters based on
false intelligence information that they make up while
pretending to forget the clear fact that Israel has been
occupying Palestine, the Golan and parts of Lebanon
for more than five decades.

Those countries, in particular the United States
of America, have provided protection and immunity
from accountability for Israel's continued violations
of hundreds of resolutions calling on Israel to end its
occupation of Arab territories and to withdraw to the
4 June 1967 border. That encourages Israel to commit
the most heinous of crimes and terrorist acts, the most
recent of which was the killing of scores of people and
injuring thousands of Palestinian civilians who were
protesting peacefully during last weeks on the annual
Palestinian Land Day, stressing the right of Palestinian
refugees to return to their lands.

The Syrian Arab Republic has maintained its
principled position supporting the Palestinian people's
right to self-determination, to establish an independent
State on their entire national territory, with Jerusalem
as its capital, and to ensure the right of refugees to
return to their homes according to General Assembly
resolution 194 (III), of 1948.

My delegation would like to strongly condemn the
deliberate disregard by the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process of a main part of his
mandate. Once again, he did not touch on the situation
of the occupied Syrian Golan, or the continuing Israeli
practices and violations there, even though those
practices fall within the item under discussion today.
They are an integral part of his mandate as Special
Coordinator for the Peace Process. Deviating from
his mandate scores of times makes him incapable of
assuming the responsibilities he has been assigned
to handle.

Some countries have been attempting today to
impose subjects that are not under discussion, in order
to distract the Security Council from the practices of
the Israeli occupation. They have not said a single word
about putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
Arab territories and the occupied Syrian Golan. It is
as if the restoration of the Golan is not the right of the
Syrian people, and as if the Golan were not an occupied
Syrian territory. Why do those delegations not speak
about fighting terrorism, about human rights law
and International humanitarian law when it comes to
detaining Syrian people and putting them in Israeli jails
in an arbitrary manner? For example, Sidqi Al-Maqt,
the Mandela of Syria, was detained and imprisoned for
merely documenting Israel's cooperation in the Syrian
Golan with Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front gangs in the
disengagement area in Golan. Where is their rejection
of stealing Golan natural resources, including gas,
oil and water? Where is their rejection of the New
Jersey-based company Genie Energy? That company,
which is owned by a number of former United States
officials, is digging for oil in the occupied Syrian
Golan in violation of international law and the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Where is their condemnation of
the repeated aggression by Israel against my country,
Syria, in support of terrorist groups? The latest was on
9 April. Of course, none of that has been reported to the
Special Coordinator for the Peace Process.

We underscore that Syria has a sovereign right to
4 June 1967 border in the occupied Syrian Golan. It is
a non-negotiable right. Our occupied territories and
our usurped rights should be returned in full to us, the
rightful holders. Israeli settlers must leave our occupied
territory in Golan sooner or later. My country calls
on the Security Council to take immediate measures
against Israel, the occupying Power, to put an end to
its acts of aggressions and violations, and to put an
end to the occupation of Arab territories, including the
occupied Syrian Golan. It must withdraw to 4 June 1967
borders, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981), and the establishment of the
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital.

