Mr. Holkeri: This is my first report to the
Council since the brutal wave of violence in mid-
March. The violence was the most serious setback to
the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) of the
past five years and shook the Mission to its
foundations. It challenged the sustainability of the
international community's efforts to build a multi-
ethnic Kosovo where all citizens could live in peace
and security. UNMIK will do all it can to bring to
justice all those who provoked or engaged in the
violence. Some 270 arrests have been made so far. The
priority at this time is to target investigations at the
principal organizers as well as at cases of homicide and
arson.

Local prosecutors are handling more than 130
cases that are directly related to the riots. Some 50
cases of a more serious nature have been entrusted to
international prosecutors. We aim to resolve these
cases and to punish the perpetrators. To facilitate that,
UNMIK has requested 100 additional police
investigators, six international prosecutors and three
international judges. So far, 14 police investigators
have arrived in Kosovo, and we expect at least 20 more
shortly, for which we are most grateful. But we request
a more definite commitment from Member States to
enable us to move ahead with the investigations.

The arrest of key suspects in the March violence
triggered some protest demonstrations. However, they
were isolated and this time local politicians were quick
to urge veterans' and students' associations not to
participate and to refrain from violence.

The focus on investigations into the violence has
limited our capacity in other areas, including the fight
against corruption. Nevertheless, there has been some
progress in that area with the recent arrest of three
individuals.

There have been several other violent events
since the March violence. Investigations are
progressing well into the murder of two police
officials, one local and the other international, near
Podujevo on 23 March. All four suspected perpetrators
have been identified. One of the attackers was killed in
the encounter with the police. Another suspect has
since been arrested, and inquiries are ongoing to locate
the remaining two.

The Mission suffered yet another shock when, on
17 April, three United States correctional officers were
killed and 11 others - 10 United States officers and
one Austrian officer - were injured when a Jordanian
special police unit officer opened fire without any
provocation. The Jordanian police officer was killed
when the United States officers returned fire. His four
companions, also Jordanian officers, are being
investigated for their role in the crime. One of them
remains in detention.

The violence has forced us at UNMIK to take a
long, hard look at ourselves. Was our response
adequate? Did we do enough to prevent the violence?
The speed with which violence spread over Kosovo
overwhelmed the capacity of Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and UNMIK security forces to respond. UNMIK had
no means to augment its security forces; KFOR was
not reinforced until after the violence ended. Our
Mission has been working to review operational
procedures and coordination in responding to crises. To
that end, I have appointed a review board to examine
our response, and I will act on its recommendations.

In reaction to the March unrest, the Prime
Minister and other key political leaders, after pressure
from the international community, showed
responsibility by calling for a halt to the violence.
However, they were tardy in specifically condemning
the attacks on minorities and minority sites, including
religious and cultural sites.

Some politicians used the violence to renew calls
for independence. Some senior Government officials
and the local media jumped to conclusions about the
cause of the 16 March drowning of young Albanian
boys and thereby contributed to the trouble. Some went
so far as to justify the violence as a legitimate reaction
against Serb parallel structures and United Nations
"misgovernment". The unprofessional and provocative
reporting of the events by many of the local media
inflamed the situation.

The impact of the violent attacks on members of
the Kosovo Serb, Roma and Ashkali communities was
dramatic. Some 4,100 persons were displaced in just
two days. The violence has obviously had a very
adverse effect on the overall returns process. The
viability of returns in 2004 is dependent on a variety of
factors, including initiatives on the part of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and of
Kosovo society to build trust and enhance security.
Much will depend on the effectiveness and visibility of
the initiative led by the Provisional Institutions to
rebuild what has been destroyed as well as on outreach
by the Provisional Institutions to the minority
communities and on confidence-building and
reconciliation efforts.

Achieving progress on returns - including of the
newly displaced - and ensuring a truly secure
environment for returns will require a substantial
increase in the quality and quantity of protection
provided by KFOR and the police. In the immediate
future, KFOR in particular needs to play a much more
substantial role in providing a secure environment
regarding returns and minority communities than was
envisioned at the outset of this year.

The Kosovo Government's initiative to
reconstruct damaged houses is to be commended, and I
have welcomed it. But reconstruction must not be
allowed to become a half-hearted, superficial effort.
UNMIK will continue to work with the Provisional
Institutions to ensure that the concerns of community
members are fully addressed throughout the process.
Rebuilding the physical infrastructure is just the first
step; restoring the confidence of the affected
communities is even more important.

The current security environment in Kosovo is
not conducive to the forcible return of members of
minority communities to their homes in Kosovo. We
are urging countries where persons from minority
communities in Kosovo have been granted temporary
protection to extend such protection until such time as
their return in conditions of safety and dignity can be
guaranteed, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

The rights of all communities in Kosovo can be
ensured, above all by vigorously implementing the
standards for Kosovo. The standards remain a top
priority for UNMIK. The Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan sets out in detail what actions are
designed to meet the standards, who is responsible for
undertaking those actions and when the actions are
planned to take place.

The Provisional Institutions and UNMIK began
work together on the Implementation Plan the very day
we unveiled the "Standards for Kosovo" document last
December. We were putting the final touches on the
Plan when the violence erupted in March. Just days
later, on 31 March, Prime Minister Rexhepi and I
jointly launched the Plan. That was a demonstration of
our intention to overcome the legacy of the violence
and to set the policy course for the future.

The commitment of the Provisional Institutions
and of the people of Kosovo to the Plan's
implementation is crucial to its success in all areas of
the standards. The coming elections will be a test of
that commitment. I expect a politically mature election
campaign and the swift formation of a new
Government. It is imperative that all the political
parties maintain their full support for the standards
process and that the next Government - whatever its
composition - works hard to ensure maximum
progress on the standards.

The Implementation Plan is comprehensive and
details many policies. There is a great deal to do and
little time in which to do it. Progress will require hard
work on the part of all the institutions of Kosovo, at
both the central and the municipal levels. UNMIK is
determined to give all its support to the people and the
Government of Kosovo so that they can make the
greatest possible progress. Partnership between the
Provisional Institutions and UNMIK is the only way
for Kosovo to make progress.

The introduction of new and tough actions in the
Implementation Plan in the areas of returns and
communities as well as freedom of movement was
essential to reflect the new reality in Kosovo. I am
concerned, however, that the level of commitment
displayed so far in those areas by the Provisional
Institutions is insufficient. The deadline for the
formulation of revised policies on those areas in the
Plan following the violence has already been missed.
The Provisional Institutions need to do more. I know
that the Prime Minister shares my view, and I hope that
the necessary commitment will be forthcoming.

As Council members know, the Serb community
has chosen not to participate in the standards process. I
regret that, and I will continue my efforts to encourage
them to change their minds. Other non-Albanian
communities are participating, because they understand
that the standards process is all about the improvement
of conditions for their communities - indeed, for all
communities in Kosovo.

The door remains open for the Serb community to
participate. I encourage them also to re-engage in the
work of the Provisional Institutions and the other
institutions of Kosovo. I understand their doubts after
the terrible shock of the recent violence, but such
participation is the best way to ensure that their voice
is heard and to protect their interests.

As Council members are aware, one of the eight
standards is direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. Just days before the violence erupted,
UNMIK successfully launched two direct-dialogue
working groups, on energy and on missing persons.
Unfortunately, the outbreak of unrest has forced the
postponement of that process.

In the weeks since the violence, leaders in
Belgrade and Pristina have told me that, in the current
political situation, dialogue is on hold. However, as
one of the standards, it cannot be ignored or deferred
indefinitely. I will strive to ensure that direct dialogue
is resumed as soon as possible.

Strengthening local government is an important
component of the standards and is key for ensuring the
peaceful coexistence of all communities. Work in that
area has begun. For that work to succeed, the full and
constructive engagement of all communities, as well as
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, is
required. The objective is to put in place effective
Government structures at the local level without any
partitioning or cantonization of Kosovo, neither of
which is practical or sustainable.

We have taken note of the plan proposed by
Serbian Prime Minister Kostunica and endorsed by
Serbia's National Assembly. We share Belgrade's
concerns about the security and economic
sustainability of the Serb community in Kosovo.

But the key to effective and enduring reform of
local government is that any concept should be
developed, discussed and agreed by the parties within
Kosovo itself. Our guiding principle is that devolution
of powers to communities and local government reform
must be acceptable to all communities. That means that
the entire population should enjoy the benefits and
share in the responsibilities of local government
reform.

We are encouraged by the continuing support and
active engagement of the international community in
the implementation of the following policies:
standards, dialogue and local government reform. In
that regard, we welcome the recent engagement of the
Contact Group Plus.

Looking to the future, we intend to continue with
our task, under Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), to prepare the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government for self-government. This would mean, in
addition to building capacities, an eventual transfer of
further competences from UNMIK. I have asked all
pillars and offices of UNMIK to involve the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government as much as
possible in their work, including in the reserved areas.
Those measures are the right way forward if we are to
create truly responsible and effective government in
Kosovo. The status quo does not provide for such
change. But, of course, our efforts to build and increase
engagement with the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government will depend to a great extent on how
seriously those Institutions are committed to taking the
responsibility we offer them. They must, above all,
show real progress on standards implementation,
reconciliation and reform of local government.

As for UNMIK, it is right, too, that we should
consider whether its structures and organization are the
most effective for today's and tomorrow's
circumstances. UNMIK has always been a changing
mission, as the needs and challenges in Kosovo have
altered. For example, at the municipal level, our role is
already shifting from administration to monitoring and
advice. This is a natural consequence of our work to
prepare and build Kosovo's own institutions. At my
instruction, we have begun to consider our future
configuration, including the possible reorganization of
our structure. I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage the Council to consider this question, too;
we would welcome its views. Meanwhile, UNMIK will
forcefully continue its mission, as defined by Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Council's
instructions.

Privatization has been for some time a crucial
issue in Kosovo's economic life. It is no secret that this
process has been fraught with difficulties, both legally
and politically. I am glad to report to the Council today
that there has recently been progress in this area, with
agreement on operating procedures between UNMIK
and the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.

Before concluding, I want to say an important
word about Kosovo's political future. The Security
Council has endorsed the mechanism for a review of
Kosovo's readiness for consideration of its future
status. It is not for me to say what that decision should
be, though I will certainly give the Council my view
when the time comes. The decision will be for this
Council to make. But with mid-2005 just over a year
away, thought should be given now on how to handle
the difficult choices that lie ahead.
There is much work ahead for us in UNMIK and
for the people and the Government of Kosovo. The
continued support of the Security Council and of the
international community is for all of us both essential
and welcome.

