I would like to pay tribute, through Generals Gyllensporre, Tinaikar and O'Brien, to all military component Commanders, who are carrying out their missions in particularly demanding and often degraded conditions. Despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) epidemic, some actors are continuing their destabilizing actions. I commend the responsiveness of the Secretariat and of each peacekeeping operation for having been able to adapt so quickly and effectively to this situation and to pursue the implementation of their mandates to the maximum extent possible. The role of peacekeeping operations remains essential in such a context. We see this in the protection of civilians; indeed, both the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) play a key role in this regard. Both have maintained their activities, despite numerous cases of COVID-19 within the Mission for the former and significant restrictions of movement for the latter. France also condemns the violations of the status-of-forces agreement and welcomes the fact that things are now improving. I would ask General Gyllensporre, following the force generation conference, what new capabilities among those announced does he believe will make a difference on the ground? What does he still need? I would also ask General Tinaikar how the force is adapting to the upsurge in intercommunal violence. UNMISS also plays a key role in the fight against sexual violence, which can serve as an example for other peacekeeping operations. What lessons and good practices has he learned from the work of UNMISS on this issue? The importance of peacekeeping operations is also reflected in their political mandate. In Mali, the force is playing a leading role in supporting the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian army. That process would not be taking place without MINUSMA. How does the General foresee the continuation of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian army? The United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, for its part, plays an essential role in liaising between the parties on both sides of the ceasefire line. Despite the constraints imposed by COVID-19, it is important that it be able to resume and intensify its inspection activities on the Bravo side and that the various restrictions placed on it be lifted. In conclusion, I wish to praise the courage of the peacekeepers, who have managed to continue their missions, often working, within these three operations, in a very tense environment.
