Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today's debate, which offers us all an
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to ensuring the
protection of the security, rights and well-being of
children in armed conflicts. I also wish to extend my
appreciation to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, for
their remarks this morning.

The legacy of war and violence has had a
devastating impact on my country. Violence still takes
its toll on everyday life. It did so today in Kandahar. As
President Karzai stated after the loss of his brother,
Ahmed Wali Karzai, the head of Kandahar Provincial
Council, "This is the life of all Afghan people. I hope
the miseries that every Afghan family faces will one
day end."

Sadly, such miseries are ongoing and include
children. Children continue to bear the brunt of conflict
in Afghanistan. They are among the growing number of
civilian casualties, and their ability to live safe, healthy
and prosperous lives remains in jeopardy. There is no
war zone in Afghanistan; there are no front lines.
Violent attacks take place in our villages, markets and
public streets, and put Afghan children at risk as they
attempt to live normal lives. Forty-four per cent of all
child casualties are caused by improvised explosive
devices and suicide attacks, which are increasingly
intended for soft targets such as civilian roads, schools
and health clinics. Children, women and other
vulnerable groups are the prime victims of such
attacks.

The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
fulfilling its responsibility to protect the rights of all
children and to addressing violations of children's
rights. We have initiated a number of important steps,
including the launch of an inter-ministerial steering
committee mandated to develop and implement our
national action plan, which seeks to prevent the
recruitment and use of children in our national security
forces and to address all forms of violence against
children. Our efforts are geared towards meeting our
obligations in child protection.

We are working closely with the United Nations
country task force on monitoring and reporting and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to
protect children's rights to security, education and
health care. I take this opportunity to welcome the
Working Group's visit to Afghanistan, led by
Ambassador Wittig, during which important
discussions were held with relevant Government
entities to enhance progress in the lives of Afghan
children.

We all must address the disturbing rise in child
suicide bombers employed by extremist militant
groups. Recent reports of terrorist networks training
and selling children to militant groups for suicide
bombings reflect gross violations of children's rights in
all countries. The vulnerability of a child who knows
nothing outside of a war-torn existence is not up for
exploitation in war; a child's innocence is not fair
game as a fighting strategy; and most importantly, a
child's body is not a weapon of war either under the
standards of the Constitution of Afghanistan or under
international law. The use of these children in suicide
attacks is a heinous crime that must be addressed with
firm conviction.

By the same token, we believe it essential to
avoid equating the Afghan Government with the
terrorists when considering the challenges facing
Afghan children. Attacks against children and
violations of their fundamental rights are the work of
those who are continuing their campaign against peace
and stability in Afghanistan.

Violence against children through sexual,
physical and domestic abuse is an abomination and
against national law. Sexual violence, including
pederasty in its local form, which is widely
sensationalized in media reports, is a crime that incurs
serious punishments under the Afghan legal system.
Though such problems are not unique to Afghanistan,
we are taking all necessary steps to stop this illegal,
un-Islamic and immoral practice.

The widespread poverty afflicting the country is
also a threat to the safety and security of Afghanistan's
children. Over 7 million children are living under the
poverty line. Poverty plunges underage children into
the labour force both in Afghanistan's cities and in the
countryside. Their struggle to be breadwinners
deprives many children of opportunities to pursue an
education and to build a brighter future.

In the face of these challenges, we should not
lose sight of the progress made thus far. To date, more
than 7 million boys and girls are enrolled in schools,
investing in their futures. We have constructed more
than 4,000 schools across the country; we predict
having nine million children enrolled in schools by
2020; and in a country where practically no girls
received education just 10 years ago, over 40 per cent
of these new students will be girls. Additionally, the
great majority of Afghanistan's population has access
to basic health care, showing great improvement over
the past 10 years.

Nevertheless, we have yet to overcome our
challenges. We look forward to our continued
partnership with the international community to
improve security and ensure prosperity in the lives and
futures of Afghan children. Our international
partnerships will remain intact throughout the
transition as the Afghan Government begins to assume
its leadership role. Therefore, we are alone neither in
our successes, nor in our failures. We share
responsibility for the security of children in

Afghanistan, who need and deserve an environment
free of indiscriminate violence to pursue their full
potential.

