Mr. Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to commend the delegation of Japan for
having convened this open debate, whose intrinsic
importance was underscored by the presence this
morning of important officials. Who better than the
representatives of the countries that have experienced
such a crucial transitional phase and achieved positive
results to illustrate for us - through their experiences,
mistakes and successes 7 that each case is different and
to remind us that we cannot effectively apply a single
approach to differing situations?

Peacebuilding is a complex long- and medium-
term process that encompasses a broad range of tasks
and stakeholders that require coordination and
coherence. The United Nations is certainly just one of
the actors involved. In many cases, it is not the most
relevant one - at least when it comes to financial
contributions, which are a crucial element in such a
critical phase. Nevertheless, due to the unique
legitimacy derived from its universally representative
character, it is of course the United Nations that is
expected to play a central role in mobilizing and
coordinating support to countries emerging from
conflict.

Nevertheless, given that peacebuilding
encompasses a considerable range of thematic issues
and owing to the very structure of the Organization,
when it comes to making that concept a reality,
significant challenges arise within the United Nations
system in the areas of leadership, coordination and the
definition of responsibilities, which we need to
address. The establishment of a body specifically
mandated to take up this issue should have helped, in
large measure, to resolve this problem. However, in
spite of the substantial contribution made by the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) since its inception,
in particular in countries on its agenda, its place within
the Organization and the support resources at its
disposal are insufficient to maximize its potential.

In that regard, although there seems to be a
certain degree of consensus as to the need to strengthen
the PBC, we also have the impression that, in the
context of the difficult review process currently under
way, substantive differences exist as to its role and
structure. To that end, we could focus on making
timely and viable changes that strengthen the PBC and,
above all, try to increase its added value on the ground.
We have trust in the leadership of the Chair of the
Organizational Committee, as well as in the work of
the facilitators, to achieve a positive outcome to the
current review process.

Along with its legitimacy, the United Nations has
a comparative advantage in helping affected countries
to define comprehensive and integrated peacebuilding
strategies, which are crucial to ensuring sustainable
peace and development. In that regard, as we have said
on other occasions, there can hardly be sustainable
peace in countries emerging from armed conflict if the
causes of those conflicts are not addressed.

Security sector reform is another extremely
important thematic area in which the United Nations
can bring relevant added value. In this as in other
areas, it is essential to enjoy abundant and flexible
financial and human resources. In that connection, we
should keep especially in mind the comparative
advantage of civilian experts from developing
countries. That will require the expanded use of South-
South and triangular cooperation mechanisms. We
should also make maximal use of the presence of Blue
Helmets in carrying out peacebuilding tasks.

It is indisputable that there can be no
development without security. However, security alone
is not enough to sustainably consolidate stability and
peace. Any peacebuilding strategy should therefore
include elements that serve to promote social and
economic development.

Although when we talk about strategies we tend
to think about the medium and long terms, it is
essential that we keep in mind the immediate and
short-term dimensions in the aftermath of a conflict so
as to produce tangible results 7 such as the restoration
of basic services - at the onset of peace processes. In
doing so, in addition to appreciating the inherent
benefits of peace, the parties would see the desirability
of having launched such a process. That would also
serve to generate trust among the parties involved.

In conclusion, with regard to the guiding
principles of peacebuilding efforts, allow me to point
out that it can indeed seem nearly impossible to find
broad consensus in the formulation of an agreed
national strategy in politically and ethnically divided
societies that have just torn themselves apart. The
principle of national ownership can also appear to be
an empty concept in devastated countries with limited
institutional capacity. Nevertheless, it is the best way
to proceed not just because it is the most correct
politically, but because it avoids sowing the seeds of
discord and resurgent conflict. It is the way to promote
sustainable peace.

Therefore, above and beyond the existing
differences in each situation, when the international
community finds in a given country emerging from
conflict leadership that is clear, conciliatory and able to
achieve political stability and national reconciliation, it
should not squander the opportunity to decisively and
sustainably promote its efforts to consolidate peace and
to promote economic and social development. The
examples we have heard today speak to that. The
counter-weight would be a transparent and reciprocal
mechanism of accountability among all stakeholders
involved.
