Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to warmly thank the speakers
for their informative briefings and to warmly thank
Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik for their work of recent years.

On 24 April, the Russian President signed a decree
to facilitate the granting of Russian citizenship to
residents of certain areas of the Ukrainian oblasts of
Luhansk and Donetsk. We condemn that unilateral
measure, which not only is contrary to the spirit of the
Minsk agreements but may also exacerbate tensions
between the parties. We recall Belgium's View that
the Minsk agreements remain the only way to reach
a lasting political solution to this conflict. Therefore,
we expect all parties to refrain from unilateral action,
implement the agreements swiftly and fully, and honour
their commitments.

Belgium supports the efforts of the Trilateral
Contact Group, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Normandy format. We
call for the ceasefire to be respected and on Russia to
immediately stop fuelling the conflict by providing
financial and military support to armed groups and
to instead use its influence to encourage these groups
to fully comply with their commitments under the
Minsk agreements. We strongly encourage the parties
to the conflict to respect the mandate of the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine and to allow it safe and
unhindered access to all Ukrainian territory, including
along the Ukrainian-Russian border and in Crimea.

I reaffirm our unwavering commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. We do not recognize
the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia, which we
consider to be contrary to international law. We call on
the parties to overcome the differences between them
and to fully engage in the resumption of the dialogue
necessary to achieve ajust and lasting peace.

We continue to face many humanitarian challenges.
The civilian population on both sides of the line of
contact suffers from the presence of heavy weapons and
mines, which are contrary to the Minsk agreements. We
call for a complete withdrawal of those weapons and
the disengagement of troops from designated areas.
We urge all parties to allow full access, in accordance
with humanitarian principles. We are deeply concerned
about the targeting of crucial civilian infrastructure,
which is contrary to international humanitarian law.
Three and a half million people - as Ms. Mueller
further confirmed - need help and protection due to the
widespread presence of mines, increasing psychological
trauma and lack of access to basic services.

The human rights situation in eastern Ukraine
also continues to attract our attention. In that regard,
we support the work of the Human Rights Monitoring
Mission of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and call on the parties to allow safe
and unhindered access for international observers, in
particular the Commissioner for Human Rights of the
Council of Europe.

I should like to conclude by referring to the recent
presidential elections held in Ukraine. The elections
were a successful test of Ukrainian democracy, five
years after the Maidan revolution. The elections, which
were well organized and effective, went smoothly and
transparently. Fundamental freedoms were widely
respected. We congratulate the Ukrainian people
on their demonstration of democratic maturity and
encourage them to continue the process of reform
and the implementation of the European Union
Association Agreement.

