Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his presentation of the fourth
and final report of the year on the implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016).

We would mention that, among other things, the
resolution refers to the legal invalidity and flagrant
violation of international law of the establishment
of settlements by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories since 1967, including East Jerusalem. This
is the fourth time in 12 months that the delegation of
Bolivia has attended such an important meeting as this
on resolution 2234 (2016), which, on 23 December,
it will be one year since its adoption. We note that
in that time little or nothing has been achieved in
its implementation.

We reiterate our appeal that the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) be presented in written format
and prior to the Council's briefings thereon, with a
View to conducting a more thorough analysis of its
content and the statistics on the settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, such as those that were
presented today.

Contrary to expectations, we take note of the
Secretary-General's report (A/72/564) from 1 November
presented before the General Assembly entitled, "Israeli
settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, and the Occupied Syrian
Golan", which mentions that the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process reported that, during the first six months ofthe
year, plans have been advanced for approximately 5,000
housing units through the Israeli planning bodies in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We are concerned
about the forced evictions that several Palestinian
communities faced, during which their inhabitants
endured the demolition of their homes. We must point
out that those actions constitute a manifest violation of
human rights, including the rights to adequate housing,
water, sanitation, health and education.

My delegation wishes to refer to General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), adopted in 1947, as part III, in
reference to the special regime of the city of Jerusalem,
provides that the City of Jerusalem shall be established
as a corpus separatum under a special international
regime. Recent events, especially since 6 December,
when the Government of the United States of America
unilaterally recognized Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel, are in clear violation of the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The
decision has led only to an escalation of violence in the
region. We wish to recall that it was the Organization
that established the special international status for the
city of Jerusalem, under the administrative authority
of the United Nations. Similarly, it was the Security
Council that reiterated that all measures that altered the
geographical, demographic and historical character of
the city of Jerusalem are null and void and should have
no effect.

We express our firm commitment to all
international efforts that lead to a peaceful solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that regard,
we support initiatives such as the Quartet road map,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and
others that constitute guarantees for a just and lasting
peace so that both peoples can live within secure and
recognized borders.

Bolivia remains convinced that the two-State
solution continues to be the only long-term alternative
for a solution to the conflict - where at last there is
a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State
within the pre-1967 international borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital and in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly.

