Mr. Abdounasir (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me, on the occasion of the fourteenth United
Nations Police Week, to use this opportunity to speak
to the Security Council about the prime importance of
political solutions in our efforts to prevent and combat
organized crime.

Organized crime has become an international
scourge that threatens the stability of many countries
around the world, thereby undermining international
peace and security. The international community has
always mobilized its efforts to ease the suffering of
affected countries by deploying peacekeeping missions.
Through the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations has articulated its
efforts to assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in better combating organized crime and the militant
actions of armed groups. MONUSCO police have
developed strategies to prevent and combat organized
crime in order to provide support to the Congolese
national police and local populations in that process.

The role of national law enforcement institutions is
paramount in preventing and combating armed groups
and organized criminal groups. We must therefore
seek out relevant national and subregional political
will and ensure that it is supported by a very strong
regional intelligence network and an international
commitment to combating organized crime. Given
that criminal networks operate in complex ways and
are connected by cross-border links, an obligation to
bring perpetrators to justice would clearly strengthen
the authority of States to advance unity with regard to
achieving social progress. Given that good governance
is a collective responsibility, the rule of law remains
a prerequisite for the development of fragile States.
In order to overcome their instability, most countries
affected by organized crime have developed a strong
tendency to respond to it with military action when
it would be more appropriate for them to strengthen
their judicial systems by integrating into their law
enforcement structures a more transparent and rigorous
criminal justice system.

If we are to combat organized crime effectively
and holistically, we must place political action at the
forefront of our efforts. The ultimate solution lies not
in a military-based approach, which has been quick to
reveal its limitations, but rather in promoting sustainable
political solutions, combating bad governance and
guaranteeing an operational and accessible criminal
justice system - notwithstanding the need to increase
transparency in the management of public affairs. I
remain strongly convinced that, if we strengthen the
operational capacities of the Congolese national police
and put forth a substantial plan to reform the judicial
and penal systems in that country, we will ensure good
governance in a context that is conducive to effectively
combating organized crime. In that connection, I
also welcome the fact that the Security Council has
consistently kept the issue of restoring State authority
through the strengthening of criminal justice systems
among the priority objectives of its various mandates.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Council for its efforts in promoting and consolidating
peace in fragile countries.

