Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I would like to commend
you, Minister Davutoglu, and the Turkish presidency
for convening this important debate on terrorism. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General, with whose wise
ideas we agree. I am also glad to see that there is a
broad commonality of Views on such an important
topic.

Terrorism is a scourge that haunts our time. There
are no excuses for terrorist acts, which inflict suffering
and fear indiscriminately. Brazil has always
condemned terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Our Constitution enshrines the
repudiation of terrorism as a fundamental principle of
our international relations. Brazil is a party to all
relevant international conventions and protocols
against terrorism.

As a serious global threat, terrorism must be
addressed with a holistic approach and full
consideration of the complexity of its root causes.
Violence and intolerance take root in an environment
of long-standing social, political, economic and
cultural injustices, to which reference has also been
made today. Social and economic development,
accompanied by an atmosphere of respect for the other,
is the best antidote to terrorism.

In combating terrorism, Brazil has a strong
preference for truly multilateral agreements and
arrangements. It is important to reinforce the capacity
of the United Nations in this field. We fully support the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
appreciate the fact that the Strategy is inspired by a
comprehensive perspective.

We must guard against dangerous rhetoric and
postures that fuel xenophobia and prejudice. Tolerance
is key to avoiding violent polarization and extremism.
Initiatives such as the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations can have a role in this regard. Our draft
presidential statement appropriately refers to that.

At a 2003 conference on combating terrorism
held here in New York, President Lula stressed that the
terrorists' motivations cannot be countered only by
repression, important as repression may be. Diplomatic
initiatives based on international law are also essential.
Brazil emphasizes the urgent need to conclude the
negotiations of a United Nations comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, with special attention
given to the relationship between organized crime and
the financing of terrorism.

There is also growing concern that terrorists
might have access to weapons of mass destruction,
especially nuclear weapons. At the Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington DC. in April, President Lula
reaffirmed that, without prejudice to the indispensable
security measures that need to be taken, the most
effective way to reduce the risks of nuclear devices
falling into the wrong hands is the total and irreversible
elimination of all nuclear arsenals.

The Council has a unique role both in responding
to and in preventing terrorism. Our strongest
contribution to fighting terrorism would be to attain
just and sustainable solutions to long-standing agenda
items. Peacebuilding efforts can also help to avert the
spread of radicalism in countries already affected by
conflicts and social strife. Cooperation and capacity-
building in relation to security measures, as well as
broader information sharing, are very important.

I reiterate Brazil's full support of the initiatives
undertaken by the Security Council's committees to
facilitate technical assistance to countries that request
it. Brazil is ready to cooperate with other countries in
this regard. It is our common duty to prevent and
combat terrorism. Counter-terrorism strategies must be
predicated on the rule of law and the full protection of
the human rights of all involved.

The full realization of universal human rights,
including the right to development, must be an integral
part of all efforts to combat the terrorist threat. For all
these reasons, Brazil is fully committed to a
coordinated and multidimensional response to all the
challenges posed by terrorism. The United Nations
should be at the forefront of this endeavour.

