Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes you, Madame, to the Security Council today.
We would like especially to thank your country for its
initiative in organizing this very important debate on
the situation in Haiti. We salute your leadership in
focusing the attention of the international community
back on Haiti and in reminding us of the terrible
tragedy that befell that nation and the ongoing
challenges that still lie ahead on the road towards
reconstruction and recovery. The international
community should use this opportunity to reaffirm its
commitments and to redouble its efforts in support of
the Government and people of Haiti as they rebuild
their lives for the better.

My delegation wishes to extend a warm welcome
to President Preval and his delegation, and to thank
him for leading the Haitian people towards stability
during these trying times. We also welcome the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Haiti,
President Clinton, and thank them for their continued
inspiring leadership of the recovery efforts in Haiti. We
further welcome and thank all the high-level
participants in today's debate, especially from the
immediate region. This high-level participation is proof
of the international community's continued solidarity
with the people and the Government of Haiti during
this critical juncture in that nation's history.

In January, we met in this Council (see S/PV.6471) to commemorate the anniversary of the
earthquake that shook Haiti last year and caused so
much devastation. We believe that, with the continued
support of the international community, Haiti will be
able to overcome these challenges. We assure the
Council of South Africa's continued commitment to the
country's current and future reconstruction and
development efforts. South Africa will continue its
bilateral support to Haiti, including through such
mechanisms as the India-Brazil-South Africa trilateral
mechanism.

It is without doubt that the challenges facing
Haiti today are interrelated. Certainly, security and
institution-building in such areas as the rule of law,
democracy, justice and development are mutually
reinforcing and should be pursued simultaneously.
South Africa welcomes the signing of the
memorandum of understanding between the
Government and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in accordance with
resolution 1927 (2010), through which MINUSTAH
will provide temporary logistical assistance to build
capacity in Haitian rule of law institutions. This is a
good example of how the international community can
support Haiti's own efforts in building a strong State.

My delegation also wishes to express our
appreciation to MINUSTAH, under the leadership of
Edmond Mulet, for its efforts in stabilizing Haiti.

South Africa welcomes the fact that the second
round of presidential and legislative elections was held
under generally peaceful conditions. We also take note
of the announcement of the provisional results on
4April, and congratulate Michel Martelly on his
victory. As the results are still to be finalized on
16 April, we call on all parties to ensure that the
electoral process runs its full course and that the
democratic transition is completed within the
framework provided by the Constitution and electoral
law of Haiti.

It should be emphasized that the legal conclusion
of the electoral process is central to the legitimacy of
the new Government in Haiti. It is important that all
sides accept the outcome of the elections and work
together in the post-electoral phase in the formation of
the new Government. All parties must work together in
a spirit of reconciliation and inclusiveness, which are
essential to the stability of Haiti.

Without a concerted effort of the international
community to support Haiti in its recovery from the
various humanitarian disasters that affected it last year,
Haiti will not be able to achieve sustainable stability
and development, regardless of its efforts to build
strong institutions. My delegation remains deeply
concerned about the fact that very little of the aid
committed to the recovery effort has been delivered
this year. We therefore call on the international
community to fulfil its commitments and help rebuild
the lives of the people of Haiti.

In the light of the security situation in the camps
and the high rate of violence, especially sexual and
gender-based violence, we believe that the efforts of
the Haitian National Police, MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team should be reinforced to
ensure the protection of the most vulnerable.

In conclusion, South Africa remains convinced
that Haiti - the first black Republic in the world, from
which we drew inspiration during our own struggle for
freedom - has both the ability and the resilience to
recover from the calamity that befell it and to rebuild
itself. South Africa will do all it can to ensure that the
dream of a united and successful Haiti becomes a
reality.

