Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express the sincere gratitude of
myself and the delegation of Mali for the convening
of this important meeting, which is the culmination of
the tireless commendable efforts we have made in the
search for a lasting solution to the serious crisis that
Mali is currently experiencing. In that connection,
Morocco's presidency of the Security Council has
served to move forward the process of resolving
the crisis in Mali. That is reflected in the Council's
meeting on 5 December on the situation in the Sahel
(see S/PV.6879), during which the Council considered
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Mali (S/2012/894), as well as in the open debate held on
10 December (see S/PV.6882).

The Security Council has taken a historic step
today in unanimously adopting resolution 2085 (2012),
which, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations, authorizes the deployment of an international
force under African leadership to help Mali's military
and police forces to restore State sovereignty and
territorial integrity in the areas of Gao, Timbuktu
and Kidal, which are controlled by the terrorists and
extremists ofAl-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM),
the Mouvement pour l'unicite' et le jihad en Afrique de
l'Ouest (MUJAO) and affiliated groups. Mali welcomes
the adoption of this resolution, which reflects the
commitment of the international community to stand
by Mali in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime, which gravely imperil the region's
stability as well as international peace and security.

The Government of Mali commits itself to
cooperate fully with the Security Council and to fulfil
its obligations under this resolution. In that regard, I
would like to reiterate here our determination to pursue,
under the auspices of the Economic Community of West
African States mediator, the discussions that have been
initiated with Malian rebel groups that have decided to
break all ties with AQMI, MUJAO and their affiliated
terrorist and extremist groups, as well as to definitively
reject violence and the notion of secession. Needless
to say, political dialogue cannot begin outside the
framework of non-negotiable conditions set out by the
Government of Mali, which includes strict respect for
Mali's sovereignty and territorial integrity, the secular
nature of the State and the unity of the country.

Allow me to take this opportunity, on behalf of
the President of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Dioncounda Traore, and of the Government of
Mali, to thank the members of the Security Council for
their tireless efforts in adopting today's resolution, to
the great happiness of all of Mali's people - and in
particular our people under occupation and those who
have been displaced or become refugees. I would in
particular like to thank France, its people, President
and Government, who very early on understood that
the presence in northern Mali of heavily armed AQMI,
MUJAO and affiliated extremists and terrorists posed
an immediate threat to international peace and security.
France spared no effort in ensuring that the Security
Council assumed its responsibilities.

I cannot conclude without expressing the deep
gratitude of Mali's authorities to the Economic
Community of West African States, the African Union,
the European Union, the United Nations, our bilateral
and multilateral partners, our neigbouring countries
and all the States of the region for their solidarity and
support in the process of resolving the crisis in Mali.

