Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
thank Ambassador Gambari for his briefing. I would
also like to join others in welcoming the Foreign
Minister of Angola to the Council. In its work related
to the situation in Angola, the Council can benefit
tremendously from such direct contacts with the
Government and other positive forces in Angolan
society. We also welcome this opportunity to listen to
the views of non-member countries. I am therefore
grateful to you, Madam, for convening this open
debate.

We are concerned about the increased violence
and military activity in Angola. As a result, we are
seeing humanitarian degradation, an increased number
of internally displaced persons and a flow of refugees
into neighbouring countries. All concerned must do
everything possible to help those who suffer. I
understand that the Government is using the army and
its logistical capabilities to try to help bring
humanitarian aid into areas outside the reach of the
United Nations. These efforts must continue.
Furthermore, we would like to encourage the
Government to look closely for ways to increase its
efforts to reduce the suffering of the Angolan people.
In this connection, let me also stress the importance of
improving the safety situation for humanitarian
personnel.

The main responsibility for the lack of
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and for the
conflict in Angola rests with Jonas Savimbi's UNITA.
We strongly condemn the UNITA attacks, particularly
the gruesome attacks on civilians. UNITA must enter
into an immediate ceasefire and engage in a
constructive and forward-looking dialogue with the
Government. I share the view expressed in the
Secretary-General's latest report that the conflict in
Angola cannot be resolved by military means. The road
to peace and reconciliation goes through constructive
dialogue.

In this regard, I commend the Government for the
positive measures taken. Efforts aimed at seeking a
political solution to the conflict must continue. It is my
belief that, in this process, and in its efforts to
consolidate democracy and good governance, the
Government should closely cooperate and sustain a
dialogue with civil society. Interesting initiatives have
been taken by forces within civil society and the
churches. I was pleased to learn today about the
meeting between the President and the leader of the
Church. At some stage, it might be an idea for the
Council to meet with representatives of such groups. It
could be useful for us to learn more about their
activities and ideas and find out how the Council could
encourage their activities.

The human rights situation in Angola is cause for
concern. In this regard, we believe that the contribution
of the United Nations Office in Angola (UNOA) is
important in improving the situation. It is particularly
important that UNOA cooperate closely with the
Government of Angola. We commend the Government
for its open approach to this cooperation. We hope that
the Government will keep its focus on human rights
issues and maintain its responsible approach by seeking
to continue to identify and overcome existing
weaknesses.

Lastly, let me touch briefly upon the issue of
sanctions against UNITA. The sanctions are a very
important tool for the Council, enabling it to maintain
the pressure on Savimbi and UNITA. Such pressure is
needed. We see from the reports of the Monitoring
Mechanism that the sanctions do serve a purpose, by
limiting UNITA's ability to conduct war. The sanctions
should therefore be kept in place. All Member States
can do their part for the benefit of the situation in
Angola by implementing those sanctions strictly.
Judging from the reports of the Mechanism, there is
room for considerable improvement.

