The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui for their
insightful briefings.

Poland welcomes the signing of the agreement on
the establishment of a new civilian-led transitional
Government and transitional institutions between the
Forces for Freedom and Change and the Transitional
Military Council in the Sudan. We commend the people
of the Sudan for bringing about the peaceful transition.
We also welcome the appointment of the new Prime
Minister, which we see as an important step in creating
a civilian-led Government. We praise the international
community, in particular the African Union and
Ethiopia, for its mediation efforts.

It is of crucial importance that representatives
of Darfur participate in the process of transition at
the national level and that the Darfuri people benefit
from the new political reality. We hope that this new
political dynamic in the Sudan will also bring back
the momentum to the peace process in Darfur and
will prompt the Darfuri rebel groups to engage in
negotiations with the new Sudanese authorities.

When it comes to the situation in Darfur, we note
with regret that violations of human rights, including
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as violations
of international humanitarian law, continue to occur
across the region. We strongly condemn the targeting of
the civilian population - especially those who are most
vulnerable, such as women, children and internally
displaced persons - by security personnel and the
Rapid Support Forces, as well as militias. It is our
strong belief that the authorities should spare no effort
to hold the perpetrators accountable and do their utmost
to fight impunity in Darfur. In that context, I would
also like to reiterate our call upon the Government of
the Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur
to cooperate fully with, and provide any necessary
assistance to, the International Criminal Court and its
Prosecutor, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Poland will continue to closely follow the
developments in the Sudan and in Darfur, including
in the context of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) mandate
renewal scheduled for October. We are willing to
look into every proposal concerning United Nations
engagement in Darfur post-UNAMID. Bearing in mind
the persisting and numerous human rights violations in
Darfur, we believe that issues such as ensuring respect
for human rights and the protection of civilians should
be reflected in options for political engagement in
Darfur after UNAMID's withdrawal.

We continue to believe that, during the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and in order to
achieve lasting peace in Darfur, particular emphasis
needs to be put on socioeconomic conditions, including
the provision of health services and workplaces,
education, trade, basic economic infrastructure
and agriculture, as well as on establishing effective
rule of law across Darfur. Without the support of
the international community and securing funding
for development in Darfur, we are putting the gains
achieved with great effort over the past decade at risk.

In conclusion, let me express our gratitude to all
UNAMID personnel, the United Nations country team
and the humanitarian actors who continue to work
tirelessly to help to achieve sustainable peace in Darfur.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

