Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting upon the request of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to discuss the incident in
which the Libyan vessel Al-Marwa, which was headed
for the port of Gaza, was prevented from delivering aid
by naval vessels of the State of Israel. My delegation
regrets that humanitarian aid destined for the suffering
people of Gaza was prevented from being delivered,
since we believe that the port of Gaza is an integral
part of Palestine.

The situation in the whole of the occupied
Palestinian territories can be described as a
humanitarian disaster in which innocent civilians
continue to suffer the consequences of the lack of
peace. At the centre of this problem is the fact that the
people of Gaza have been suffering under an illegal
blockade that has denied them humanitarian assistance
of any kind. The root cause of all these difficulties is
the illegal occupation by Israel of Palestine. Illegal
settlement activity in the occupied territories seeks to
change the facts on the ground and is a key obstacle to
the peace process.

We urge the Council to demand that Israel
immediately and completely end the blockade of Gaza,
freeze all settlement activity, including natural growth,
and dismantle outposts erected since 21 March 2001 in
order to not change the facts on the ground and
prejudice final status negotiations. Until such time as
peace is firmly established between Palestine and
Israel, the international community, and neighbouring
States in particular, have a moral responsibility to
assist the innocent victims.

Twelve months ago, at a meeting hosted by the
United States at Annapolis and attended by the
representatives of many countries from all over the
world, including South Africa, Palestine and Israel
agreed on a joint declaration expressing their
determination to end their conflict and to work towards
a peaceful settlement based on the existence of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security. They further agreed to make every effort
to conclude an agreement before the end of 2008.

We have reached a critical stage of the process,
with the deadline set in Annapolis drawing ever nearer.
Despite assurances that negotiations are continuing, the
situation on the ground has not improved significantly

since the start of the process. The time for the parties,
the international community and the Security Council
to act is now. The parties and the international
community cannot sit back and allow the situation on
the ground to continue to deteriorate, ending all hopes
for a negotiated two-State solution.

The security of Israel can be secured only once a
lasting and permanent solution to the Palestinian
question is found. The security concerns of the State of
Israel should not be used as a justification for denying
the victims of this conflict access to humanitarian
assistance. We call on the State of Israel to allow
unhindered access to the international community to
deliver the much-needed humanitarian support to
Palestinians through all the crossings into Palestine,
including the port of Gaza.

Finally, we would hope, as we have said many
times before, that the Council will find it possible to
pronounce itself on the humanitarian situation in
Palestine, particularly in Gaza. We cannot continue to
avoid confronting such an egregious situation.

