Ms. Rice (United States of America): I Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Interim Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. Fisher, for his
briefing, and Ambassador Gaspar of Haiti for joining
us today. We value his engagement and partnership.

Last October (see S/PV.6842), we gathered in
this Chamber with relative optimism about the great
strides being made by the Haitian people in rebuilding
their country, including the appointment of a new
Prime Minister, the increased roles for women, and
constitutional amendments to strengthen the rule of
law and democracy, to name but a few. Today, Acting
Special Representative Fisher has shared the Secretary-
General's observations that Haiti has missed an
opportunity to achieve meaningful progress over the
past six months. His candid findings remind us all of
the hard work that remains to be done.

As the Council noted in January, holding free, fair,
inclusive and credible local, municipal and senatorial
elections by the end of 2013 is critical. The absence of
such elections impedes stability and socioeconomic
development. The Haitian Parliament's designation of
its three representatives to the transitional permanent
electoral council last week is an important step forward,
and we hope that it will be followed swiftly with the
actions necessary to schedule overdue elections.
Progress on that front will reassure the international
community and the Haitian people of the Government's
commitment to democracy, transparency and good
governance. Attention can then turn in earnest to
creating jobs, fighting food insecurity and preparing
for the next natural disaster.

Another area of concern is security. Without
question, the capacity and sustainability of the
Haitian National Police (HNP) should be the single
highest priority for MINUSTAH. The ability to
transfer full security responsibility is a precondition
for further reductions in MINUSTAH forces and its
eventual withdrawal. We are encouraged by the robust
partnership between MINUSTAH and the HNP, and
support efforts on that critical priority.

Turning to reconstruction, we are encouraged by the
progress made since the 2010 earthquake. In particular
we note that the total number of displaced persons who
have sought shelter in camps has fallen to 357,000.
We expect MINUSTAH to continue working with the
Government of Haiti and international partners to find
durable solutions for the sheltering and protection of
those vulnerable individuals that remain in the camps.

With regard to efforts to eradicate cholera, we
commend the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment to the issue and support the appointment
of Mr. Paul Farmer as the Secretary-General's Special
Adviser for Community-based Medicine and Lessons
from Haiti.

The United States welcomes the Secretary-General's
conditions-based consolidation plan 2013-2016 (see S/2013/139, annex) and its focus on a core set of
mandated tasks to be executed in partnership with the
United Nations country team, international partners
and, most importantly, the Government of Haiti. The
plan is a living document that will evolve in response
to developments on the ground, as well adjustments to
the MINUSTAH mandate. We look forward to working
with Council members to refine the plan in the coming
months.

Finally, I would like to underscore our appreciation
and support for the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. Every day, those serving in MINUSTAH
are working side by side with the Haitian people and
Government to strengthen the country's institutions,
provide security, protect human rights and tackle
challenges, such as forced evictions and sexual and
gender-based violence. MINUSTAH carries a heavy
responsibility, and we are grateful for the Mission's
tireless work.

We nevertheless insist that any instance of sexual
exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel
is unacceptable. We expect sustained actions by
MINUSTAH's leadership to ensure that such abuses
will not be tolerated.

We cannot let setbacks cause us to lose sight of the
most important objective f to achieve a self-sustaining,
stable and secure nation in which all of its citizens have
democratic freedoms, the protection of human rights
and the assurance of food, shelter and basic services.
Serious problems persist, but Haiti is gradually moving
forward with the help of MINUSTAH, international
partners and the hard work and determination of the
Haitian people. The United States remains firmly
committed to helping Haiti build a brighter future and
reach its full potential.

