Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Over the past year,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has been instrumental in supporting
Afghanistan's election process. It and the wider United
Nations system will continue to play a key role as
Afghanistan proceeds on its journey of transformation.

The formation of the Afghan National Unity
Government through Afghanistan's first peaceful
democratic transfer of power was a historic
milestone - momentous for the Afghan people and
for the international community alike. Canada is
encouraged by the new Government's first few months.
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
have embraced cooperation and secured important
progress towards Afghanistan's future stability.

Continuing cooperation that delivers practical
outcomes will be the key to managing the challenges
ahead. Central to this, President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah must together ensure
effective implementation of vital reforms to reduce
poverty, strengthen the economy, improve governance,
eradicate corruption, protect human rights - especially
women's rights - and improve participation in politics
and society, particularly for women and minority
groups. The sooner the National Unity Government
delivers a Cabinet, the better positioned it will be to act
on these challenges.

I can assure the Council that Afghanistan will not
stand alone in its undertakings. Since 2001, Canada has
stood with Afghanistan. Our troops have fought and
died for security and freedom for the Afghan people;
we have supported the development of Afghanistan's
constitutional and democratic processes; and we have
funded programmes that have improved the lives of
ordinary Afghan people, particularly women and
children.

We remain committed to these goals. Canada will
be contributing $330 million over three years, starting in
2015, to help sustain the Afghan National Security Forces
in order to further the aims of stability and security.
Afghanistan remains a country of focus for Canada's
international development efforts, and between 2014
and 2017 we will invest $227 million in the future of
Afghanistan's children and youth. We will solidify and
expand the gains made in maternal, newborn and child
health. We will assist in providing education to children
and young people, and in emboldening women's civil
and political participation, human rights and economic
empowerment. We expressed confidence in President
Ghani's reform agenda by investing $20 million towards
the Government's fiscal gap, of which $10 million were
new funds, and the other $10 million reprofiled from
the World Bank's Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund.

We recognize that the international footprint in
Afghanistan will change in 2015. Canada welcomes the

Security Council's adoption of resolution 2189 (2014),
recognizing the importance of the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission, which will provide ongoing training,
advice, and assistance to the Afghan Government
beginning in 2015. We further welcome the Afghan
Government's reaffirmation of its commitment to the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, set out at
the Tokyo Conference in 2012, and the consensus it
reached with the international community on a process
to refresh the Framework at next year's senior officials
meeting, based on the reform programme and priorities
of the Afghan Government.

(spoke in French)

In the meantime, Afghanistan's regional partners
must continue to work together to manage security
and development challenges through the established
frameworks and in accordance with international law.
When States flout international law by annexing or
illegally intervening in other States' territory, we all
suffer the ensuing effects of the conflict and instability.
An international rules-based order benefits us all;
chaos erupts without it. Each and every Member State
has the responsibility to abide by international law,
including to act against terrorists and militant groups,
and to ensure that their territories do not become bases
for such operations.

Let me dwell further on this point. There is no
distinction to be made between a good terrorist and a
bad terrorist, for all terrorism is inherently evil. There
is consequently no role for terrorism in the conduct of
international relations. Terrorist forces may have tainted
Afghanistan's recent history, but we are determined that
they will not decide its future. The Afghan population
has made plain its desire for a peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan. Canada continues to support them in this
aspiration, and will work with the Afghan Government
and international community to address the numerous
challenges that remain.

