Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives of
Austria, Mexico and Turkey, Ambassadors Mayr-
Harting, Heller and Apakan, respectively, for their
briefings on the work of the Committees they head and
for their views. The Russian Federation considers the
strengthening of the efforts of these Committees and
their Groups of Experts to be an important condition
for enhancing the effectiveness of the Security
Council's contribution to countering the global
terrorism threat.

Among the most substantive aspects of the
Committees' activities since the briefing in May (see S/PV.6310), we note the following. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), backed by its Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), continued to
actively monitor implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and work on resolution 1624 (2005). Moreover,
the CTC and CTED increased the transparency of their
work. The Russian Federation supports that approach,
believing that it promotes fuller implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) by all States.

We note that the CTC's continued dialogue with
States in the framework of the procedure of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments of resolution
1373 (2001) and its country visits are yielding results.
We advocate further improvement of these fundamental
monitoring instruments of the Committee.

Among the thematic priorities dealt with by the
CTC, we note the subjects of specialized international
cooperation, extradition and mutual legal assistance, as
well as the issue of curbing incitement of terrorist acts
in accordance with resolution 1624 (2005).

We believe it is necessary to step up efforts to
implement resolution 1624 (2005), develop the practice
of including relevant issues on the programme for
country visits, analyse best practices and experience
with a View to their wider dissemination, and prepare a
further global report on the state of affairs in this area.

In this context, we welcome the recent decision
of the CTC to hold a meeting of the Committee in
April 2011, at the Council of Europe in Strasbourg,
with international, regional and subregional
organizations on the subject of preventing terrorism.
We believe that this meeting will create conditions
conducive to an in-depth consideration of the whole
range of issues related to resolution 1624 (2005). It is
also important that the specialized Committee of the
Security Council once again bring international
organizations together to discuss the latest challenges
in contemporary counter-terrorism efforts.

We welcome the assistance given to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee by its Executive Directorate. We
support in every way the participation of the
Directorate on the basis of the existing mandate and the
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and its cooperation with the expert groups of
Security Council specialized committees.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) remains one of the fundamental
mechanisms of the Security Council in suppressing the
terrorist activities of Al-Qaida and the Taliban and the
spread of their influence and extremist ideology. We
call on all States to take firm measures with respect to
individuals and entities on the sanctions list, as
stipulated in the relevant Security Council resolutions
and in the guidelines for the work of the 1267
Committee.

We support the Afghan leadership's policy aimed
at national reconciliation and the reintegration into
society of those members of illegal armed groups who
are not tainted by crimes against the Afghan people,
who have renounced violence and ties with Al-Qaida
and who have recognized the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

We continue to believe that removing individuals
from the sanctions list is possible only on an individual
basis. At the same time, we consider unacceptable any
proposals for the simplified de-listing of some
categories of individuals or entities on the list contrary
to existing procedures. We support the efforts of the
Committee and its Monitoring Team in keeping the
sanctions list up to date so that it reflects the real
nature of today's terrorist threat.

The comprehensive review of the list that was
carried out was aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of
the Committee's work and strengthening the sanctions
regime. We hope that the Ombudsperson, who has
begun work on de-listing, will contribute to making the
Committee's procedures more transparent, so as to
avoid doubts about the legitimacy of applying
sanctions, including on the part of regional and
national courts. We call on States, pursuant to
resolutions 1735 (2006) and 1904 (2009), to continue
to submit to the Committee requests for inclusion on
the sanctions list of individuals and organizations with
ties to the Taliban and Al-Qaida, including those who
finance their terrorist activities through income from
the illegal drug trade.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the unswerving implementation by all States of
resolution 1540 (2004) and subsequent resolutions
1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008), which are designed to
serve as a reliable obstacle to prevent weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials from falling into the hands of terrorists. The
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) plays a key role in reinforcing and
enhancing the effectiveness of international efforts to
carry out the measures provided for in these
resolutions. We believe that the Committee and its
group of experts worked hard during the reporting
period to help to further enhance the activities of the
international community to counter proliferation risks
and threats.

We welcome the efforts to make the work of the
Committee more planned and systemic, and we hope
that these efforts will be continued. We are in favour of
the Committee continuing to give priority attention to
the tasks of assisting States in implementing resolution
1540 (2004) and coordinating activities by the
international community to that end. For our part, we
are ready to continue actively supporting these
measures, including in the context of our ongoing
cooperation on issues related to resolution 1540 (2004)
with member States of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

