Mr. Dumitru (Romania): Mr. Minister, my
delegation feels honoured by your presence at the helm
of the Security Council. I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on arranging a discussion on a theme that will
allow for the productive consideration of ways to
improve the role of the Security Council in
humanitarian crises. It is very timely.

Romania associates itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones Parry,
on behalf of the European Union. Consequently, I will
speak more briefly.

Over the past two years, the Security Council has
reflected on various dimensions of conflict
management and post-conflict peacebuilding; those
reflections have made an effective contribution to our
collective thinking on developing a coherent and
effective response to those challenges. Today's
discussion complements that ongoing process, and the
non-paper recently circulated by Ambassador
Vassilakis (S/2005/434, annex) has greatly helped to
guide the Council in that direction. Romania fully
endorses the main thrust of the concept paper proposed
by the presidency, namely, the need for a holistic vision
and approach.

Indeed, in the discharge of its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council is frequently
called upon to intervene in complex crisis situations.
Those situations are often characterized by interlinked
military and security dimensions, as well as by
political, economic, social and humanitarian aspects.
The wide range of issues involved requires a
comprehensive, multidimensional approach based on
increased system-wide coordination.

Against that backdrop, the time has come for the
Security Council to approach the host of tasks,
including the rule of law and security-sector reform,
that condition the success of peacebuilding, not as
separate dimensions with individual merits but as
congruent and closely integrated elements. In this
sphere, the synergetic approach is not an end in itself
but a way to make a practical impact on one of the
major components of the work of the United Nations:
the effort to protect human life.

In that context, we should acknowledge and give
due consideration to all ways in which the Security
Council can contribute to better, more effective action
by the international community in the face of
humanitarian crises provoked by conflicts. The
Council's role is decisive and wide in scope.

In that context, I would like to share shed some
light on four aspects of this issue. First, Romania
considers that the logic of prevention should be given
the highest priority, particularly in situations where
there is a threat of a breakdown in peace and security,
which could have disastrous consequences for
civilians. In that regard, it is our view that all conflict
situations, irrespective of their type or stage, must be
closely monitored by various United Nations bodies, in
particular the Security Council, and that the system
should be maintained at an appropriate level of
readiness to act whenever a dispute appears to escalate,
threatening to cause a humanitarian disaster.

In that framework, Romania believes that due
attention should be also given to forgotten crises and
so-called frozen conflicts, which have the greatest
potential to evolve towards violent forms of
confrontation. Most frozen conflicts tend to generate
lawless zones characterized by massive and systematic
human rights abuses and therefore a breeding ground
for humanitarian crises.

The United Nations should not refrain from
deploying the whole range of its tools to address that
type of situation as well, keeping in mind that, in the
event that a Government is unable to provide for the
security of its own people, the international community
has the legitimate right to intervene and protect the
victims.

Secondly, before taking action, there is a need to
collect, organize and analyse properly all the necessary
information about the potential sources of
humanitarian crises. United Nations agencies can and
must play a crucial role in this respect. We appreciate
very much the work done by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and we are
especially pleased that the Council has been able to
learn, on a regular basis from the Secretariat's
briefings, about developments on the ground. However,
information provided by specific monitoring and
reporting mechanisms at the disposal of the Security
Council, such as that proposed for situations in which
children are affected by armed conflict, is, in our view,
indispensable when the time comes to decide on the
right course of action to prevent or stop a humanitarian
crlsls.

Thirdly, the Security Council must bring to bear
its political weight to make sure that those responsible
for humanitarian crises are brought to justice. Support
for the International Criminal Court as an effective
instrument in the efforts of the international
community to put an end to impunity in cases of war
crimes or massive and systematic human rights abuse
is essential.

Finally, with regard to coherent thinking and
action, we should keep in mind the interlinkage
between the Security Council and other major actors.
In this regard, in the Council and elsewhere, Romania
has constantly promoted cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Enhanced
cooperation and, where appropriate, coordination and
consultation with regional organizations, are
particularly important, including for an increased and
more effective role for the Security Council in
humanitarian crises. That should be accomplished on
the basis of a more integrated approach, with the aim
of maximizing the use of available resources and
capabilities, which, if taken in isolation, will always
seem scarce but, if considered jointly, may prove to be
more than adequate.

Romania remains committed to transforming this
particular challenge into a solid lesson learned on the
way towards strengthening the role of the Security
Council in humanitarian crises.

