Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation expresses its appreciation for the
presence of Minister Steinmeier in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to provide us with
Germany's priorities during its chairmanship. We
trust in the German leadership, given the country's
political weight, its knowledge of the organization and
its commitment to the search for solutions to conflicts.
Spain extends its full cooperation and support to the
German chairmanship.

Renewing dialogue, rebuilding trust and restoring
security is not only amotto of the Germany chairmanship,
it is also an objective that we share and support. We
have analysed the chairmanship's priorities and we are
satisfied to note that they correspond to a great extent
with Spain's priorities within the organization.

The OSCE is the only regional organization that
brings together 57 countries of the Euro-Atlantic,
Euro-Asiatic and Euro-Mediterranean regions in
a single forum and with the same principles and
commitments, including respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of States, as
has been reiterated here today. Its multidimensional
security focus from the political, military, economic,
environmental and humanitarian perspectives, as well
as its concept of cooperative security, set forth in the
December 2010 Astana Commemorative Declaration,
among others, makes the OSCE an essential platform
for strengthening the security of all ofits member States
and States of the region. None of the challenges that we
face today, ranging from terrorism, the proliferation
of weapons, cybercrime and climate change, can be
addressed solely with exclusive tools or perspectives of
a military or security nature.

Allow me to refer to one of the main challenges
of the OSCE, which has been mentioned repeatedly
in the Chamber today. I refer to the crisis in and
around Ukraine.

Almost a year ago, in its resolution 2202 (2015),
the Security Council adopted the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Unfortunately, one year later we continue to have to
call for the implementation of those agreements. While
we recognize the efforts made by the Government of
Ukraine, we call on all the parties to the conflict and
all those that have the capacity to assist to make firm
progress in the implementation ofthe Minsk agreements.
In particular, putting an end to the ceasefire violations
is essential. The adoption of measures to mitigate the
humanitarian impact of the conflict is also necessary.
Spain recognizes and fully supports the role of the
OSCE in the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine and
through the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine.
We are aware of the limitations of the Mission and the
challenges before it. Nonetheless, it is the best guarantee
for an international presence in eastern Ukraine, and in
that way to help put an end to the conflict. It is necessary
that all the parties involved help the Mission in carrying
out its mandate in all its areas of operation and that the
Mission's full freedom of movement is guranteed and
respected. We also recognize the valuable work of the
Normandy format and Germany in efforts to resolve
this crisis. We trust that the next meeting of the format,
scheduled for Thursday, 3 March, will make it possible
to continue to make progress of the various elements of
the Minsk agreements.

Allow me to move on to another region Whose
stability is closely linked to the future and the presence
of the OSCE. I refer to the Meditarranean. Germany
played a key role last year to promote cooperation in
the southern coastal area of Europe and to revitalize
the Mediterranean Contact Group, which it chaired.
We sincerely appreciate Minister Steinmeir's personal
involvement in that work and his solid participation
at the OSCE Mediterranean conference in Jordan in
October 2015. Spain believes it is essential to invigorate
and solidify cooperation with the Mediterranean
cooperation partners, including Morocco, Algeria,
Tunisia, Egypt, Jordan and Israel, and to strengthen
the Group. In that regard, we continue to work with
the current Austrian chairmanship of the Group, with
which we are organizing an event in Madrid to be held
in May.
Closely linked to this area, to which the Minister
referred, the OSCE, in its comprehensive view of
security, is a suitable framework to address the
complicated phenomenon of the migration and refugee
crisis, and it can provide important added value. We
support the continued efforts begun last year in Belgade
in the lead-up to the next ministerial council to be held
in Hamburg. We also hope that the next meeting on
security, which will be held in Rome on 4 March, will
also provide it with significant momentum. We place
Spain's experience on comprehensive management
of the migration phenomenon at the disposal of the
chairmanship-in-office.

As Minsiter Steinmeier noted, the 2011 Vienna
document on confidence-building and security
measures will be reissued this year. It is undoubtedly
an excellent opportunity to do that and align it on the
basis of a constantly evolving security situation. We
recognize the work that Germany is carrying out in that
regard. This year the Council will also be undertaking
the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2006),
the Committee of which Spain is the Chair. The OSCE
is probably the regional organization with the most
experience in the implementation of the resolution.
Therefore, we hope that we will be able to make a
substantive contribution to the comprehensive review
and, to that end, we make ourselves available to the
chairmanship. The Chair of the Committee will visit
the OSCE next April.

Finally, I wish to refer to one of the fundamental
dimensions of the OSCE, its human dimension, as we
are convinced that security is not possible if human
rights and fundamental freedoms are not respected
by law. We support the German chairmanship in its
effort to continue strengthening this third dimension
of the OSCE, and we agree on the central role of the
implementation of the obligations and commitments
related to fundamental freedoms. In particular, we
would like to acknowledge and welcome the references
made by the Foreign Minister today on the issue of
women and peace and security and the importance
of the participation of women. Accordingly, we will
continue to work in the framework of the OSCE to
effectively satisfy the provisions of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 2242 (2015).

Today's meeting shows that the enhancement of
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations
is possible. Spain will contribute to that end through its
membership in both entities. We do not consider it to
be only a formal matter, but necessary in the effort to
come up with synergies and work practices that create
true added value.

