Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Ambassadors Verbeke, Arias and Burian
for their efforts as well as those of their Missions to
achieve concrete progress in the work of the three
Committees they chair - efforts that are reflected in
their reports. The Council must continue to focus on
the work of the committees, whose respective
mandates constitute a broad-spectrum response to the
grave threats posed by terrorism and proliferation. We
must strengthen cooperation and the exchange of
experiences among the three committees.

We fully subscribe to the statement that will be
made on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union. I should, however, like to touch on a number of
points.

First, France hopes that the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will
attain all the objectives set out in the programme of
work adopted on 1 October 2006. We hope that, with
the full renewal of the group of experts mandated to
assist the Committee, substantive work on
implementation of the resolution will gain the
sustained pace necessary for full implementation of the
programme of work during its four remaining months.
A commitment to individualized dialogue with States,
the identification of best practices and the development
of operational relationships with other organizations
are some of the elements of that programme on which
key work remains to be done.

For now, understandably, the Committee's
activities should focus on promoting the resolution and
assistance with its implementation. Here, France has
provided material support for the organization of a
seminar on resolution 1540 (2004), to be held at
Jakarta on 28 and 29 May. As members know, that
event is being organized by the Institut francais des
relations internationals et strategiques in coordination
with Indonesia's Centre for Strategic and International
Studies. After last year's successful meeting organized
by other organizations at San Francisco, the Jakarta
meeting should make possible further progress in
implementation of the resolution by South-East Asian
countries.

We welcome the progress the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) has made
since the beginning of the year; this has helped strengthen
the legitimacy and the credibility of the sanctions regime.
Since the adoption of resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735
(2006) in December, the 1267 Committee has had a
number of tasks to complete, which we believe have been
undertaken in a promising way.

First and foremost, my country - which
originated this concept - welcomes the Secretary-
General's establishment of a focal point and the speedy
adoption of the 1267 Committee's guidelines. My
delegation has addressed a letter to that Committee, as
well as to the other sanctions committees, stating that
French authorities will exclusively use the focal point
for requests for the delisting of French nationals or
residents of France.

We were pleased to note the improvement of the
Committee's website; this should make it possible to
increase awareness and understanding on the part of
users and practitioners.

We hope that in coming months the Committee
will continue its efforts to improve the consolidated list
by continuing to update it and adapting it to the reality
of the threat posed by Al-Qaida, the Taliban and their
associates. We hope in particular that the Committee
will work on the implications of Al-Qaida's use of the
Internet to recruit terrorists.

We have great expectations of the new approach
established by the Counter-Terrorism Committee for
following up the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), which breaks with the past practice of reports.
By June, the Committee should adopt a preliminary
evaluation of each State's implementation with a View
to conducting an individualized dialogue on that basis.

In this undertaking - developing new tools for
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) - the Committee should also, in the coming
weeks, consider an overall study of the implementation
of the resolution, which would complement those
individualized evaluations with a regional and thematic
perspective. France hopes that the Council could
consider the conclusions the Counter-Terrorism
Committee will draw from this exercise.

We hope that the Committee will quickly adopt its
technical assistance action plan, developed with the
support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which is aimed at proactively strengthening
its action in this area.

Strengthening cooperation with relevant
international and regional organizations is also key in
improving States' implementation of Security Council
requests. We expect the next special meeting of the
Committee with such organizations, to be held in
October at Nairobi, to contribute to attaining that
objective in Africa.

In conclusion, I would recall the central role my
country ascribes to the United Nations in providing a
comprehensive, universal response to the threat of
terrorism. It was in that spirit that on 5 April
Mr. Francis Delon, French Secretary-General of
National Defence, presented to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee a French Government white paper on
internal security in the face of terrorism, which is our
policy framework on this issue. France is convinced
that, given the persistence of terrorism, our collective
and individual efforts must be resolutely long-term and
must adapt to the shifting contours of the threat. In our
view, it is vital that the Council, and the entire United
Nations system, remain fully mobilized against this
scourge.

