Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Chinese presidency for
organizing today's discussion on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa.

I would first like to join my colleagues in
expressing our condolences in connection with the
deaths of the Malawian and Tanzanian peacekeepers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
Central African Republic. Needless to say, we condemn
attacks on Blue Helmets, pay tribute to their courage
and dedication and wish the wounded a speedy and
successful recovery.

We are grateful to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his informative briefing and his unwavering
focus on strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. We also thank Mr. Sma'il
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his views.

Russia has consistently supported the efforts of
African States to achieve greater independence in
maintaining peace and security on their continent. We
support the consistent, forward-looking development
of diverse types of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and African subregional
organizations, based on the principle of African
solutions to African problems. It is unacceptable to
impose prescriptions for responses to crises on Africans
without their express consent.

We very much appreciate the African Union's
desire to get the African Standby Force established
under the African Peace and Security Architecture
working in practice as soon as possible. We see the
justification for African countries' wish to bring up
the issue of the provision of material and financial
assistance for measures to maintain international
peace and security, including through the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union. We
agree that it is important to increase the predictability,
reliability and flexibility of the financing for African
operations and joint missions. In principle, we are not
against considering the possibilities for expanding
United Nations participation in such missions, and
we are ready for further constructive dialogue in this
regard. However, we believe it is important to maintain
the current United Nations procedure for reviewing
and approving related budget requests, ensuring
transparency and accountability in the allocation and
use of funds and providing for the participation of
United Nations staff at every stage of the planning and
practical implementation of the tasks involved.

We also want to point out that strict adherence to the
basic principles of peacekeeping is key to the success
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Mandates
should consider the views of host States and the ability
of troop-contributing countries to implement them.
Burdening peacekeepers with additional functions in
the areas of the protection of human rights, gender
issues and environmental problems only complicates
the implementation of peacekeeping operations'
primary duties.

We particularly want to note the importance
of the efforts of the African Union and subregional
organizations to prevent and mediate disputes. As
a rule, Africans know the local nuances better and,
importantly, do not have a dual agenda. Unfortunately,
we can recall a great many examples where African
mediation efforts have been relegated to the sidelines
or deliberately undermined by external actors. I should
not omit to point to the example of South Sudan in
that regard, where a number of countries rammed
through the decision to impose an arms embargo
despite the conclusions of the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and almost wrecked the revival of the negotiation
process there.

In spite of our Western partners' constant
pronouncements about the importance of strengthening
the peacekeeping potential of the African Union and
the need for ensuring that it cooperates closely with
the United Nations, in practice things are often very
different. Narrow interests have the upper hand. Oil-
rich Libya is a clear example of that. After blocking
mediation through the African Union, which had
proposed a political plan for resolving the crisis, various
Western countries - we all know which - opted for
force. That turned out to be a tragedy for the Libyan
people with major consequences that are making
themselves felt to this day. Libya remains sundered,
divided into zones of influence, with no united State
governance institutions and a collapsing economic and
social infrastructure. It has become not just a haven
for terrorists from neighbouring countries and the
entire Sahara-Sahel but a destabilizing factor in it. It
is noteworthy that those whose irresponsible actions
destabilized the situation in Libya and the whole region
and then left the country to its fate are now presenting
themselves as peacekeepers and constantly bemoaning
the absence of an alternative political settlement for
Libya, while once again ignoring the good offices ofthe
African Union and its Ad Hoc High-Level Committee
on Libya in particular.

We support an approach whereby the Security
Council would speak based on united positions in
support of regional efforts. At the same time, however,
it is important to understand that there is a place for
all stakeholders with good motives and no hidden
agendas in dealing with crisis situations on the African
continent. Russia is assisting the stabilization process in
the Central African Republic based on those principles,
and is also helping the country's authorities to restore
the security sector. We hope that our colleagues on the
Council will leave behind their own historical fears and
narrow national interests in the work of helping Bangui
to a way to emerge from its protracted crisis.

We do not have to look far to find examples of
Africans' active involvement in the maintenance of
peace and security on their own continent. We would
like to pay tribute to the sacrifices that African countries
have made in sending military contingents to the
African Union Mission in Somalia to fight Al-Shabaab.
And we all know that it was Powers in the region that
were originally behind the Intervention Brigade. The
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur has already become a success story of close
collaboration between the two organizations in the
field of peacekeeping. We believe that establishing all
the essential preconditions in that region of the Sudan
will enable the peacekeeping mission to be completely
wound down by the end of 2020, in accordance with the
time frame for that set out in resolution 2429 (2018).

It is becoming increasingly clear that the United
Nations peacekeeping presence in a country should not
be open-ended. Any mission should have a clear strategy
for its eventual exit. Creating artificial obstacles to
drawdowns of peacekeeping operations is not just
counterproductive, it is dangerous. It is essential to
take the views of host countries into account, especially
since there are still a number of crisis situations in
Africa needing the Council's attention. In that regard,
I would like to remind the Council of the hopes of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has repeatedly raised the issue of optimizing the
numbers of the peacekeeping presence in the country.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Russia provides multidisciplinary support to African
peacekeeping efforts in Africa, including by training
African military personnel and law-enforcement
officers in Russian higher educational institutions.
We would like to highlight the training we give
peacekeepers, including many from Africa, at the All-
Russian Institute of Advanced Training for Employees
of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian
Federation in Domodedovo, which has United Nations
certification, as well as the Infantry Training and
Research Centre of the Combined Arms Academy of the
Russian Federation Armed Forces and the International
Mine Action Centre of Russia's Ministry of Defence.
African law-enforcement officers have the opportunity
to study in higher education programmes as well as
internships in short-term refresher courses in our
Ministry of Internal Affairs educational institutions.

