Mr. Ouedraogo (spoke in French): It is my honour
to speak on behalf of the President of the African
Development Bank, Mr. Donald Kaberuka. Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for your kind invitation
to the African Development Bank to participate in
this ministerial debate on the Sahel region. We take
that invitation as an expression of the devotion of your
country, the Kingdom of Morocco, to peace, security
and development throughout the African continent. We
commend and thank you.

Allow me also to welcome the endeavours of the
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to resolve issues of
peace, security and stability throughout the world,
and particularly in Africa. In that context, we note our
support for the appointment of Mr. Romano Prodi as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel.
We wish above all to assure Mr. Prodi that the African
Development Bank will stand by him as he carries out
his mission.

In participating here today, the African Development
Bank offers its support for the countries of the Sahel
region, most of which are founding members of the
Bank. However, we also express our support and
availability for joint efforts to resolve the prevailing
situation in the Sahel region. For all too long, that vast
territory, stretching from Cape Verde to the Horn of
Africa, has been beset by recurrent conflicts ofvariable
natures and intensity. Too often, those tensions have
generated religious fundamentalism, rampant banditry,
trafficking of all sorts, especially in drugs, as well as
the taking of hostages.

Other consequences include the weakening of
States and vast population displacements towards
neighbouring States or territories, as we are presently
seeing in Mali. It is therefore extremely urgent to
act - and to act together - in order to mitigate the
situation, which risks becoming a dangerous spiral
capable of irreparably weakening the entire region and
neighbouring areas and leading to an unacceptable
debacle. That is why the Bank welcomes this
ministerial debate and supports the vision of deploying
a comprehensive integrated strategy for the Sahel.

For over a year now, we have undertaken efforts,
in the framework of our mandate, with the Global
Agriculture and Food Security Program on a series
of programmes involving several countries, including
Senegal, the Gambia and the Niger, at a total cost of
$115 million. Those programmes have allowed us to
mobilize larger sums than the Bank could raise alone
in order to achieve the anticipated results, which are
significant. Other projects are planned for Mali,
Guinea-Bissau, Benin and Cote d'Ivoire.

We also hope to ensure that the Sahel becomes an
area for development, because if development efforts
do not receive support, the region will be exposed to
certain threats with which we are familiar, including
the recurrent droughts that are becoming increasingly
frequent as a result of climate change.

Some of the Bank's efforts have been undertaken
under the auspices of the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS)
with a view to boosting the overall resilience of all the
economies of the Sahel. We are implementing a major
$500-million programme together in order to promote
such resilience. Consultations are under way with the
States members of the CILSS and their partners involved
in agriculture, social protection and humanitarian aid.
When I speak of partners, I am referring in particular
to the European Union, the Islamic Development Bank,
the World Bank and the United Nations.

The main pillars of our initiative are promoting
production, processing and marketing infrastructure;
enhancing capacity-building to enable interventions
by public, private and community institutions in the
agricultural sector; improving production and the
productivity of the agriculture, livestock, forestry
and fishing sectors; and promoting regional trade and
integration. This initiative will extend over a period of
10 years, and we hope that its initial phase will start in
2014.

Other efforts have been undertaken pursuant to
our vision for general resilience in the Sahel, together
with the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Niger Basin
Authority and the Mano River Union. To that end, we
are focusing our efforts on strengthening agricultural
and regional infrastructure to allow us to open up the
region.

Two weeks ago, we welcomed Mr. Gressly, United
Nations Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Sahel. We discussed enhancing the complementarities
between the activities of the African Development Bank
and the United Nations system, and we found that there
are areas where we can enhance such complementarities.
The Bank's work is focused on medium- and long-term
development and on creating conditions to entrench
and intensify development. The United Nations has a
mandate geared more towards providing emergency
aid, in particular humanitarian assistance.

In the context of our agricultural infrastructure
policy, we have launched programmes to improve
water management. Twenty projects are currently
being implemented, at a cost of more than $500 million.
They include 13 projects that are dedicated specifically
to managing water for agriculture and livestock
breeding, covering over 30,000 hectares at a cost of
$225 million. In order to address the critical drought
situation that has recently affected Chad, Senegal, the
Gambia, Mauritania and Mali, the Bank has mobilized
emergency aid of over $4.7 million.

The Bank believes that the idea of agricultural
infrastructure can also be applied to efforts to open
up the region and to support governance and regional
integration. Our activities seek to ensure that the
overall resilience of the Sahel economies enables them
to tackle any situation, thereby buttessing them and
preventing them from becoming even more vulnerable.
Regional expansion is a good example of this.

The efforts undertaken in recent years have
demonstrated that regional and national markets have
become more fluid. Agricultural surplus can be sold to
other regions because of this expansion, but we realize
that the existing network is not enough. We noted with
regret that, in 2011, it was cheaper for Senegal to import
onions from the Netherlands than from the Niger, next
door, which had a surplus that it was not able to sell.
So the Bank decided to continue to fund the road
transportation sector, with a particular emphasis on
inter-State corridors. In 2013, we will be undertaking
a substantive project on the missing links in two
corridors, N'Djamena/Niamey and the trans-Saharan
route between Lagos and Algiers.

Regarding the burning issue of Mali, which is of
great concern to us, we recall that less than a year ago
that country was seen as an example to be followed
in every way. Following the sudden deterioration of
affairs, the Bank would like to place on the record
its full willingness to join the transitional national
authorities, the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the United Nations in
seeking ways and means to achieve a final resolution
to the multidimensional crisis there, which has lasted
for too long. In September, we cancelled the measures
to suspend our operations that were put in place in
March. For that reason, some projects have already
been resumed.

We are wrapping up our discussions with the
transitional Government on implementing other
programmes as soon as conditions allow, which we
hope will be very soon. I am thinking in particular
here of budgetary support and the case of a programme
supported by the International Monetary Fund that
would enhance public services. I would also mention
projects that have a direct impact on populations, such
as the provision of drinking water to Bamako, which
is in an advanced stage, and other largely agricultural
projects, which will contribute to the resilience of the
country.

