Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his
valuable remarks, and Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra for her presence with us today. I would
particularly like to thank Mr. Romano Prodi for his
contribution and for all his endeavours, and Mr. Tete
Antonio for his contribution to our work today.

Croatia fully supports the statement to be
delivered later today by the Swedish representative on
behalf of the European Union.

We have read with great interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/470) on practical ways to
provide effective support to the African Union in
undertaking peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations, including his detailed assessment of
the recommendations contained in the report
(S/2008/813) of the African Union-United Nations
panel established under resolution 1809 (2008).

Recognizing the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security, Croatia supports the increasing
engagement of regional and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction, consistent with Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter.

In that context, we further support the
development of an effective strategic partnership
between the United Nations and African Union (AU)
on matters relating to the maintenance of peace and
security, as well as the strengthening of coordination
and consultation mechanisms between the two
organizations at all levels in order to make the most of
their respective advantages and, at the same time, to
avoid working at cross purposes. I should like to
mention that the third meeting between Security
Council and African Union members during the
Council's visit to Africa last May constituted a step in
that direction. In that regard, we welcome the
establishment of a United Nations-AU task force
charged with reviewing immediate and long-term
strategic and operational issues.

Peacekeeping operations undertaken by the AU
so far have clearly shown the exceptional value of
rapid response on the part of regional actors, as well as
the benefits of national and local ownership of such
actions. In this regard, we welcome the AU decision to
increase the statutory transfer from the Union's regular
budget to the AU Peace Fund from 6 per cent to 12 per
cent.

Furthermore, we salute all those African States
that have so far contributed troops and supported
peacekeeping operations throughout the region and
beyond. We salute Uganda and Burundi, in particular,
for their extraordinary involvement and sacrifices in
Somalia. On the other hand, the fact that some of the
operations undertaken were seriously constrained by a
lack of military capabilities, inadequate resources or
weak institutional capacity is certainly a reason for
major concern.

Croatia shares the view that peacekeeping is not
the only tool for dealing with every conflict and that
peace and stability in Africa - as well as in many
other troubled regions of the world - cannot be
achieved through military means alone. We strongly
encourage cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations on a number of capacity-building initiatives
under the 2006 United Nations-African Union Ten-
Year Capacity-Building Programme in relevant fields
such as conflict prevention, early warning and conflict
resolution and mediation. We believe that a forward-
looking capacity-development strategy must link the
resources of the United Nations with those of other
partners in the field. We also strongly support ongoing
efforts to strengthen the African Peace and Security
Architecture as well as to operationalize the African
Standby Force, which would definitely represent a
major contribution to peace and security in Africa.

We call on the AU to undertake further intensive
efforts to enhance its capabilities to plan and execute
peacekeeping operations, as well as to develop a long-
term capacity-building road map in cooperation with
its international partners. At the same time, we are of
the view that there is a dire need for better
coordination between the numerous donor-sponsored
initiatives and other contributions targeting the area of
peace and security - of which there are more than
130, as we learned from the Prodi report (S/2008/813).
This should alleviate, to a certain extent, the burden on
the AU administrative capacities in the field, which
have not been fully developed and which are often
bogged down by reporting obligations to donors and by
multiple audits. In that context, we welcome United
Nations efforts to develop a harmonized administrative
and financial management framework that could
consolidate funding based on a limited number of
thematic programmes and a single financial reporting
format in order to further engage existing donors and to
attract new ones, including from the private sector.

Croatia believes that the issue of the funding of
regional peacekeeping operations remains central to
enhancing the relationship between the United Nations
and the AU. We share a common understanding that
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
of AU peacekeeping operations is of the utmost
importance. We are looking forward to the continuation
of the consideration of all options outlined in the
Secretary-General's report, bearing in mind at the same
time the established rules and practices of the United
Nations.

We also note with great interest the idea of
establishing, within the framework of the African
Union's Peace Fund and in accordance with the
principles of financial accountability, a flexible multi-
donor trust fund in order to maximize the effectiveness
of voluntary contributions and provide the necessary
sustainability, predictability and flexibility of
resources.

Finally, let me reiterate our full support for the
principle of African ownership as a crucial factor not
only for effective action in the field of peace and
security in Africa, but also for socio-economic
development. In that context, strong partnerships with
the international community should only serve as a tool
to finally cement and reconfirm that ownership.

Lastly, I express my full support for the draft
presidential statement and I thank the Ugandan
delegation for having prepared it.

