Ms. Rice (United States of America): I should
like to thank President Cavaco Silva for presiding over
this meeting of the Council. I should equally like to
thank the Secretary-General, High Commissioner
Pillay, Assistant Secretary-General Bragg and
International Committee of the Red Cross Director
Spoerri for their briefings and for their dedication to
the protection of civilians.

Protection of civilians is at the heart of what we
should be doing in the Council. In the past year, we
have made significant progress in operationalizing
norms on the protection of civilians. The Council
played a critical role in protecting the people of Cote
d'Ivoire in the aftermath of the elections there. When
Muammar Al-Qadhafi moved to make good on his
promises to massacre civilians in his own country, the

Council acted. The United States is proud to have taken
part in the NATO-led coalition that was authorized,
without any opposition, by the Council under
resolution 1973 (2011). This was necessary and
appropriate, given that Al-Qadhafi's forces continued
to unleash brutal attacks on civilians and civilian-
populated areas and hindered the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Thus, in accordance with
resolution 1973 (2011), NATO and its partners
protected civilians for as long as necessary.

Of course, every situation is different, and every
solution will be different. But the need to act in each
instance remains. The situation most immediately
confronting the Council is in Syria. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has warned that
the Syrian Government's appalling actions might
amount to crimes against humanity. Her Office now
places the likely death toll at least 3,500. The Al-Assad
regime's crimes are condemned more widely every day.
The Gulf Cooperation Council has demanded an end to
what it called Al-Assad's "killing machine". The Arab
League has worked hard to bring a halt to the violence,
but thus far to no avail.

Yet the Council has not adopted a single
resolution, even to condemn the Al-Assad regime's
brutal attacks on civilians. But let there be no doubt:
the crisis in Syria will stay before the Security Council,
and we will not rest until the Council rises to meet its
responsibilities.

The Council has also failed to act, or even to
speak, in defence of the thousands of innocent civilians
in the Sudan's Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States,
where a brutal military campaign by the Government
has again resulted in horrific loss of life and a dire
humanitarian crisis. Our silence is deafening and
inexcusable.

Overall, the United Nations and the Council face
challenges of both will and capacity. We believe that,
to build our capacity to protect civilians, the United
Nations should advance on five fronts.

First, we must strengthen early-warning systems
to detect and draw attention to threats against civilians,
especially where the United Nations already has a
significant presence on the ground. Humanitarian
workers are often the first to sound the alarm bell.
United Nations peacekeeping personnel have an
obligation to do so as well. We have seen some recent
promising examples of early-warning and prevention
strategies in peacekeeping missions. For example, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, with the
support of the United Nations country team, mobilized
in response to escalating tensions in Jonglei State,
including consultations with community leaders and
Government authorities. This early-warning system
may well have helped prevent retaliatory
intercommunal violence.

We encourage such early-warning activity in
other missions as part of an overall mission-wide
strategy for the protection of civilians. Such strategies
can succeed only if they rely on strengthening mission
personnel's understanding of and communications with
the host communities. A mission-wide strategy also
needs to provide peacekeepers with the necessary
equipment and training, as well as ensure their resolve
to use all means at their disposal, including force
where necessary and so mandated.

My Government welcomes the development by
the United Nations of training materials focused on
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as other
tools to help missions improve their protection
strategies. The United States helps the United Nations
to survey current practices and has initiated a
workshop for missions with civilian-protection
mandates.

Secondly, where prevention has failed, we must
bring the evidence of atrocities to light. That is easier
to do when human rights investigators are already on
the ground as part of a peace operation or human rights
presence. But even where such missions are not
present, there are several options available that we can
rely upon, such as fact-finding missions, special
rapporteurs and commissions of inquiry. The
membership must be ready to take action on such
information in this Chamber, in the Human Rights
Council and in the General Assembly.

Thirdly, the Security Council can impose targeted
sanctions, such as asset freezes and travel bans, on
individuals responsible for ordering and committing
violence against civilians. Full and effective sanctions
implementation can be an extremely useful tool for
limiting the ability of these individuals to prey on
vulnerable populations.

Fourthly, we must support societies that have
been ravaged by atrocities in strengthening their
domestic accountability and, when necessary, enabling
international courts to bring those leaders responsible

for atrocities to justice so that all people can live under
the protection of law. We have seen first-hand the
consequences when those who direct violence against
civilians are not held to account, as in the case of
Walikale in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where over 350 civilians were raped but the
prosecution by Congolese authorities of alleged
perpetrators is still pending 15 months later. Since
then, soldiers have continued to commit mass rapes in
North and South Kivu, and the number of rapes
committed by civilians has increased as well.

Finally, in order to see justice through from
beginning to end at the international and national
levels, we must ensure protection for victims,
witnesses and judicial officers. For example, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United States is
supporting the witness protection project of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, aimed at high-
profile and sensitive cases against perpetrators of rape,
as well as providing support for the Mission's
prosecution support cells.

The United Nations has learned valuable lessons
in all of these areas in recent years, and the United
States is studying them carefully right now within the
context of the presidential study directive on mass
atrocities, which President Obama issued in August.
We look forward to consulting with our fellow Council
members and partners throughout the United Nations
system as we continue our work on it.

In conclusion, I should like to commend again the
brave work of the United Nations and the tens of
thousands of local and international United Nations
staff, from peacekeepers to humanitarian workers and
human rights monitors, who risk their lives daily to
protect civilians in harm's way. We must never take
them for granted or underestimate the challenges they
face in defence of our shared values and international
peace and security.
