Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): It is with great
pleasure that I shall make the following observations
on behalf of the Secretary-General, who is currently
travelling.

First, I should like to thank the Government of
Nigeria and you, Sir, its Minister for Foreign Affairs,
for having taken the initiative of convening this debate
on the maintenance of international peace and security,
moving forward with security sector reform, and
prospects and challenges in Africa.

A poorly managed and ineffective security sector
can be a source of significant challenge to stability,
poverty reduction, the achievement of sustainable
development and peacebuilding. In the broader
framework of upholding the rule of law, the United
Nations has undertaken to support countries facing
conflict in their efforts to build disciplined, effective
and economically viable security sectors.

A significant share of United Nations support to
the security sector targets African countries, some of
which - including Angola, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania
and a number of others - are becoming important
providers of assistance in security sector reform (SSR)
to other African States. Many are also active
contributors of troops and police to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as significant
stakeholders in the international security architecture.

Opportunities to share experiences in African
security sector reform have nevertheless been rare, and
that is why I welcome today's debate.

(spoke in English)

The Security Council hosted its first open debate
on SSR in 2007 under the presidency of the Slovak
Republic (see S/PV.5632). That debate concluded that,
although the United Nations has been providing SSR
support for many years, our engagement was ad hoc
and inconsistent. The Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to produce a report on this issue.

The Secretary-General's 2008 report on security
sector reform (S/2008/39) drew on decades of
experience of the Organization and its membership,
and defined a United Nations framework for security
sector management based on a number of core
principles. It recognizes national ownership not only as
a moral imperative but also as a pragmatic necessity
for legitimacy and sustainability. The report also paved
11-54194
the way for the creation of a dedicated Headquarters-
based SSR unit, the modest expansion of relevant field
capacities, and the establishment of a special United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Task Force,
currently co-chaired by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme. In May of the same year,
under the presidency of the United Kingdom, the
Security Council hosted another open debate on this
issue (see S/PV.5889).

I am pleased that today's discussion will provide
us with an opportunity to take stock since the Council
last met on this issue. I am particularly encouraged that
its focus is on security sector reform in Africa - an
issue of paramount importance to the United Nations.

Over the past few years, the demand for security
sector support has increased exponentially. SSR is now
an integral part of the mandate of many new United
Nations missions and operations, several of which are
in Africa. Our mandates and national requests for
support in this vital area have become increasingly
complex, ranging from training and infrastructure
development in Burundi to capacity-building for
management and oversight of security institutions in
Liberia; from strategic advice for the articulation of
national priorities and the development of national
security policies, strategies and plans for Somalia and
C6te d'Ivoire to assistance coordinating international
partners in support of national priorities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Guinea Bissau.

These experiences have taught the United Nations
that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to security
sector development. The Organization and our partners
must be adaptable and capable of responding quickly.
We have also learned that many security threats can be
contained only through a regional approach, as
indicated, for instance, by the fact that a number of
African countries are working together to end the
scourge of the Lord's Resistance Army.

Critically, the African Union, supported by a
number of its regional economic communities, is at the
forefront of developing a specific SSR framework. I
am pleased that the African Union Commission is
receiving active support from our SSR unit. Other
regions should be encouraged to draw on this rich
experience to develop SSR frameworks that aim to
build professional, well-governed security sectors,
11-54194
which could contribute to sustainable development,
peace and security.

As we refine our expertise and enter a new phase,
today's debate provides a unique opportunity to reflect
on a number of strategic issues. Many Member States,
in Africa and elsewhere, have recognized that security
sector governance is necessary for early recovery from
conflict, economic development and sustainable
peacebuilding, as well as regional stability and
international peacekeeping. In addition, experience has
shown that SSR is a crucial preventive tool, as
previously underscored by the Security Council. In
Liberia, for instance, unresolved security sector
governance and management issues in the mid-19905
contributed to the re-emergence of conflict and a
dramatic 80 per cent downturn in its economy.

At the same time, security sectors can also play a
vital transformative role. In South Africa, the
consultative, nationally driven and carefully sequenced
management of the security sector was essential to
building a new, post-apartheid country.

In Guinea, a key challenge has been the
establishment of an accountable security sector that
better reflects the aspirations of the population. In
Somalia, strengthening the capacities of the security
sector will be essential for good governance and the
extension of State authority.

Close to 20 per cent of the Peacebuilding Fund
has been allocated to security sector activities in a
range of countries. It is imperative that the entire
United Nations system work together as one so as to
ensure that international resources and energies
produce their desired results.

For that reason, I appreciate the joint efforts of
the United Nations inter-agency Security Sector
Reform Task Force, and the SSR Unit, which provides
its secretariat. Both the Unit and the Task Force have
become major providers of field support. They bring
together a broad range of expertise to provide diverse,
specialized and "One United Nations" support. They
have also established a roster of experts who are
available for deployment and have initiated system-
wide training of specialists. The Task Force is also
producing a number of strategic guidance notes, among
other tools. I am also glad to report that the
Organization recently adopted a defence sector reform
policy.

I am therefore encouraged that in the presidential
statement to be issued today the Council is requesting a
report on how to further strengthen our existing
activities and the approach of the entire Organization
in the area of security sector development. I trust that
Member States will find this to be a good opportunity
to strengthen the Organization's capacities to meet
increasing requests for support.

(spoke in French)

I am firmly convinced that the experience and the
diverse perspectives of African countries can
contribute to establishing better practices in order to
improve security sector reform in Africa and around
the world.

