Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): The
situation in Yemen remains extremely grave. The
intensity of the conflict is increasing daily, and the
tragic humanitarian situation continues to worsen.

For the third successive year, Yemenis have seen
the holy month of Ramadan transformed from a month
of tolerance and peace into a month of violence and
hopelessness. Yemen has seen an increase in battles of
attrition between the parties to the conflict, and the pace
of military operations has increased in Hajjah, Ma'rib
and Al Jawf governorates. Since 10 June, fighting has
also escalated significantly in Taiz and areas to the east
of the city. The fighting for control of the presidential
palace in the city has intensified in parallel with
indiscriminate shelling in residential areas, leading
to an increase in the number of dead and injured, and
further destruction of the city's remaining civilian
infrastructure. There have been numerous casualties in
Ma'rib governorate, particularly during the battle for
control of Serwah district.

Violence has also continued in Haj jah governorate
and the border area between Yemen and the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, including on 22 and 29 June, when
rockets landed in the Jizan area of Saudi Arabia. In
addition, air strikes have continued to hit numerous
locations in the governorates of Sa'dah, Taiz, Ma'rib
and Sana'a. Air strikes hit a market in Moshnaq village,
in Sa'dah, on 18 June, and Al-Mokha town on 4 July.
Both incidents resulted in numerous civilian deaths and
injuries, including women and children.

Despite the fact that we have urged the warring
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, the targeting of civilians and civilian
infrastructure continues; this cannot be tolerated. There
must be respect for international legal norms.

On 15 June, an Emirati ship was subjected to a
bombardment from the vicinity of Al-Mokha port,
threatening maritime security in the Bab Al-Mandab
strait. The continued targeting of vessels in the area
seriously jeopardizes the provision of much-needed
humanitarian and commercial supplies to the most
vulnerable Yemenis.

In addition, security continues to be undermined by
the activities of extremist groups, including Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula. On 7 June, a vehicle-borne
improvised explosive device targeted the convoy of the
Abyan chief of security, killing two of his bodyguards.
Later in the month, on 14 June, militants detonated an
improvised explosive device at a police station in Dhale
governorate, killing the chief of police and wounding
several others. Here let me stress, as I have done before,
that the longer the conflicts lasts, the more terrorist
groups will expand and threaten Yemen's future by
controlling more territory.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen is appalling.
The people are suffering from war and hunger and from
cholera, which has continued to spread during the last
few weeks. The country is not suffering from a single
emergency, but from a number of complex emergencies
that have affected more than 20 million people and
whose scale and effect will be felt long after the end of
the war.

Approximately 14 million people are food insecure,
of whom almost 7 million are at risk of being victims
of famine, as my colleagues will indicate in their
respective briefings. Cholera is spreading rapidly
and is infecting children and elderly people and other
vulnerable groups in many parts of the country. There
are now over 300,000 suspected cases of the disease,
and more than 1,700 have died in the epidemic. Tens
of thousands of health-care workers have not been paid
for many months. More than half of the country's health
facilities have closed, and supplies of medicine and
medical equipment remain severely limited.

The speed and scale of Yemen's cholera outbreak
serves to highlight the consequences of a collapsed
public-sector system. I would like to praise the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia's generous $67 million donation, which
has helped to slow the spread of the disease. I call on
other donors to provide further contributions as soon
as possible.

The non-payment of salaries for health-care
workers and other staff in the public sector is an
urgent issue. If it is not addressed, the continuation
of the status quo will lead to key State institutions
ceasing to function. I fully support the joint proposal
by the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Health Organization and UNICEF to support
immediate payments to health-care workers as soon
as possible in advance so that health services may be
maintained. I call upon Member States to make every
effort to support this initiative, as it is important to
improving the work of State institutions, stabilize
the humanitarian situation and provide basic-service
delivery in future.

A World Bank-financed cash-transfer programme
is expected to disburse the first quarterly payment to
the most vulnerable households across the country in
August, to benefit about 8 million Yemenis. My Office
has been working continuously with partners to ensure
the success of this initiative, with a view to supporting
household purchasing power, avoiding widespread
destitution, improving the general situation and
restoring hope. I hope that the international community
will heed this call and support these initiatives.

Over the past year, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator and I have
called repeatedly for the resumption of commercial
flights from and to the Sana'a airport. The absence of
commercial flights has placed an unnecessary burden
on the population and worsened an already desperate
humanitarian situation. I appeal to the coalition
and the parties to the conflict to support the United
Nations proposal for the resumption of regular flights,
especially for individuals requiring medical care,
students studying abroad and family reunification.

I continue to work with the parties and encourage
them to strive towards the adoption of the agreements
I outlined during my previous briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.7954). I am planning to invite representatives
of Ansar Allah and the General People's Congress to
restart discussions on those ideas as soon as possible.
In the past few days, I was in direct contact with Ansar
Allah, which is cause for optimism. I am grateful for
the efforts of the People's Republic of China in playing
an instrumental role in that regard.

The proposed agreements focus on the Hudaydah
port and the surrounding area. They aim to ensure the
continued flow of basic humanitarian supplies and
commercial goods through the port and to implement a
programme for collecting taxes and other revenues for
the purposes ofpaying salaries and supporting services,
rather than underwriting the war. An agreement on
the port of Hudaydah should become the basis for
a national agreement for the resumption of salary
payments nationwide, which should provide some relief
to many Yemenis. Undoubtedly, such an agreement
will require clear mechanisms for ensuring that all
State revenues, whether collected in Hudaydah, Sana'a,
Aden or elsewhere, are used in support of the payment
of salaries and the reactivation of State institutions in
all areas of the country.

The Government of Yemen has reacted positively
to these ideas and has agreed to negotiate on the basis
of my proposals. In my meetings with President Hadi,
he agreed on the need to implement measures to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian and commercial supplies
and to prevent arms smuggling and the diversion of
taxes and other revenues.

I arrived this morning from the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, where I met Saudi Crown Prince, First Deputy
Prime Minister His Royal Highness Mohammed
bin Salman bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. I welcome the
commitment by the Saudi leadership to support efforts
to bring the parties to agreement on these issues. I will
depart for Cairo tomorrow to continue my current work
with the Government of Yemen and regional leaders on
these ideas.

I also hope to meet soon with the delegations of
Ansar Allah and the General People's Congress to
discuss the possible agreements on Hudaydah and
salaries as a preliminary step towards a national
cessation of hostilities and a comprehensive resolution
of the conflict, with a view to restoring peace and
stability to Yemen. It is essential that Ansar Allah
and the General People's Congress engage with me on
these proposals constructively and in good faith if they
truly want an end to the war and an improvement in the
humanitarian situation.

I reiterate my sincere gratitude to the international
community, which has consistently supported my
efforts and the proposals that I have put forward to the
parties. I recently visited France briefly, and its new
Government reiterated its support for the peace process.
Regional and international unity is critical if peace and
security in Yemen are to be secured.

I commend the courageous efforts of Yemeni civil
society, which continues to push for peace in spite of
many security challenges. In June, the Yemeni Women's
Pact continued to promote a spirit of compromise
as well as mechanisms that could put an end to this
devastating conflict. I also recently met in Amman
with a group of Yemeni youth activists who, while
expressing sympathy for the suffering of the Yemeni
people, also demonstrate the same commitment and
dedication. Yemeni civil-society groups are in constant
contact with my team and me. They recognize that only
a political solution can end the war and the suffering of
the Yemeni people. Their drive and sense of nationalism
carries with it a great deal of hope.

I wish that the political leaders would mirror these
activists' love of their nation and its people, which I
sense with each and every proposal I receive from civil
society. These groups are the true voices of Yemen, far
removed from personal concerns and considerations.
They convey the suffering of the people from the
farthest corners of the country.

The political leadership must recognize that the
continuation of the war can lead only to more human
and physical loss, and complicate crucial questions on
the future of Yemen, including the grievances of the
south. In that context, the southern question requires a
deeply considered solution, and I call on all Yemenis to
address it through dialogue and other peaceful means.

Finally, I would like to note that history will not
judge kindly those Yemeni leaders who have used the
war to increase their influence or profit from public
finances, and the patience of the people of Yemen will
not last. The people need an alternative to politicians
who destroy their country instead of build it. The
justifications are not convincing and the excuses are not
acceptable, especially since there is still an opportunity
to achieve peace.

