Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I convey
my gratitude to Mr. Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for having presented the quarterly
report that takes stock of developments in the situation
of Kosovo. During the period under consideration, the
Serb and Kosovo sides have shown political will in the
spirit of compromise, as is clearly demonstrated by
the new cycle of dialogue since the beginning of the
year under the auspices of Baroness Ashton, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy. Serbian Prime Minister
lvica Dacic' and Mr. Hashim Thaci have confirmed
their commitment and resolve this morning before the
Security Council, and we commend them.

The dialogue has promoted significant progress
in the association/community project in Serb
municipalities in Kosovo, ultimately leading to the
approval by the parties on 19 April of the "first
agreement on principles governing the normalization
of relations". The agreement is historic in many ways.
It marks a turning point in relations between Serbia
and Kosovo, and has finally opened a real prospect for
their integration into the European Union. It is in the
interest of both parties and the entire region that these
agreements be fully implemented.

The parties have also made progress on issues as
crucial as the levying of customs duties, taxes and value
added tax in northern Kosovo, the issue of land records
and the integrated management of border crossings.
It is hoped that this process can lead to definitive
agreements and extend to the crucial issue of the
movement of people in order to help allay the fears and
apprehensions of the people concerned. In this process,
the parties have shown courage and resolve not to
dwell on the past but to look to the future together. The
European Union, for its part, has also demonstrated its
ability to contribute through perseverance, persuasion
and motivation to a breakthrough in relations between
Kosovo and Serbia.

In terms of security, the situation has remained
generally calm. However, the tension persists in the
northern part of Kosovo because of incidents affecting
minorities, such as theft of and damage to property,
and the illegal occupation and burning of houses. The
issue of the protection of heritage and religious sites
continues to arise, and requires tangible action. The
decision to set up a specialized Kosovo police unit for
the protection of cultural heritage and religious sites is
a measure which we welcome.

With regard to the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Bernd Borchardt to lead it. That structure must
continue its monitoring, mentoring and advising
activities in the field of rule of law and the promotion
of cooperation with the parties to fight crime at the
regional level.

We commend the parties for the progress made.
We encourage them to consolidate the momentum by
continuing to work with an open mind and conciliation
to address the outstanding issues by intensifying their
efforts and preparing a common future for present and
future generations. We also congratulate the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force, which continue to play a key role
in advancing the dialogue and negotiation between the
parties to find a political solution that is comprehensive
and inclusive, in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999).

