Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for injecting quite a bit of
novelty into our formal meetings here, not least
because you have allowed questions from non-
members through members. That is quite something,
which we appreciate very much.

We would also like to thank Mr. Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing upon his return from East
Timor. We have, like many others, noted considerable
progress in a number of areas, including the civil
registration process, the training office of the East
Timorese Defence Force and recruitment in public
service.

We also share a number of points made by
previous speakers and some of their concerns, but,
nevertheless, I would like to make some brief points.
To begin with, public service; we all know that this
year is very important, and it has been mentioned
around the table that public service will be one of the
factors that will determine to a great extent the kind of
transition we can expect in East Timor towards
independence. We are therefore happy to note that a
large percentage of civil servants have already been
recruited to the East Timor Transitional
Administration. We appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) to encourage gender balance in this new
public administration, reflected in the recruitment of
about 2,000 women out of 8,000 officers recruited in
this service. This is an encouraging sign. We would
have liked to see the same balance in the Constituent
Assembly, and it is a bit of a disappointment for us that
the mandatory quota for women was not agreed.

The next point I want to mention is the refugee
situation. This is still a very big concern for us, as the
refugees continue in their plight in the camps in West
Timor. We believe that we have to do something about
it very quickly. We are encouraged by the meeting
between the Secretary-General and the Indonesian
Foreign Minister, and the security category re-rating is
something which we would encourage the Office of the
United Nations Security Coordinator to go forward
with as soon as possible, because we believe that that is
the only way to encourage and facilitate the large-scale
and definitive return of the refugees from West Timor.

But, of course, we are very happy to learn that
even in the absence of this, the United Nations Office
of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
the International Organization for Migration, with the
cooperation of Indonesian authorities and UNTAET,
have been arranging returns in small groups.

We also share the concern raised by a number of
delegations about the taxes imposed on international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). We believe
that in the situation that we find in East Timor, it is
very important that the NGOs be allowed to work in
the way they work everywhere in the world. That is
why we would also request that the ongoing discussion
be continued and a solution be found to this problem of
taxes imposed on NGOs.

The next point is about the economic situation, in
particular the employment situation. We would have
liked to hear Mr. Annabi brief us on this. What is the
current situation? What is the employment rate now?
What new projects have been undertaken in the last
few months to improve the rate of employment? We
think the relationship between the employment
situation and the civil disturbances is quite clear, and
we have to address that problem as best we can.

To conclude, I would also like to ask the
Secretariat to brief us in due course on the second
round of Timorese talks, which is perhaps now taking
place with Australia in Melbourne. Some of the points,
as you mentioned, Mr. President, can also be covered
in the forthcoming report of the Secretary-General.

