Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation joins
in welcoming you, Sir, to New York and thanks the
delegation of Costa Rica for organizing this debate
today. Your presence in New York is a clear
demonstration of your commitment to the issues we are
discussing today, particularly the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We also welcome the Foreign Minister of Panama
and thank Mr. Duarte for his briefing.

At the Millennium Summit and the 2005 World
Summit, world leaders set out an ambitious plan that
could help to eliminate poverty and to achieve
development, peace and security for all. The
international community did so in the certain
knowledge that development is the only certain

pathway to peace and security. Now that we are at the
halfway point towards attaining the Millennium
Development Goals, we continue to struggle to
mobilize the requisite resources, while military
expenditure worldwide continues to rise from an
already extremely high level.

Today's debate is an important initiative to focus
attention on the complex nexus that exists between
collective security and development and on the need to
regulate and reduce armaments so that scarce resources
can be more appropriately directed towards realizing a
better life for all.

We recognize the right to security and, in that
context, the right to produce, procure and possess arms
at a level that does not go beyond that required for the
purposes of self-defence. South Africa has a national
defence force that is actively involved in peacekeeping
operations on the African continent.

Security is one of the most fundamental
aspirations of humankind and is a basic human right.
The United Nations Charter is premised on the notion
of collective security, and the right to self-defence is
explicitly set out in Article 51. That is why the Security
Council is entrusted with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security and
has a wide range of powers under the Charter.

However, history has shown that the traditional
approach in many parts of the world - that of seeking
security through the acquisition of the most advanced
weapons and by building up huge armies - has led to
numerous conflicts, including two devastating world
wars. The advent of nuclear and other highly
destructive weapons has brought us to the point where
collective security is threatened by the continued
existence of the most destructive weapons.

Other principles of the United Nations Charter,
specifically the principles of respect for sovereignty,
refraining from the threat or use of force, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, are all threatened when some
countries seek a military advantage over the rest. Arms
races between competing nations also consume scarce
resources that could be better utilized to address the
plight of the world's desperately poor and that
adversely affect the right of peoples freely to determine
their system of social and economic development.

Without infringing on the mandates of other
United Nations bodies that work on this broad theme, it
is possible, we believe, to point to some specific areas
where the Security Council makes a constructive
contribution and where it ought to do more. In our
View, the Security Council's most profound
contribution is to be found in its conflict resolution and
prevention work and in the support it provides to
existing disarmament, non-proliferation and arms
control regimes. Through its good offices, the Security
Council can help to promote security sector reform in
countries emerging from conflict, including the
integration and rationalization of armed forces that will
be accountable to that Government and the people.

The Council could do far more - in particular
through the example that can be set by its own
members - to help cut the flow of weapons to all
conflict-afflicted areas, and not just those that are
subject to its arms embargoes. South Africa's own
national arms control procedures are designed to
prevent the sale of South African weapons to areas of
conflict. In addition, through full compliance with both
their disarmament and their non-proliferation
obligations and a non-selective approach, members of
the Security Council will restore confidence in the
relevant multilateral instruments.

A second Security Council contribution would be
more even-handed execution of its primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. The current situation, where the Council only
acts in some arenas and in defence of the security of
certain peoples, does little to contribute to an
environment that is supportive of the efforts of States
to implement their disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control obligations fully, thereby freeing up
resources for development. One only has to look at the
situation in Palestine and the wider Middle East region
to see the disparities in the Council's actions.

A third contribution from the Security Council is
through the achievement of a more effective and
efficient collective security system through building on
synergies between the United Nations and regional
arrangements in terms of Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. South Africa has promoted this theme
throughout our tenure in the Council, with a particular
focus on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union.

In conclusion, the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) affirms that
development, human rights and collective security are
the three interlinked and mutually reinforcing pillars
that support the multilateral system. Peace and security
issues are best addressed multilaterally and in
accordance with international law. Moreover, as this
important debate reminds us today, collective security
and matters of war and peace should not be seen in
isolation from the right of peoples to socio-economic
development. Decisions on arms procurement and
military expenditure affect us all.

