Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, we wish to welcome both
your presence in the Security Council today and the
fact that you are presiding over this meeting. We
also welcome the presence of the State Secretary of
the Federal Foreign Office of Germany. We wish to
thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, and reiterate our
full support for his efforts and mandate, which he is
ably fulfilling in a difficult and delicate security and
political environment.

Uponjoining the Organization, States Members of
the United Nations adopt the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter, including the specific mandate
given to the Security Council under Article 24, in
which Member States confer upon the Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and agree that in carrying out its
duties under this responsibility the Council acts on
their behalf. Furthermore, Member States agree, in
accordance with Article 25 of the Charter, to accept and
carry out Council resolutions. Today, at a time when
Israel, the occupying Power, continuously ignores or
violates the resolutions of the Security Council, and
make it impossible to resolve the Palestinian question,
which represents the core of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, and thereby to achieve a just and comprehensive
peace, we would like to highlight the binding nature of
Security Council resolutions.

First, the Charter of the United Nations is an
international treaty, whose articles carry the same
weight and trigger the same kinds of obligations that
other instruments of international law do, particularly
in terms of their mandatory nature, which binds Member
States in terms of such principles of international
relations as the sovereign equality of States and the
illegality of the use of force against States. Since the
founding of the United Nations in 1945, the Security
Council has adopted dozens of resolutions on the
Palestinian question, most of which have focused
on calling on Israel, the occupying Power, to end its
occupation of and violations committed in occupied
Palestinian territory. However, those resolutions have
remained ineffectual, despite of the fact that they are
binding on all countries.
Secondly, although States Members of the United
Nations have delegated a major part of their authority to
the Security Council, the Council has regrettably been
incapable of making the occupying Power implement
its resolutions. Of further concern is the contempt with
which the occupying Power treats the Council and
its resolutions, particularly those aimed at protecting
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and at
putting an end to all illegitimate and illegal actions
taken against them, their property, sacred places and
fundamental rights.

Thirdly, given that the Security Council is the organ
mandated by the Charter to assume responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
the strength of its resolutions derives from the fact
that no State has the right to renounce its obligation to
implement those resolutions, particularly those adopted
in the context of Council efforts to end conflict.

Fourthly, Council resolutions are of particular
importance in addressing the Palestinian question
because international consensus on the issue is a
fundamental pillar of any peace agreement and
represents the legal basis and key reference point for
all endeavours and negotiations aimed at resolving
the issue, in particular the two-State solution and the
principle of living side by side in lasting peace.

Fifthly, it is regrettable that Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to act as if Council resolutions on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict are irrelevant. In fact, Israel
is attempting to alter the historical and demographic
situation on the ground, particularly in Jerusalem, by
resorting to military force and expansionist settlement
policies, despite the call in resolution 2334 (2016) for
an end to such policies. Today, Israel is demolishing
Palestinian buildings and houses, resulting in forced
displacement of residents. Violence is committed by
settlers against local inhabitants. The Gaza Strip is
under siege. Attacks on Al-Aqsa Mosque are regular
events. Moreover, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which has provided essential services to the
Palestinian refugee community for decades, is under
tremendous financial pressure. We wish to take this
opportunity to express our full support for UNRWA
and its mandate and condemn all practices aimed at
acquiring territory by force, in violation of international
law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

The Security Council has the primary duty of
maintaining international peace and security, acting
on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
as their executive organ. Council resolutions are
therefore binding, which means that Member States
have an international responsibility to hold to account
those States that are not complying with the Council's
resolutions, namely, in this case, the State of Israel, the
occupying Power, which has deliberately disregarded
the legal nature of Council resolutions for decades and
has shown nothing but contempt for the Charter of the
United Nations and fundamental human rights.

Earlier, my Palestinian colleague mentioned tools
available to the Council, including the imposition of
sanctions under Article 41 of the Charter, that might
ensure that Israel respects and implements relevant
resolutions. We once again call on members of the
Council to visit the occupied Palestinian territory
to see the effects of occupation as well as the tragic
consequences for the Palestinian people, with a view to
taking necessary steps and measures to put an end to
the occupation.

Finally, while Israel occupies Palestine and ignores
the will of the international community, we reiterate
our support for the Arab, Islamic and international
stance that holds that peace is the strategic choice and
that a lasting, comprehensive and just solution must be
based on the two-State solution, in accordance with the
agreed terms of reference, namely, relevant Council
resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the road
map and the Arab Peace Initiative. Accordingly, the
Palestinian people will be assured of all their legitimate
political rights, including the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

