Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like first of all to express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for having convened
today's meeting. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Lo j , Ambas sador Mayoral and
Ambassador Burian for their briefings on the activities
of the Committees that they head.

The Russian Federation fully supports the
development of coordination and cooperation between
the three Security Council Committees that are tasked
with combating terrorism, and considers those
activities to be an important aspect of strengthening the
anti-terrorist capacities of the United Nations and the
Security Council.

We welcome the notable progress in enhancing
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
which has been made possible because of the activities
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). The Committee's eighteenth work
programme is based largely on the basic guidelines for
the overall activities approved by the Security Council
for the CTED in December 2005, including broad tasks
reflecting the Committee's new and strengthened
potential.

We support the programme's priorities, which
indicate a shift towards a differentiated approach to
reports submitted by States, and the initiatives to
establish more effective coordination in providing
technical assistance and strengthening systematic work
with donors and deepening cooperation with
international organizations.

We attach great importance to improving CTC
field visits. We believe that the first round of those
visits has already enabled us to draw initial
conclusions. We have clearly made progress in
enhancing the quality of expertise with which States
comply with the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001),
in evaluating requirements for technical assistance and
in forming a reliable pool of international and
specialized organizations participating in the CTC's
visits.

At the same time, we believe that we must devote
greater attention to the mechanism for monitoring State
compliance with the final recommendations made by
the missions after they have completed their work. We
must also make more effective use of the opportunities
provided by such visits to develop the necessary
dialogue with States on compliance with the provisions
of resolution 1624 (2005), which is designed to combat
incitement to terrorism and to prevent the spread of
intolerant and extremist ideas. We hope that the CTC
as a whole will become more actively involved in
implementing the resolution's provisions, which are an
important component of its mandate and truly assist
States in their efforts to prevent terrorism and to create
conditions that will strengthen dialogue among
civilizations and religions.

We continue to attach priority to the work of the
1267 Committee, concerning sanctions on Al-Qaida
and the Taliban. The threat posed by those groups to
international peace and security remains real and
recently has even increased. We must further intensify
the coordinated international efforts to neutralize that
threat and to ensure full and scrupulous compliance by
all States, including the Government of Afghanistan,
with their obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

In that connection, we welcome the strengthening
of the 1267 Committee's cooperation with Interpol,
which is reflected in particular by specific steps for the
issuance of joint special notices by the Security
Council and Interpol regarding individuals on the
sanctions list. We should also establish the practice of
country visits by the Chair of the 1267 Committee and
members of the Monitoring Team. Such visits enable
us to become familiar with the situation on the ground
and to report first-hand to Member States regarding the
importance of this area of the Council's work. They
allow for more substantive consideration of States'
needs for technical and other types of assistance in
implementing sanctions against the Taliban, Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities. Russia,
working together with its partners in the Security
Council and all interested delegations, will continue to
help further enhance the effectiveness of the activities
of the 1267 Committee and the Monitoring Team.

Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) is an
important non-proliferation and antiterrorist instrument
aimed at preventing weapons of mass destruction from
entering the black market and, above all, from falling
into the hands of terrorists. Ensuring full compliance
by all States with its provisions is our priority task.

We are satisfied with the work of the Council's
1540 Committee in analysing national reports. We
support the proposals contained in the statement of its
Chairman, Mr. Burian, with regard to working with
States that have been late in submitting their reports,
including by holding regional seminars and
strengthening cooperation with international non-
proliferation and export control mechanisms.

Because of the broad scale of the tasks set out in
resolution 1540 (2004), the resolution's
implementation should not be limited to an infrequent
formal listing of accountabilities. Much painstaking
work lies ahead of us to establish an improved national
monitoring and non-proliferation regime. That is why,
in November 2005, we spoke in the Security Council in
favour of an initiative to extend the 1540 Committee's
work for two more years. We agree with Ambassador
Burian's view that, in view of the limited time
remaining until the Committee's mandate expires, we
should undertake practical work on this matter as soon
as possible.

