Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Madam President, we are once again pleased
to see you presiding over the Security Council, and
we are grateful to our Indonesian colleagues for
proposing that we address the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. My thanks also go to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Mr. Federico Borello, Executive Director of the Center
for Civilians in Conflict, for their contributions to
today's discussion.

Over the past 20 years, the subject of the protection
of civilians has occupied a special place in the work
of the Security Council. The Council has adopted a
number of important resolutions that define the work of
the United Nations and set universal standards in this
area. Without question, the work of the Security Council
over these years has helped to strengthen the protection
of civilians, thereby saving lives. Nevertheless, the
number of victims in armed conflict, a significant
proportion of whom are women and children, is
unacceptably high. The change in the character of
armed confrontations has brought new challenges with
it, and the answers to those challenges must be sought
through continued dialogue and by uniting efforts to
prevent conflicts and settle them peacefully. Only this
type of approach, founded on international law in its
classic sense, without invented artificial concepts, can
produce positive results.

Today we are seeing a particular threat from
terrorist groups involved in armed conflict. For these
groups, mass executions, the use of civilian facilities as
cover and civilians as human shields, and the creation of
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance are
the norm. The sobering statistics for civilian victims of
terrorism confirm the importance of ramping up efforts
to mobilize States, the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations to strengthen mechanisms for combating
the global terrorist threat. There is no question that
terrorist activity should be put down, but it should
be with intelligent and proportional force. We are
concerned about the spreading practice of using combat
drones, for example. The difficulty of controlling such
devices can lead to civilian casualties, which we are
seeing in the situation in Afghanistan in particular. We
are also concerned about the psychological stress that
civilians are exposed to when living under the constant
threat of destructive missile strikes as well as about
civilian deaths.

The humanitarian component is an important factor
in the protection of civilians. The work of humanitarian
actors should be based on the Charter of the United
Nations and fundamental humanitarian principles.
We firmly reject the use of humanitarian pretexts for
criminal purposes, or to support terrorists or spread
disinformation. The activities of the notorious White
Helmets in Syria - and this is mainly about that
organization - have not only done severe damage to
the Syrian peace process, they have also significantly
compromised the international humanitarian
movement. The unprecedented politicization of the
humanitarian arena in international relations that we
are seeing today certainly does nothing to help us
achieve the noble goal of preventing and minimizing
the suffering of civilians. It is crucial to always ensure
that aid to people in need, rather than political aims, is
at the core of humanitarian efforts. That also applies
to assessments of humanitarian needs, which should be
carried out in close coordination with the authorities of
host countries, in accordance with fundamental General
Assembly resolutions. Unfortunately, the Office within
the Secretariat responsible for those assessments does
not always succeed in complying with that rule. We
urge it to pay greater attention to the issue in future.

Lastly, within specialized international organizations,
civil society and academic circles, we have recently
seen a kind of sports competition emerge based on who
can think up the most interesting novelty for discussion
within the framework of the subject of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The Security Council has
also been infected, unfortunately. There is no need to
develop new international legal concepts that allegedly
fill so-called gaps in the protection regime in the Geneva
Conventions. We should not be distracted by the endless
identification of new categories of persons who need
special protection under international law. In practice,
such ideas can only weaken the protection we give
civilians. The Council's job should be to concentrate on
practical work for ensuring the protection of civilians
within the framework of existing international legal
standards and prevailing mandates.

