Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): We wish to thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals; Judge Vagn Joensen, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR); and Prosecutors Serge Brammertz and Hassan
Bubacar Jallow for the reports on the completion strategy
of their respective Tribunals (S/2013/308, annexes I and II; S/2013/309, annexes I and II; S/2013/310, annexes I
and II).

Rwanda recognizes the important role played by
the ICTR and the ICTY in the international system of
justice. Both Tribunals have produced a substantial body
ofjurisprudence, including definitions of the crime of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and
forms of responsibility such as superior responsibility.

In 1998, the ICTR, through the Akayesu case,
established that a genocide had occurred in Rwanda
in 1994 - a genocide against an ethnic group, the
Tutsis. In the same vein, in 2004, the ICTY ruled in the
Krstie case that in 1995 a genocide had been committed
against the Bosnians in Srebrenica. Unfortunately,
those rulings have not prevented genocide deniers in
Rwanda, Bosnia and Herzegovina and beyond to openly
deny the fact ofthe genocides, which, for us, is an insult
to the memory of the victims and to the survivors.

Nonetheless, in the case of Rwanda, one of the
tactics of the genocide deniers was to co-opt the
very terminology of the United Nations, which had
described the crime as the "Rwandan genocide". As
a result, revisionists of all kinds, including scholars
from Western countries, were able to state that, yes,
a genocide had occurred in Rwanda, but it was one
perpetrated against a national group, that it was a
question of Rwandans killing each other.

As we prepare to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide next year, we call upon the
United Nations to consider reviewing the qualification
and call the crime established by the ICTR in the
Akayesa case a genocide perpetrated against the Tutsis.

We acknowledge the efforts of the ICTY and
the ICTR to expedite the proceedings and smoothly
achieve the transition to the Residual Mechanism.
However, allow me to express the serious concern
of my Government with regard to two aspects of
the work of the ICTR. First, with regard to the time
and cost of the proceedings, the ICTR has, since its
inception 17 years ago, completed cases involving
only 75 suspects with an overall budget amounting to
billions of United States dollars.

Secondly, with respect to the decisions of the ICTR,
particularly those ofthe Appeals Chamber, in 1998, Jean
Kambanda, the then-Prime Minister of the Government
that was in place during the genocide, pleaded guilty to
six counts before the ICTR, including conspiracy with
other members of the Government to commit genocide.
However, the ICTR, particularly the Appeals Chamber,
has on several occasions in the past month acquitted
a number of members of that Government, some of
whom were heavily sentenced at first instance. Given
both the pace of the proceedings and the acquittals
of some of the masterminds of the genocides, it is the
feeling of our people that the ICTR did not fully live up
to the trust that Rwandans, particularly the genocide
survivors, had vested in the Court.

As stated in the ICTR report (S/2013/310), four
cases were transferred to national jurisdictions, two
in Rwanda and two in France. For the case of Jean
Uwinkindi, and soon the case ofBernard Munyagishari,
referred to Rwanda, we reiterate our commitment to
full cooperation with the ICTR Residual Mechanism
monitoring arrangement. However, as we had already
stated before the Council in June 2011 and in December
2012 (see S/PV.6545 and S/PV.6880), we are concerned
about the fate of the cases against Laurent Bucyibaruta
and Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, transferred to France in
November 2007. Almost six years after the referral,
little has been done to try the two suspects. While
taking note of the ongoing monitoring arrangement
for the cases, we would, however, wish to request that
the status of those cases, including the reasons for
the delay, be communicated in the next report of the
Residual Mechanism.

Rwanda welcomes the call made again yesterday
by Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow to urge the States
Members of the United Nations to live up to their
obligations to cooperate with the Residual Mechanism
and the tracking and arrests of the remaining nine
fugitives, among whom the most wanted are Felicien
Kabuga, Protais Mprianya and Augustin Bizimana.
Indeed, we are deeply concerned at the lack ofprogress
in that regard, and we commend the Prosecution
tracking team for its tireless efforts in ensuring that
the remaining fugitives are brought to justice. In that
regard, we acknowledge the role of the United States
Government and its War Crimes Reward Program.

In the same vein, we call upon the concerned States
Members of the United Nations to arrest other genocide
suspects living on their soil, including leaders of the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR),
a movement with members who have committed
genocide in Rwanda or who perpetuate its ideology. In
that regard, we commend the Government of Germany
for its indictment yesterday for terrorism of the leaders
of the FDLR operating in that country. We believe that
that decision should be emulated by countries of the
region and beyond that may be tempted to support or
sympathize with that genocide force.

The Government of Rwanda once again reiterates
its request that the archives and records of the ICTR be
transferred to Rwanda upon completion of the mandate
of the Residual Mechanism. Those archives should
be transferred to Rwanda because they constitute
an integral part of our history. They are vital to the
preservation of the memory of the genocides and will
play a critical role in educating future generations
to guard against genocide deniers and revisionism.
We recall that this request was also endorsed by the
East African Community, a subregional organization
comprising Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and
Tanzania, the latter being the ICTR host country. We
are grateful to President Joensen for recognizing the
need to ensure that the ICTR's records are readily
accessible to the Rwandan people for posterity.

To conclude, let me recall that the next April,
the world will be commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the genocide perpetrated against the
Tutsi in Rwanda. Rwanda is today a different country,
which has achieved a great deal in the area of justice,
reconciliation and development. With the closure of
the Gacaca courts last year and the winding down of
the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism in 2014-2015,
we hope that the twentieth commemoration will be
an opportunity to turn a dark page of our history. For
that, we call upon the ICTR, the Residual Mechanism,
the Security Council, the Secretariat and all States
Members of the United Nations to accompany Rwanda
in the process along the lines of the requests and
suggestions we have expressed during this debate.

