The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Lebanon to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today's meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/10.

As this is, I hope, the last Council meeting over
which I shall preside, I should like to thank Council
members for their constructive contributions to today's
review of the Council's work, as well as for their
very kind words addressed to me and my delegation.
My special thanks also go to all the United Nations
Members represented here today

As this is the last formal meeting of the Republic
of Korea's presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May, I take this opportunity to express
my appreciation to all Council members for their
commitment to advancing the work of the Council
and for their cooperation with the presidency. I am
also grateful to the Secretariat staff for their untiring
support in facilitating our work. My special thanks
go to the support staff of translators, interpreters and
security personnel.

We believe that the work of the Council is measured
not merely by the number of briefings and meetings
convened, but rather by the tangible results of our
collective action for peace and security. There will
always be differences within the Council, but I am sure
that it is our shared commitment that drives the Council
and holds it together. Now, as my delegation passes
the baton, I wish every success to Ambassador Vitaly
Churkin of the Russian Federation and his delegation as
they assume the presidency for the month of June.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
