Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, Mr. Keating; the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Madeira; and
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Mlambo-
Ngcuka, for their briefings.

Mr. Keating's term in office will soon come to an
end. China highly commends him for his contributions.

China welcomes the new Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia and commends the former Permanent
Representative for his contributions.

Somalia is an important country in the Horn of
Africa. In recent years, through the concerted efforts
of the Somali Government, the African Union (AU),
the United Nations and the international community,
Somalia has made ongoing and positive progress
in rebuilding the State. China supports the efforts
of the Somali Federal Government to promote
political reconciliation, restore the economy and
improve livelihoods.

Relations among the States of the Horn
of Africa - Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti and
Somalia - have continuously improved of late, thereby
creating sound conditions for regional peace, stability
and development. China welcomes these developments.

In the meantime, Somalia faces many challenges
to its political process and economic and social
development. The threat posed by terrorism to regional
security persists. Somalia has a long way to go in its
rebuilding and development efforts. In that context, the
United Nations and the international community should,
based on the situation on the ground, support African
States in their efforts to resolve African issues in
African ways and assist Somalia in its State-rebuilding.

First, on the basis of respect for the leadership of
the Somali Government, efforts should be pursued
to assist it in advancing the implementation of its
transition plan, with a focus on governance, justice,
police and security sector capacity-building. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia should
provide targeted assistance in these areas. Regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
should fully leverage their roles in leading good offices
efforts and work with Somalia towards further progress
in security and rebuilding.

Secondly, efforts should be maintained to support
the Somali Government in its work to combat extremist
anti-Government forces and terrorist organizations,
and to assist the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in its enhanced efforts to implement its
mandate. The United Nations and the international
community should give positive consideration to
providing stable, predictable and sustainable funding
support to AMISOM. and help the troop-contributing
countries with capacity-building so as to crack down
more effectively on terrorism and promote the peace
and stability of Somalia and the surrounding regions.
Thirdly, it is important to further step up
humanitarian assistance and support to social and
economic development in Somalia in order to help the
Somali Federal Government to rebuild the economy
and improve the well-being of the people. After many
years of war and turmoil, Somalia's economic and
social development is lagging. There is much to be done
to strengthen its agriculture, education, health-care and
infrastructure sectors. The international community
should enhance its support for Somalia's economic
and social development with greater inputs so that the
Somali people can enjoy better lives.

Peace, stability, development and revitalization
of Africa are the long-term aspirations of the people
of that continent and the common responsibility of
the international community. Early this month, China
successfully hosted the Beijing Summit of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation. The Forum adopted
two important outcome documents: the Beijing
Declaration-Toward an Even Stronger China-Africa
Community with a Shared Future, and the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation Beijing Action Plan
(2019-2021).

It also launched new measures to comprehensively
deepen China-Africa cooperation, with eight major
initiatives at the core. Both sides agree to strengthen
peace and security cooperation. China decided to set
up a China-Africa peace and security cooperation fund
to support their cooperation in peace, security and the
maintenance of peace and stability. As China's first
funding mechanism for African peace and security, the
fund will help to build an even more effective platform
for their cooperation.

China will continue to follow the principle of
sincerity, real results, amity, good faith and the
pursuit of the greater good and shared interests in its
cooperation with Africa, and to participate actively
in the cause of Africa's peace and security so as to
make its due contribution to the peace, stability and
development of Africa.

