Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
question of the role of the United Nations in post-
conflict situations is gaining increasing importance in
light of the variables in international conflicts. This has
put major responsibility on the shoulders of the
international community, and we must all have the
political will to address it.

The role of the United Nations in peace-building
and peace maintenance in different phases of conflict
resolution is established and is gaining importance,
particularly in light of the United Nations successes in
Angola and Mozambique and its proven capabilities in
dealing with delicate and difficult situations in Kosovo,
Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone. However, this role has
varied in the case of each conflict.

The United Nations working method has differed
according to the mandate entrusted to it by the Security
Council. Experience in the field has shown that the
Organization has succeeded to a great extent in
developing its expert capabilities in planning,
implementation and commanding peacekeeping
missions in accordance with differing mandates, which
vary in size and nature.

The United Nations has succeeded tangibly in
building participation and communication bridges with
regional powers and organizations in the area of the
conflict. Although myriad parties have recognized that
the experience of the United Nations in many conflict
areas was positive, we must not disregard the fact that
the Organization continues to face many challenges to
its efforts. They include the fact that some donor States
have not honoured their pledges and commitments to
peace-building in post-conflict States.

These challenges are also reflected in the lack of
coordination between the pace of the United Nations
achievements in the areas of security and politics and
its pace in building the economic and social
infrastructures in the countries affected, in particular
the pace of implementing programmes or building
institutional capacities such as the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in
civil society, de-mining and trying war crimes.

There is no doubt that peace cannot be divided -
it is indivisible - and that the security and political
aspects of peace, despite their absolute importance, are
not adequate for a comprehensive framework for
building peace. A healthy economic and social climate
is also necessary to develop and perpetuate that peace.

In the framework of the United Nations
concentration on post-conflict situations, surely the
question of Iraq, with all its developments since the
Security Council adopted resolution 1441 (2002) and
even before that, has constituted and still constitutes a
major challenge to the concept of the effectiveness of
the contemporary United Nations, a challenge that
threatens to destroy the overriding principles and
norms of the United Nations Charter. Furthermore, the
challenges of the future of post-war Iraq are no less
important and serious than those that international
collective efforts faced during the war itself.
The positions of the Security Council during the
last month have shown a reticence on the part of the
international community to deal with post-war Iraq.
The Council did not fail, in dealing with the issue of
Iraq and in the context of resolution 1472 (2003), in the
preamble, to refer to the Geneva Convention Relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
and to the responsibility of the Occupying Power in
ensuring all the needs of the population. Whether the
occupied territory had the resources to meet these
needs is an issue to which Egypt attaches great
importance.

Egypt warned of the risks of a lopsided war,
although no one heeded our warnings and advice. The
destructive war has come to pass nonetheless. Today,
we urge that certain principled considerations be taken
into account in order to avert further peril befalling the
Middle East. These considerations are as follows:

First, the two coalition forces that control Iraq
must provide for the security and stability of that
country as soon as possible and protect the lives and
dignity of its citizens. Secondly, the international
community should intensify its efforts to create without
delay an atmosphere conducive to establishing a
legitimate Government, to be chosen by all factions of
the Iraqi people. Thirdly, the occupation must end and
the foreign forces withdraw as soon as possible in
order to preserve the unity, security and safety of the
Iraqi people and its country. Fourthly, the United
Nations should assume its essential role in the
reconstruction of Iraq and the restoration of security
and legitimacy there, in consideration of the
implications of the situation for the credibility of the
Organization and its Charter and for the concomitant
role of the regional organizations.

One final issue that we feel should be addressed
concerns the fact that, although we are considering and
assessing the development and strengthening of the
United Nations role in post-conflict situations, we must
not allow ourselves to forget that the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, must shoulder
their principal responsibility for saving humanity from
the scourge of such wars before they begin or are
launched and for protecting peoples from the
destruction of their infrastructures, the plundering of
their resources and the loss of their cultural and
historical heritages. Regrettably, the issue of Iraq is a
case in point in this context.

