Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I welcome you, Madam, and thank you
for your personal presence in New York to preside over
today's important meeting.

The Chinese delegation wishes to thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his recent report on
Iraq and for the supplementary briefings which he and
his Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
delivered earlier.

We listened attentively to the Secretary-General's
statement, which drew a very clear picture of the
current situation in Iraq and the aspirations of the Iraqi
people and provided a concise summary and
explanation of what should be done in that country. It
reflected his usual wisdom and vision, and I wish to
place on record my highest appreciation of and support
for it.

I also wish to thank Special Representative Vieira
de Mello and his team for their efforts and hard work.
We also acknowledge the statement made by the
representative of the Iraqi Governing Council, Mr.
Pachachi.

Over the past two months, Mr. Vieira de Mello,
acting under the mandate of Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003), has opened extensive contacts
with various Iraqi sectors and other relevant parties and
has heard their views on the reconstruction of their
country. He has provided us with important information
for a comprehensive and objective understanding of the
situation in Iraq and of the aspirations of the Iraqi
people.

In his report, the Secretary-General has made
many useful recommendations for the way forward. We
highly appreciate the valuable contributions of the
Secretary-General and Mr. Vieira de Mello. I wish to
reiterate that the Chinese Government shall continue to
support them in implementing recent Security Council
resolutions.

In the Secretary-General's report and the
supplementary briefings given by him and Mr. Vieira
de Mello, three points in particular have drawn our
attention.

First, the Iraqi people ardently hope to see their
sovereignty and self-government restored as soon as
possible. Secondly, the security situation in Iraq
remains unstable and economic reconstruction will be
an arduous and long-term task. Thirdly, the United
Nations can and should play an active role in the
course of reconstruction. China wishes to state its
views with particular focus on these areas.

First, we fully understand the powerful
aspirations of the Iraqi people to being masters of their
own country. We wish to see the earliest possible
formation of a broadly representative interim
administration, supported by the Iraqi people. We
favour the early launching of a constitutional process
run by and for Iraqis. The Iraqi Governing Council was
established a week ago. We welcome this development
and share the Secretary-General's view that

"it is important that Iraqis are able to see a clear
timetable leading to the full restoration of
sovereignty". (S/2003/715, para. 107)

We look forward to the day when Iraq will be
reintegrated into the international community with a
new look as an independent and sovereign member
pursuing a policy of good-neighbourliness.

Secondly, we are deeply concerned about the
security situation in Iraq and its negative effects on the
restoration of normal life for the Iraqi people and on
the international humanitarian relief endeavour.
Achieving security and stability in Iraq is undoubtedly
a very important and urgent task. Security is closely
linked to reconstruction and development. We hope
that, with the efforts of the parties concerned, law and
order in Iraq will be restored and the security situation
will be improved as soon as possible.

After suffering from years of economic sanctions
and the scourge of war, Iraq now faces the arduous and
complex task of reconstruction. An effective response
to those challenges requires the extensive participation
and support of the international community. In that
regard, the forthcoming international conference on
Iraq's reconstruction, which is scheduled for October,
is of important significance. We wish the conference
fruitful results.

Thirdly, we are in favour of an active and
effective role for the United Nations in Iraq's political
process and economic reconstruction. Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003) has established a good
foundation for this effort. The resolution also reflects
the international community's consensus. It should
therefore be fully implemented. As pointed out by the
Secretary-General, the legitimacy and impartiality of
the United Nations is a considerable asset in promoting
the interests of the Iraqi people. The recommendations
put forward by the Secretary-General in his report with
regard to the future role to be played by the United
Nations in Iraq's reconstruction are timely and highly
important. The Council should give them due attention
and careful consideration.

I would like to reiterate that China has always
attached importance to Iraq's reconstruction. China was
one of the first countries to give humanitarian
assistance to Iraq. We will continue to render support
to the Iraqi people within our capabilities. We are
prepared to work with other members of the
international community to help the Iraqi people in
their reconstruction efforts and to ensure early
achievement of national stability and development.

The Iraqi people have a long history and an
ancient culture. Their country is a cradle of
civilization. The hard-working, courageous and
talented people of Iraq have made important and
remarkable contributions to human development in all
historical periods. We are confident that - although
they face a situation fraught with extremely arduous,
complex and difficult challenges - the great Iraqi
people will, by their own hand and through their own
wisdom, add new chapters of peace, stability,
development and prosperity to their history.

