Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan
for presenting the quarterly report on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and for his dedicated and devoted leadership of
the Committee.

We have received the most recent report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), dated 20 February. In that regard, I
would like to underscore that, according to the report, in
the specified three-month period, Iran implemented the
initial practical measures contained in the annex to the
framework for cooperation with the IAEA. Moreover,
we believe that it is auspicious that the Agency and Iran
have agreed to the next seven steps to be implemented
before 15 May and that the report also recognizes that
Iran has fulfilled its obligations with regard to the
measures of the joint action plan agreed with the P5+l.

As we said in the Council in December (see S/PV.7082) and in other forums, we understand that the
agreement between the P5+1 and Iran reaffirms the value
of diplomatic measures and represents a significant step
forward in the area of Iran's nuclear programme. We
therefore congratulate the Governments of the United
States, Iran, France, China, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom and Germany on the entry into force
of the agreement on 20 January.

We are also pleased that the P5+l and Iran have
requested the IAEA to carry out the nuclear energy-
related monitoring and verification activities that are
necessary in order to implement the joint action plan,
and that the Board of Governors of the IAEA approved
the Agency's carrying out ofthose tasks at its session in
January. In that regard, we believe it important for the
Agency to have the necessary capacity to carry out its
work effectively.

While we welcome the progress achieved in recent
months in the negotiations, we have taken careful
note of the Director General's conclusion that there
is still much to be done to resolve pending issues. In
that regard, we believe that it is essential that Iran
cooperate actively with the Agency on all pending
issues, particularly with regard to the possible military
dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme - on which
there has not yet been significant concrete progress,
according to the report - and that it comply with its
obligations, including Security Council resolutions.

With regard to the Committee's work, as
Ambassador Quinlan indicated the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council are still in effect and should
be implemented by Member States. In that regard, I
reiterate my delegation's concern with regard to the
quality of the lists of persons and entities subject to
sanctions developed by some Committees. We stress
the importance of entries being supported by sufficient
data to allow Member States to properly identify them
in applying sanctions. For that reason, we support the
Chair's efforts to improve the quality of the Committee's
list and, consequently, the sanctions' effectiveness.

