Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First,
Sir, let me thank you, as you approach the end of your
presidency, for having convened this important wrap-
up meeting on peacekeeping operations. I also wish to
convey to you my delegation's appreciation for your
activities throughout the past two years, as we have
worked together on the Security Council, and to wish
you every success in your new post and your new
responsibilities.

The Council's consideration of the question of
peacekeeping operations is particularly timely and
wise, because over the past few years, peacekeeping
operations have proliferated throughout the world,
becoming the very core of the United Nations
collective security system.

In the course of this month, the Security Council
considered a number of questions related to the
peacekeeping component of its work, as was the case
with Kosovo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Liberia. Another reason to welcome the choice of
this topic is that, as the President has just mentioned, it
gives the Council an opportunity to assess the
efficiency of peacekeeping operations, which are the
primary responsibility entrusted by the Charter to the
Security Council. It is through these operations that the
international community and public opinion can - to
use the words of the Secretary-General - appraise the
capacity of the United Nations to make the difference
between war and peace.

A number of prior conditions are indispensable
for peacekeeping, and I will again quote the Secretary-
General: a clear and achievable mandate and the
strength and authority to defend itself and safeguard
the mission. Moreover, the Charter makes available to
the Organization a vast array of tools ranging from
ways for the peaceful settlement of conflicts under
Chapter VI to the coercive measures provided for in
Chapter VII. I must underline that peacekeeping
operations involve complexities that vary from one
situation to another. They are therefore a permanent
challenge for the Organization, requiring it unceasineg
to explore new routes of action and new opportunities
for streamlining.

In that context, the analysis and recommendations
of the study group on the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations, better known as the Brahimi report,
are an essential contribution. That reference report
helped raised awareness of the urgent need to reform
peacekeeping operations and to provide them with
adequate means for reaching the desired goals by
taking into account all specific characteristics of a
conflict when defining a mission's mandate.

While in some situations peacekeeping soldiers
are rapidly mobilized and deployed with the
appropriate resources, in other situations that are just
as tragic, or more so, the international community has
unfortunately wavered in deciding for the intervention
of the United Nations. And when that decision is taken,
the international community struggles to muster the
necessary resources. That unfortunately hinders the
effectiveness of the operations concerned, with all the
consequences that entails, the humanitarian
consequences in particular. Certain non-governmental
organizations have not failed to denounce that sad
reality.

Several solutions have been proposed to remedy
that situation. Today, many reforms have been
introduced in peacekeeping missions: a realistic
definition of every mission's needs, without necessarily
casting doubt on a newly enlarged mandate for that
mission; ongoing consultation among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries - in this respect some are thinking of some
form of joint decision-making, with the countries
contributing troops or resources; the enhanced
involvement of civil society and the relevant non-
governmental organizations, in partnership with the
regional organizations concerned; rules of conduct for
United Nations personnel involved in peacekeeping
operations; and measures to halt the spreading of the
HIV/AIDS epidemic, which is a major crisis for
development. My delegation believes that the
systematic use by the Secretary-General of missions to
evaluate needs would be another very useful response
to the concerns encountered.

It often happens that the Security Council
authorizes a State or group of States to intervene
urgently and with their own resources in certain crisis
situations. The results of that practice have not been
completely conclusive, if one recalls the interventions
in Somalia in 1992 and in Rwanda in 1994. Most
fortunately, that approach seems to have had several
convincing successes in recent years. I will give the
examples of the deployment, in certain conflict zones
in Africa, of Operation Unicorn and the mission of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Cote d'Ivoire, the Artemis Force of the
European Union in Bunia in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and, more recently, the ECOWAS mission
in Liberia.

Endowing multinational forces with a robust
mandate certainly enables them to deal urgently and
very effectively with certain major crises. Therefore,
we believe that it is healthy and prudent to define very
clearly the duration of interventions. That demonstrates
that a long-term response depends on the capacity of
the United Nations to mobilize the appropriate
resources for action rapidly and at any given moment.
In the meantime, the Organization must rationalize its
use of available resources. In that context, the current
experience in Liberia opens a new path for reflection,
mainly in relation to the regional management of Blue
Helmet contingents and the logistical resources in
response to neighbouring conflicts, such as is the case
in western Africa.

Such reflection can also take into account the
need to set up regional warning mechanisms with
sufficient autonomous capacity. That formula seems to
be taking shape in certain regions. In that respect, we
consider cooperation in the framework of Chapter VIII
to be fundamental.

The tragic events of 19 August - towards which
we share the sentiment just expressed by the Council
President - have reminded the Council that the
measures taken thus far in response to the new
challenges before the international community, are not
adequate to protect United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel participating in
the peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council. That is why my delegation welcomes the
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 1502
(2003) on 26 August.

With respect to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes included in
peacekeeping operations, while disarmament and
demobilization are being handled better and better at
the moment, much remains to be done with regard to
reintegration. In that respect, the Council should
continue the dialogue begun with multilateral financial
institutions in order to develop a concerted and
coordinated approach that simplifies and makes more
flexible the eligibility requirements so that action is
more rapid and more closely tied to reconstruction.

In conclusion, strengthening the primary
responsibility of the United Nations in peacekeeping
and the effectiveness of its peace operations requires
that States demonstrate their political will and that
there be extensive cooperation between the United
Nations and all actors of the international community.

