Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to welcome Special Representative Haekkerup to
the Council for the first time. He has my Government's
full support in his difficult mission.

We are obviously quite concerned about the
violence in the region and its potential to disrupt and
undermine what has been achieved in the past years at
great cost of political and financial commitment. No
one in this Chamber has any tolerance for violence or
doubts the importance of the rule of law, I am sure. We
continue to believe that the vast majority of Kosovar
Albanians reject violence and are more concerned, as
they should be, about practical issues of governance,
which the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has addressed quite
successfully in the first year and a half of its operation.

In dealing with the Albanian community, we
should extol those individuals, intellectuals and leaders
in Kosovo, like Vetan Surroi, who reject violence and
support the democratic process. We must roundly
criticize those who are either silent about the taking of
innocent lives or, worse yet, suggest that violence is
acceptable. The latter must be under no illusion about
the harm, and what they are doing to the aspirations of
Albanians in Kosovo and elsewhere is close to being
irrevocable. It has not gone unnoticed, of course, that
American forces in the Kosovo Force (KFOR) were
recently involved for the first time in a firefight with
some of these violent extremists near the Macedonian
border. This is a cause for great concern.

My Government has been encouraged by the
restraint in Skopje and Belgrade in dealing with the
violence and by the reaction of Prime Minister Meta's
Government in Albania, which has condemned in the
strongest terms the violence in Macedonia. My
Government continues to encourage Kosovo's senior
leadership to be unequivocal in its condemnation of
violence and to use its influence to help bring it to an
end.

We note the recent statements by Democratic
League of Kosovo (LDK) President Rugova and the
Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) President Thaci
that condemned fighting in Macedonia, but these are
not enough. These statements are accompanied by
articles in the newspapers of these and other political
parties that label anyone who criticizes the perpetrators
of this violence as traitors to the Albanian cause. This
must not continue; it is irresponsible. Those who aspire
to positions of responsibility in Kosovo must limit the
influence of extremists and isolate them. They are not
representative of Kosovar aspirations and that has to be
clear.

My delegation believes that, in fact, a large part
of this violence is explained by organized criminal
activity and I hope that the Special Representative will
make this problem one of his priorities. My
Government has provided support in the fight against
organized crime and we are ready and willing to
provide more resources to intensify UNMIK's efforts
in this regard. We hope that UNMIK and KFOR will
use all available means to apprehend those few
individuals who are hiding behind grand political
motives as a cover for criminal behaviour.

We believe that UNMIK should move as quickly
as possible in organizing Kosovo-wide elections later
this year. Much has been said about necessary
conditions for the elections and we agree on the need
for a legal framework for transitional self-government,
for all minorities to be registered and for there to be
minimum levels of security. We do not agree, however,
that these conditions must all be fulfilled before setting
a date. Quite to the contrary, we would that argue that
setting a date will galvanize the international
community and Kosovars to make progress on these
difficult issues.

In that connection, we are cautious about the
suggestion for a follow-up Security Council mission to
Kosovo. It should be considered only in the right
context, with clear objectives and at the right time. We
would not want such a mission to distract UNMIK in a
tense and complicated phase of developments in the
region or to complicate efforts by those in the region to
deal with these problems.

We fully support UNMIK's efforts to improve its
relationship with Belgrade and we look forward to the
full staffing of its office there. Clearly, political
developments in Yugoslavia over the past year have
completely changed the situation on the ground, but
these changes do not affect the requirements of
resolution 1244 (1999). The Yugoslav authorities do
not have a special role in making the decisions that
UNMIK and the Secretary-General must ultimately
make about Kosovo's transition self-government.

To be sure, however, Belgrade obviously should
be informed. I mention this because it is linked to
Kosovar Serb participation - or rather, non-
participation, unfortunately - in the activities of the
Working Group on the legal framework and even in the
municipal Governments where they are not a majority.
We reject the assertion that Belgrade's role in Kosovar
Serb participation should be linked. If the Government
of Yugoslavia is sincere about its commitment to
renewing a dialogue with Albanian leaders, then surely
it will encourage Serbs in Kosovo to participate in the
setting up of these structures as a way of reconfirming
commitment to the full implementation of the
resolution. Certainly, the Yugoslav Amnesty Law was
an important first step in creating conditions that would
support such a process, and we hope that Belgrade will
move to resolve the cases of those Kosovar Albanian
political prisoners who remain in custody.

