Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1874 (2009), which
condemns the nuclear test undertaken by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and, in that
regard, introduces additional restrictive measures with
regard to North Korea.

The resolution adopted is, on the one hand, an
appropriate response to the violation by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea of the decisions of the
Security Council and, on the other, a balanced measure
that demonstrates a responsible approach to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region and
reaffirms the resolute commitment of the Security
Council to a political and diplomatic settlement of the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.

Russia views the repeated nuclear tests by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea as a serious
blow to international efforts to strengthen the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and as an
action that undermines the international norms laid
down by the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
on the prohibition of such tests and jeopardizes
security and stability in the region. The circumstances
required the adoption of a strong, but, at the same time,
carefully measured Council resolution that, which, in

addressing the proliferation risks, would lead
Pyongyang to return to the Six-Party Talks.

Resolution 1874 (2009) meets those goals. The
additional restrictive measures on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea provided for in the
resolution are fairly substantive. At the same time, they
are targeted and closely linked to the need to end the
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and do not
affect the pressing need of the population to receive
humanitarian aid and economic assistance.

It is of fundamental importance that the
resolution clearly stipulates - and the Russian
delegation firmly insisted on this - that all sanctions
measures are to be implemented exclusively under
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter, which does
not provide for the use of military force. The vessel
inspection regime on the high seas, introduced in the
resolution, will be applied solely in the context of
ensuring compliance with its provisions. It has a fully
defined framework clearly limited to the situation
arising as a result of the nuclear test by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. It is unprecedented and
cannot be interpreted more broadly.

The Russian delegation actively contributed to
ensuring that the resolution contains detailed
provisions in support of the political and diplomatic
settlement of the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
and the resumption of the Six-Party Talks. It is
important that the text issues an appeal to Pyongyang
immediately and without preconditions to return to that
dialogue format. We trust that the resolution's
provision for the possible suspension and subsequent
lifting of sanctions will be a serious incentive to the
North Korean side to undertake to implement the
Security Council's decisions.

We would like to stress that the attempts of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to create a
nuclear missile potential not only does not strengthen
its security, but, on the contrary, increases tension in
North-East Asia and thus threatens the security both of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea itself and
of the region as a whole.

As an alternative to that extremely negative
scenario, it is important to continue to work jointly
with the partners in the Six-Party Talks format and
other interested parties to establish a mechanism to
guarantee peace and security in North-East Asia by
political and diplomatic means.

