Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his presentation, as well as
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine and
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Israel for their
briefings.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
European Union.

The Secretary-General has just presented a
damning assessment of 50 days of war in the Gaza
Strip, the third war in six years that has caused so many
deaths and wounded, destroyed so many lives and
neighbourhoods.

We would like to thank Egypt, whose efforts led to a
ceasefire agreement concluded on 26 August. It was the
first step necessary to end the hostilities, the sufferings
and humiliations. We also welcome the holding of the
conference in Cairo on Palestine, "Reconstructing
Gaza", on 12 October, organized by Egypt and Norway
in support of the Palestinian Authority. Our Minister of

Foreign and European Affairs was able to reaffirm the
strong solidarity of Luxembourg with the Palestinians,
which translates into an ongoing financial commitment
of approximately €7 million euros a year.

We also welcome implementation of the mechanism
established by the United Nations, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel, which is another necessary step in
the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip. But we all know
that we need to go further. No people can live under
the conditions imposed on the inhabitants of Gaza,
besieged between three walls and the sea, surviving
only thanks to UNRWA and international aid. We must
lift the blockade that strangles Gaza and its economy.

The war in Gaza confirms that fighting is
inevitable in the context of political deadlock, hatred
and discord. For 20 years, the peace process has seen
the repetition of three successive stages: stimulus,
stagnation and failure. Each new cycle has brought its
share of suffering. It is now high time to think outside
the box. It is no longer time to repeat the same sterile
processes of perpetual negotiations that go nowhere. It
is our responsibility to learn the lessons from the past.

The elements of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East have often been stated. We all know
the terms of the equation; there is no need to repeat
them. The goal is clear - an independent, democratic,
contiguous and sovereign State of Palestine, living
in peace and security alongside Israel, based on the
pre-1967 borders with Jerusalem as the capital of two
States. It is time to take bold and concrete measures
to implement the two-State solution before others take
new measures that make that solution impossible.

In that context, Luxembourg condemns the
recent decision by the Israeli authorities to approve
construction plans for 2,610 dwellings in Givat
HaMatos. That decision directly threatens the two-State
solution and the need for Jerusalem to be the capital of
two States, Israel and Palestine. If upheld, the decision
would confirm our doubts about Israel's commitment
in favour of a negotiated solution with the Palestinians.
Luxembourg recalls that the settlements are illegal
under international law. We call on Israel to reverse
that decision and, more generally, to immediately end
settlement activities in East Jerusalem and the whole of
the West Bank. Like the European Union, Luxembourg
will not recognize any changes to the 1967 borders other
than those agreed by both parties. We hope the Security
Council will play a constructive role in achieving peace
to encourage and facilitate efforts aimed at safeguarding
the two-State solution and ending the occupation. My
country is ready to support those efforts.

I must mention another tragedy, the conflict that
has been ravaging Syria and decimating its civilian
population for more than three and a half years. The
numbers speak for themselves - over 191,000 Syrians
have been killed in three years, including more than
10,000 children; 10.8 million Syrians, more than half
of them children, are in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance; 4.7 million Syrians are trapped by combat
in areas difficult to access; more than 3 million Syrians
have been forced to leave their country; and over
1 million ofthem are refugees in Lebanon, representing
nearly one-third of the total population of Lebanon.
Within just a few weeks, 200,000 civilians have fled
the city of Kobani and taken refuge in Turkey to seek
protection from the murderous rampage of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Those numbers of
deaths and displaced persons are staggering, but they
do not capture all the suffering inflicted on the Syrian
people, suffering that must deeply affect the human
conscience.

To respond to the humanitarian emergency, the
Security Council has been able to mobilize. The
first positive action has been taken under resolution
2165 (2014), adopted by the Council three months
ago, for cross-border humanitarian assistance across
the Syrian-Jordan and Syrian-Turkey borders and
for cross-line assistance through lines of conflict.
However, the parties to the conflict, particularly the
Syrian authorities, continue to ignore the demands of
resolution 2139 (2014). Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians, schools and hospitals, bombardements using
barrel bombs, the denial of humanitarian assistance
and the use of starvation as a weapon of war continue
unabated. Administrative obstacles to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance remain. The suffering of the
Syrian people will not be relieved by half measures,
the issuance of visas at a snail's pace nor by the
approval of a few additional national non-governmental
organizations. We demand that the parties, in particular
the Syrian authorities, adopt concrete measures to
implement resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) in
their entirety. This is all the more urgent as the Syrian
people will soon face their fourth winter since the
conflict began.

We hope that progress on the humanitarian front
will facilitate the task of those seeking a political
solution, the only possible solution to the conflict.
As Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos said
yesterday, we urgently need a political solution. Such
a solution entails a political transition that responds
to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, in
line with the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
of June 2012. In that regard, we support the efforts of
the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to
restart talks on the political level.

Luxembourg is gravely concerned by the
findings of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons fact-finding mission, published
on 10 September. It is now well-established that a
toxic chemical, specifically chlorine, was used as a
weapon systematically and repeatedly against villages
in northern Syria. Witness statements contained in
the report established a link between the attacks with
chlorine and the use of helicopters. However, only the
Syrian armed forces possess helicopters in Syria.

A year ago, with the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), our goal was clear. It was to ensure that crimes
using chemical weapons were not repeated again in
Syria. In our View, the Security Council should not
tolerate violations of resolution 2118 (2013), which are
being ignored in silence.

Today,wecannolongerbeindecisive orprocrastinate
in the face of war crimes and crimes against humanity
perpetrated in Syria, whether committed by the Syrian
authorities or extremist or terrorist groups, chief among
them the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. That
group, which is neither a State nor Islamic, defiles
Islam and merely strives to spread its reign of terror
to take root in Syria and Iraq and to destabilize the
entire region. The advance of ISIL makes it even more
urgent and necessary for the international community
to provide support to the countries suffering the impact
of the Syrian conflict - Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon. We
encourage the political leaders of Lebanon to elect a
President who can continue to implement the policies
of dissociation from the conflict.

My country fully supports the measures adopted to
counter the terrorists ofISIL, the Nusra Front, Al-Qaida
and their affiliates to cut off their funding channels to
prevent radicalization and stem the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. We can do that under resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). Beyond the actions taken
at the political, economic, military and humanitarian
level, it is important to redouble efforts to combat
impunity, whoever is responsible for the crimes. It is
at least important to give a ray of hope to relatives of
victims of the Syrian conflict and the victims of the
ISIL throat-slitters and other terrorist groups; the hope
that in the end, justice will be rendered; the hope that
the perpetrators of the heinous crimes in Syria and Iraq
will be held accountable for their terrible actions. In
our opinion, the International Criminal Court must play
a key role in nurturing that hope for justice.

