Mr. Vieira de Mello: Thank you all for your words
of encouragement. Let me say how greatly strengthened and
stimulated I feel after again meeting with you in this
Chamber and hearing your supportive statements. I have
taken note of all the observations and suggestions that you
have made, and I will take them back with me to Dili
over the weekend to relay to my colleagues there.

Mr. President, you have just asked me to respond to
some of the specific questions that have been put to me,
and I will do so with pleasure.

Ambassador Eldon put a question to me that was
also formulated in different words by Ambassadors
Yel'chenko, von Walsum, Holbrooke and by yourself. He
specifically requested me to provide the Council with an
assessment of future potential militia activity and asked
what could be done to tackle this problem. There are
different ways in which this can be addressed. I referred,
as does the Secretary-General's report, to the primary role
of the Indonesian Government, in particular the
Indonesian armed forces and the Indonesian police. I have
mentioned to you that this has been raised repeatedly by
both Major General Cosgrove and by myself, including
last week, and the indications I have received, in
particular from General Kiki Syahnakri, who is the
Udayana regional commander based in Den Pasa, are
encouraging.

What we are dealing with are the remnants, the
vestiges, of militia groups. These are small bands of 15
to 30 elements each, who have been particularly active, as
you know, around the Oecussi enclave, both on its eastern
and western borders. Most of these small groups appear
to be under the command of one individual whose name
is well known and is mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report and which I have mentioned repeatedly; Major
General Cosgrove has also repeatedly mentioned it to the
military and civilian authorities of Indonesia. General
Syahnakri promised me last week that this person would
be detained. I have received this morning a report which
indicates that he will in fact be interrogated by the joint
investigative team of our civilian police on the basis of
evidence gathered inside the Oecussi enclave, as well as
by the Indonesian National Police, POLRI, who will
fingerprint him and photograph him for further judicial
action, we hope.

General Syahnakri also reiterated to me all the steps
he had taken since his appointment to search camps for
weapons, to establish checkpoints - which I have seen
with my own eyes - around refugee settlements in
Atambua, as well as in areas close to the border between
East and West Timor. He also indicated to me that
despite his limited resources he would increase patrols
around the Oecussi enclave on the Indonesian side of the
border. All of this is extremely encouraging. I have

 

requested General De Los Santos, the new Philippino Force
Commander of the United Nations in East Timor, to
establish and maintain with General Syahnakri and his
superiors in Jakarta at the headquarters of the TNI, the
Indonesian armed forces, headquarters the closest possible
relations so as to build upon previous agreements: the one
signed in the presence of Ambassador Holbrooke in late
November, and the one mentioned here signed between
General Cosgrove and General Syahnakri on 12 January.

Repression of these hard-core, hard-line, die-hard
militia leaders is not sufficient. They must be deprived of
their political base or of their political command and
control structures. For that to happen I strongly believe that
political dialogue must be increased and must be
strengthened with the many different political leaders
representing the pro-autonomy, pro-integrationist cause that
continue to live and operate out of West Timor. I met with
some of them last week. They have just held a congress,
which was not entirely conclusive in terms of unifying the
pro-autonomy groups and certainly not terribly successful,
I am told, in terms of providing the moderate course of
action which the Indonesian Government, UNTAET and
Xanana Gusmao have been promoting, the broad majority
support of pro-integrationist groups in West Timor.

I am told that, unfortunately, it is still the hard line
that seems to have prevailed, which further demonstrates
the need for us to engage the pro-autonomy leaders in
continued systematic dialogue. They must not be excluded.
I think this would be a dangerous course of action. They
must be involved. They must be reassured that if they opt
for democratic, non-Violent means, they can, they must
return and engage in normal political activities in the new
framework that we shall establish in due course for the
functioning of political parties in East Timor. In other
words, they should abandon their past aspirations, which
were defeated by the majority on 30 August, look towards
the future and work within the new framework we are
establishing.

Ambassador Hasmy asked me what could be done to
disarm ex-combatants. I think I have indicated what
General Syahnakri and his predecessor have been doing
with the help of the Indonesian police and what additional
measures he intends to take. As far as disarming inside the
Territory of East Timor, as members know, the Armed
Forces for the National Liberation of East Timor, Falintil,
have been cantoned on the basis of the 5 May 1999
Agreement. They have been extremely disciplined. They
have respected fully that Agreement. They are not allowed
to carry their weapons outside the single cantonment area
that now exists in Aileu on the hills above Dili. They
have fully complied with that requirement. Finally, I think
I should also mention that 17 tons of weapons have been
collected, found in caches or retrieved from individuals in
East Timor by the International Force in East Timor,
INTERFET, during the last four to five months. We shall
soon be disposing of these weapons by dumping them
into the high seas off the shores of East Timor with a
small symbolic ceremony at the centre of Dili.

Ambassador Eldon also asked me to make sure that
the new East Timorese police force will be trained so as
to act in accordance with established international
standards. I can assure him that that indeed will be part
of their training in the new police academy, whenever we
manage to repair and equip that academy because, as I
said, that is one of our chronic problems: how to rebuild
public buildings, where to find funds to rebuild and equip
public buildings such as this academy, as well as the
academy for the new civil service, and so forth.

Ambassador Chowdhury asked me what we would
be doing to accelerate the deployment of civilian
policemen. This is an issue we have been discussing with
our colleagues here in the Secretariat. We will have a
series of meetings today and tomorrow to ensure the rapid
deployment of the remaining 1,100 civilian police that we
badly require.

Ambassador Eldon, later supported by Ambassadors
Dejammet, Andjaba and Holbrooke, asked me concretely
what we could do in order to improve our ability to
access those funds pledged in Tokyo in December last
year. Let me limit my comments to reconstruction only.
We will be discussing with World Bank officials today
and tomorrow how to accelerate the implementation of
the six-month reconstruction plan that I referred to in my
presentation, while, of course, adhering fully to
established World Bank procedures. I will be asking them
if it will be possible to have the Bank agree to rapid
disbursements of funds intended for reconstruction
projects in the different areas we identified in early
January without in any way interfering with the normal
progress of the project formulation, approval, international
tender and procurement process that the World Bank
cannot deviate from.

We will also discuss with them the possible
allocation to the United Nations Trust Fund, as distinct
from the World Bank trust fund, of some of the
unearmarked pledges made in Tokyo. This would give us
the possibility to proceed with badly needed

 

reconstruction projects, in particular, as I said, of public
buildings all over the country, while the Bank proceeds
with the preparation of its own reconstruction sector and
reconstruction programmes.

Bilateral contributions - such as have been made by
some countries represented in this room, for which we are
most grateful - have enabled us to launch small projects
that have kept electricity and water going, in Dili in
particular, and have made possible the launching of some
projects which Ambassador Hasmy referred to, particularly
in terms of road maintenance and repair and a number of
other infrastructure-related activities. Such contributions are
welcome, and there are enough implementing partners -
be they the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), other United Nations agencies or non-
governmental organizations on the ground - that are more
than willing to implement them in earnest.

Finally, as I mentioned in my presentation, some
flexibility in the use of assessed contributions for those
expenditures that are directly related to the implementation
of our mandate - which is to create a viable East
Timorese administration - would also be welcome. The
Secretary-General, for members' information, has convened
a meeting this afternoon, such is his personal interest in
allowing us this flexibility - needless to say, with the
support of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee.

Ambassador Andj aba asked me what other job-creating
prospects we could count on - private investment and so
on. I am afraid that, in the very near future, such prospects
are remote and minimal. There does not exist sufficient
confidence on the part of private investors in the region and
beyond for them to come in in any significant way and help
us in this critical short term to deal with the problem of
unemployment. My hope is, after contact with some
investors in countries of the region - be it Australia,
Indonesia, Thailand and, I am sure, others that Mr. Xanana
Gusmao has visited in recent days, including countries of
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
China and the Republic of Korea - that there will be, in
the medium term, much interest on the part of private
investors in coming to East Timor, but only after we have
managed to establish a durable climate of stability and a
proper economic and fiscal regulatory environment, which,
as I indicated, we are actively working on.

(spoke in French)

Ambassador Dejammet asked me whether we knew
how many Timorese living in exile would be likely to
return to Timor. I am afraid that we do not have a
comprehensive list of these human resources, but since
December the National Council of Timorese Resistance
(CNRT) has given us a few lists containing a few dozen
names of East Timorese who would, apparently, be
prepared to return. We are trying to get in touch with
them and to see under what terms they would be prepared
to return for a few months or a few years in support of
our efforts.

He also noted that the resumption of economic
activity would hinge on East Timor's normalizing
relations with Indonesia and with the western part of the
island of Timor. I agree with him entirely. Ambassador
Granovsky identified the connection between normalized
relations and the resumption of economic activity in
Timor. One thing is certain: all this will depend on the
reopening of the borders between East Timor and the
western part of the island. This is one of the matters that
we shall be negotiating with Indonesia. Jakarta would like
the borders to reopen as soon as possible, but that will
come about only when security has been made credibly to
prevail there - in other words, once the threat of
incursions, such as those that have occurred in recent
weeks, becomes a thing of the past, as we hope it will.

Ambassador Dejammet also suggested that we try,
as recommended in paragraph 18 of Security Council
resolution 1272 (1999), to reduce UNTAET's military
component, which would allow us to reallocate its
funding to governance and reconstruction. As I said in my
presentation and discussed with General De los Santos,
we periodically re-evaluate the security situation and,
thus, our military requirements on the field. I would be
the first to recommend to the Security Council that there
be a gradual reduction in the United Nations military
component.

(spoke in English)

Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh, supported
by the Ambassador of Jamaica, raised a number of issues
related to education and adult literacy. I have taken note
of their suggestions and will make sure that both are
integrated into our plan of action for education in the year
2000 and in subsequent such plans.

Ambassador Chowdhury also raised the question of
the prevention of recurrence of human rights Violations in
the future. I can report that, on Tuesday in Geneva, I met

 

with Mrs. Mary Robinson and we discussed technical
cooperation activities that her Office is eager to launch in
East Timor to reinforce the East Timorese preventive
capacity. One such activity is the creation of a national
human rights commission, and I have encouraged her to
send a mission to discuss with us and with the East
Timorese leadership the contents and the timetable for the
implementation of such a programme of technical
cooperation.

Ambassador Chowdhury also mentioned the
importance of the ASEAN countries and of the region as a
whole in the reconstruction and development of East Timor.
I think I have already addressed this in my reply to
Ambassador Andjaba.

Ambassador Shen Guofang referred to the importance
of safeguarding the unity of the CNRT. I certainly could
not agree more. That is a priority for all of us. That is a
very important message from this Council. We have
attempted to achieve that goal through the participatory way
in which the National Consultative Council has been
operating and through the consensus-building efforts within
the National Consultative Council and other consultative
bodies at the central and district levels. Secondly, I have
indicated why we decided, with Mr. Xanana Gusmao, to
delay somewhat the discussion of issues such as the new
constitution, a law on political parties or a law on
elections - that is, all those questions that are likely to
divide or to lead to a premature politicization of the
environment and to political competition, which in turn
are likely to weaken the unity and the commonality of
purpose that we have managed to develop within the
CNRT and the National Consultative Council.

Last but not least - and I agree with those members
who mentioned these visits as important in consolidating
unity within the CNRT, and ultimately unity among all
East Timorese, including those who campaigned for
autonomy and integration - I would refer to the visit of
our Secretary-General on 17 and 18 February. This will
include a very brief visit to refugee camps in Atambua,
which is a very powerful message that he will be
conveying to those refugees, and is to be preceded by the
visit of President Sampaio of Portugal and to be followed
by the visit of President Abdurrahman Wahid. These
visits, and many more that are scheduled for the month of
February and subsequent months, will be extremely
important in boosting this unity of purpose of the East
Timorese people, which we are determined to cultivate
and further support.

