Ms. Shalev (Israel): Today is a sad day for the
Security Council, for today the Council that we all
appreciate so much has been outrageously compelled to
meet in order to promote the particular agenda of a
certain member State of the Council. That certain
member State intentionally chose to abuse the
procedures of the Security Council in order to distract
it from addressing the dire problems of the
international community.

Serving as a member of the Security Council
entails a serious and solemn responsibility. That is why
the Charter of the United Nations establishes clear
demands for the non-permanent members, noting that,

"due regard [should be] specially paid, in the first
instance to the contribution of Members of the
United Nations to the maintenance of
international peace and security and to the other
purposes of the Organization".

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya knows no such
responsibility. When Israeli students were murdered in
Jerusalem last March by a Palestinian terrorist, it was
Libya that opposed the unanimous will of the members
of the Council to condemn the attack. Fourteen
members of the Security Council understood their
responsibility. Libya did not.

Since its election to the Council, Libya has
prevented any initiative on Middle Eastern issues that
contradicts its narrow political agenda. Libya even
refused to participate in briefings by the Israeli mission
on various topics relevant to the work of the Security
Council. Those examples are a clear demonstration that
Libya does not understand its role in this Council, its
obligations or its responsibilities.

This meeting of the Security Council has nothing
to do with threats to international peace and security. It
is a provocative abuse of procedure, nothing more. If
Libya was genuinely interested in supporting peace and
security in the Middle East, it would have condemned
3
Hamas when it brutally took control of the Gaza Strip
in a violent coup against the moderate Palestinian
Authority. It would have condemned the constant
barrage of thousands of rockets and mortars on Israeli
towns and villages by terrorists. It would have
condemned Iran and Syria for harbouring, supporting
and training terrorists in our region. It would have
condemned the ongoing transfer of sophisticated
weapons and financial resources to terrorist groups.
But Libya did not.

Peace and security in the Middle East can be
achieved only by supporting the moderates in our
region and denouncing extremist elements. Yet Libya
does the opposite. In fact, Libya has not provided any
constructive contribution to support the bilateral peace
process between Israel and the Palestinians. Moreover,
Libya does not recognize the State of Israel and uses
rhetoric and terminology that reflect a world view
rooted in the past. The most evident proof of this is
Libya's reference in its letter to my country Israel as the
"Zionist entity". By using that term, Libya joins other
extremist elements that deny Israel's legitimacy -
Hamas, Islamic Jihad, Al-Qaida, Hizbollah, Iran and the
Sudan. We should all ask ourselves whether it is a
coincidence that Libya's current provocation was
launched in close proximity to the meeting of the
Council regarding the situation in Darfur.

Like any other State, the State of Israel has the
right - in fact, the duty - to defend its citizens from
terrorist attacks. No State member of this Council, nor
any other Member of the United Nations, would allow
a shipment originating from a hostile State to reach a
territory that serves as a launching pad for terrorist
attacks against its civilians.

To conclude, I would like to address directly the
representative of Libya. If Libya truly desires to
provide humanitarian support to the civilians in the
Gaza Strip, there are ways and means to do so. Many
States, including those without diplomatic relations
with Israel, and international organizations use these
mechanisms to provide humanitarian relief for the
Gaza Strip. Let me emphasize that such mechanisms
exist. They are coordinated with the international
community. They are well known and do not
necessitate media events and provocations like the one
we are currently engaged in.

