Mr. Lamamra (spoke in Arabic): Thank you,
Mr. President, for your understanding and for your
assistance in making it possible for the African Union
to address the Council. This is very important for the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations.

(spoke in English)

I should like to thank the Council for this
opportunity to address it on this very important issue of
Somalia.

Somalia has witnessed significant progress since
the beginning of the year. Following the resignation of
President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed on 29 December
2008, a number of positive developments took place in
the country. First, Somali stakeholders, acting in
accordance with the decisions reached within the
context of the Djibouti process, expanded the
Transitional Federal Parliament to accommodate the
Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia and other
stakeholders, including civil society.

On 30 January 2009, the expanded parliament
proceeded, in a free and fair manner, to elect a new
President in the person of His Excellency Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed. This election, coupled with the
expansion of the parliament, crowned the process
initiated by the signing of the Djibouti agreement of
19 August 2008. Later, on 13 February, the newly
elected President appointed His Excellency Mr. Omar
Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke as the new Prime Minister,
and a 36-member national unity cabinet was thereafter
constituted. The Government and other transitional
institutions have since relocated to Mogadishu.

It is worth noting that the new President, upon
assumption of duty, expressed his commitment to work
towards effective reconciliation among the Somali
people and bring on board those elements that are still
outside the peace process. He also stressed the
intention of his Government to promote close
cooperation with Somalia's neighbours. As the Council
is aware, the Djibouti agreement was conducted under
the auspices of the United Nations, with the active
support of the African Union and other international
partners. I should like to underscore the need for
sustained United Nations engagement in the
implementation of the agreement as a critical part of
the effort to promote the success of the peace and
reconciliation process.

The African Union (AU) appreciates the Security
Council's continued attention in addressing the threats
posed by piracy off the coast of Somalia and beyond.
The effective actions that are being taken should
directly or indirectly assist in promoting much-needed
overall security for Somalia and for the whole region.

Indeed, the security situation in Somalia, and in
Mogadishu in particular, remains very volatile. In

efforts to address the heightened level of insecurity,
notably the attacks directed at the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), President Sheikh
Sharif met with representatives of a number of armed
opposition groups in a bid to open dialogue with them.
The President also established a national security
committee to oversee efforts to improve security and
broaden reconciliation. Furthermore, a number of
religious clerics, traditional leaders, businessmen and
the influential Hawiiye Cultural and Unity Council
have also intervened and prevailed on some of the
groups concerned to halt their attacks on AMISOM.
That has resulted in a form of cessation of hostilities,
which became effective on 1 March.

I should stress that AMISOM. is working closely
with the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to
operationalize the Somali Joint Security Force. At the
moment, AMISOM. is providing food rations to the first
batch of recruited TFG/ARS forces. Considering the
need to fully equip the Somali Joint Security Force
with the requisite weapons and ammunition, the AU
has been requested by the Transitional Federal
Government to work with the Security Council and
take advantage of the exemption to the arms embargo
imposed on the country to help the Government
acquire arms for its forces.

The humanitarian situation remains particularly
difficult. In fact, considerable progress recorded earlier
with the return of a number of internally displaced
persons and some refugees to Mogadishu, has been
reversed, as a number of Mogadishu residents have
again been forced out as a result of continued fighting
between various armed elements and TF G forces.

For its part, AMISOM. continues to provide basic
humanitarian relief to local communities. The
AMISOM. Level I hospital provides medical care to a
considerable number of Somalis, while AMISOM
water tankers supply portable water to communities
around the camps and beyond.

At this juncture, I should like to inform the
Council that the AU continues to pursue efforts to
enhance AMISOM. The Mission's current strength is
3,450, consisting of two battalions each from Burundi
and Uganda, against an authorized strength of 8,000.
Steps are under way to deploy, in a matter of days, one
additional battalion pledged by Uganda, while
consultations continue with Burundi as to the
appropriate timing for the deployment of the third

battalion pledged by the Burundian Government. The
African Union Commission is also engaging other
member States to secure additional troops, and I should
like to note the contribution of the Government of
Algeria in providing airlifts for the rotation of the
Burundi contingent units and for the deployment of the
third Ugandan battalion at no cost to the AU.

In addition, efforts continue to be made to
complete the deployment of the police component of
AMISOM. as part of the efforts to train, mentor,
restructure and reorganize the Somali police. The AU
and the United Nations Development Programme are
currently developing an integrated support plan for the
Somali Police Force, and I would like to seize this
opportunity to once again extend the African Union's
sincere appreciation to its bilateral and multilateral
partners who are providing financial and logistical
support to AMISOM.

It is in this light that the AU welcomes Security
Council resolution 1863 (2009), adopted on 16 January
2009, in which the Council expressed its intent to
consider establishing a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to AMISOM,
subject to a further decision by 1 June 2009. In this
resolution, the Council also approved the proposals
made by the Secretary-General on 19 December 2008,
for a logistical package to support AMISOM. with
equipment and services, as well as the establishment of
a trust fund to provide financial support to AMISOM. to
assist in the re-establishment, training, and retention of
an all-inclusive Somali security force.

I therefore call upon the Council to build on its
position and take the decision needed to deploy a
follow-on peacekeeping operation to take over from
AMISOM, in view of the fact that, on 11 March 2009,
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
renewed the mandate of AMISOM. for another three
months, in anticipation of the Security Council
decision to deploy a follow-on peacekeeping force.

Equally important is the need to urgently
implement the decision by the United Nations to
provide a logistical support package to AMISOM. In
this respect, I look forward to the General Assembly's
early budgetary approval of the elements of the support
package to be provided through United Nations-
assessed contributions. I therefore call on States
Members of the United Nations to generously
contribute to the envisaged United Nations trust fund
that will provide financial and material support to
AMISOM. until a United Nations peacekeeping
operation is deployed, and to assist in building Somali
institutions for security and rule of law.

In conclusion, I should like to express
appreciation once again to all partners that have so far
extended support to AMISOM. both bilaterally and
multilaterally. We believe that if we collectively
continue to take correct and decisive measures, we will
ensure that the current window of opportunity created
in Somalia will not have been lost.

