Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We thank the Egyptian
presidency for organizing today's open debate and for
the concept paper (S/2017/692, annex). We also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Senior Advisor at the International Peace Institute
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal
for their comprehensive presentations and for sharing
their vision on how to make peacekeeping operations
more effective and fit for the current challenges that we
face in many parts of the world.

Armenia highly values the contributions that
peacekeepers and peacekeeping missions make
towards sustaining peace and security worldwide. Over
the years, Armenia has developed solid foundations
for involvement in peacekeeping missions and our
engagement in the area of international peacekeeping
has gradually expanded. Currently, Armenia is an
active contributor to international peace and security,
and has accumulated considerable experience in the
field. Since 2014, Armenia has contributed a platoon
of 32 servicemen to the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and six shifts have already been
rotated. Armenia's contribution to international peace
and security is also reflected by its long-standing
participation in NATO-led operations in Kosovo
and Afghanistan.

We want to also highlight the importance of the
United Nations support to regional organizations
and arrangements. In this context, we welcome the
expanding cooperation of the United Nations with
the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO).
Within the CSTO, Armenia has been investing its
experience in the strengthening of the preparedness
for peacekeeping. During our presidency in the CSTO
over the past year, we attached priority to the expansion
of such cooperation between the Organization and the
United Nations and we will continue supporting closer
working interactions between the two secretariats.

Armenia will maintain the current level of
involvement in Lebanon and Mali and we are ready and
have the capacity to increase the number of troops in
UNIFIL and to provide additional staff at the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We stand by the commitment we
undertook in that connection at the summit on United
Nations peacekeeping in September 2015.

Armenia is planning to register a role-2 field
hospital and an engineering unit equipped to counter
improvised explosive devices in the United Nations
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and
make them available to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We are working closely with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in order to facilitate the
process of preparedness and deployment.

The peaceful resolution of conflicts on the basis
of the norms and principles of international law and
within internationally agreed mandates is of particular
significance. Only through comprehensive and
genuine dialogue between the parties to conflicts and
adherence to previously reached agreements will it be
possible to avoid any escalation of the situation on the
ground and pave the way for a political solution and
reconciliation between people. Prevention and early-
warning mechanisms should be at the forefront of peace
initiatives. Special attention should be paid to the early-
warning signs emanating from the parties to conflicts.

In conclusion, Armenia supports reform efforts
that are aimed at enhancing the effectiveness and
operational capabilities of peacekeeping operations
and streamlining the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture. We will continue to forge stronger
cooperation with the United Nations so as to be able to
contribute to international peace and security.

