Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Mufioz for his excellent
presentation of the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), and of the Monitoring Team established
pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004).

My delegation attaches particular attention to the
work of the Committee against Al Qaeda and the
Taliban, convinced as it is of the seriousness of the
threat posed by Al Qaeda, which has managed to adapt,
continues to strike and runs rampant in various parts of
the world. That is why we need to address this problem
collectively and in a concerted manner. In our fight
against terrorism, which should be a daily struggle, we
need to show both firmness and vigilance. It is equally
important that we attack this phenomenon in a resolute
manner, dealing with all its various manifestations, as
well as addressing all its underlying causes.

That said, there are a number of positive notes on
the register of the fight against terrorism that deserve
to be underscored.

First, we note that more than 130 States have
already submitted reports and more than 90 countries
have established teams to monitor assets belonging to
terrorists, which is an additional milestone in the fight
against Al Qaeda. It is now important that, in addition
to submitting their reports, all Member States
effectively implement the measures set out in the
sanctions regime in order to vanquish that
organization.

Next, I would like to note the progress made by
the Committee in implementing its mandate, as well as
the work accomplished by the Monitoring Team in the
few months since its establishment - its support for
the Committee in promoting the effective
implementation of the relevant resolutions and in
assessing the impact of measures announced and the
recommendations proposed to enhance them, as well as
the support given to the Chair of the Committee during
his various visits to check on the implementation of the
sanctions regime in the given countries.

In that respect, I would like to point out that the
Monitoring Team has met the deadlines set out in
resolution 1526 (2004) by submitting its first written
report, which is not only concise, balanced and of good
quality, but also outlines new ideas and makes a series
of recommendations that the Committee has already
begun to consider in informal meetings.

My delegation fully shares the Monitoring
Team's analysis of the Al Qaeda phenomenon, which
has mutated into a global network of groups linked not
by an organizational structure but rather by a series of
partially overlapping objectives. While underscoring
that terrorism knows no religion or cultural affiliation
and is indiscriminate in the selection of its victims, we
cannot fail to note that the primary victims of terrorism
are, in fact, the Muslim populations and countries
themselves, including my own. And, increasingly,
children are no longer spared by terrorist barbarities, as
witnessed in the tragedy in Beslan.

With regard to cooperation between the
Committee and Member States, it is clear that it
continues to be one of the most important aspects of
the work of the Committee. Issues that deserve special
attention include enhancing the quality of the List,
dialogue with States and visits to given States. In that
respect, my delegation believes it would be ill-advised
to suspend or remove the names of individuals or
entities from the List because of insufficient
information. What is important is not the information
itself, but the danger or the threat posed by such
individuals to peace and security.

We encourage the Chairman to continue his visits
in the field in order to strengthen dialogue with
Member States and to check on the implementation of
sanctions measures. The visits to Asia scheduled in
November will certainly be extremely useful to the
work of the Committee, given the surge of Al Qaeda
networks in that region and the attacks perpetrated
there - most recently an attack in Jakarta against the
Australian Embassy, an act which my delegation firmly
condemns.

In addition, we support the Committee in the
specific tasks it has to undertake. We encourage it
especially to listen more attentively to Member States
and to share their concerns, just as we encourage it to
further develop cooperation and coordination in
particular with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Director with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and with the international organizations
and agencies who have expertise in the struggle against
terrorism.

In general terms, the recommendations proposed
by the Monitoring Team will enhance the sanctions
regime. In that regard, we encourage the Monitoring
Team to make specific recommendations to encourage
Member States to submit names for the Consolidated
List, to better regulate the transboundary movement of
capital, to prevent the abuse of charitable
organizations, and to resolve the issue of the right to
asylum.

On this last matter, I would emphasize that, in my
statement to the Council on 25 May 2004, I indicated
that we need to think further about better use of the
opportunities provided under Chapter VII of the
Charter, in order to encourage States to fully cooperate
in the fight against terrorism, including with respect to
the issue of extradition. Concerning extradition, we
would like the Al Qaeda and Taliban Monitoring Team
to address the issue of the right to asylum in order to
strengthen international judicial cooperation. Let me
point out here that, to date, the right to asylum
continues, unfortunately, to be abusively granted to
terrorist organizations and to individuals involved in
acts of terrorism in their countries of origin, thereby
voiding the institution of the right to asylum of its
substance and above all, conveying impunity to known
criminals.

The rigorous collection and processing of
information, in particular with respect to the issue of
security, is more than recommended to provide an
objective appraisal of the threats to peace and security.
The rash and somewhat superficial categorization of
North African nationals associated with acts of
terrorism linked to Al Qaeda as being a so-called risk
factor to the Arabian peninsula leaves me somewhat
puzzled. Such categorization can, in fact, lead to
mistaken conclusions and to dangerous distortions
because, while there are North African terrorist groups,
and they are indeed on the List of the Committee, those
groups unfortunately and undoubtedly are not the only
ones. There are other groups that are indeed rampant,
not only in the Arabian peninsula, but in other
countries in the world. These are the few points that I
want to make in order that the Monitoring Team
provide us with an objective and documented
clarification in its second report, scheduled for
December.

