At the outset, allow me to welcome you, Minister Heiko Maas, and the fact that you are presiding over the Security Council today, as well as all the Ministers attending this meeting. We thank the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing. We share many of the concerns he expressed. This month will mark the one-year anniversary of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salame's three-step plan to end the current conflict in Libya. Throughout the year, the implementation of the plan has been met with numerous obstacles and challenges. While we deplore the fact that the situation on the ground is deteriorating, we also note that there has been some progress. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission, the economic dialogue, the Berlin Conference and resolution 2510 (2020) are the result of that plan. A great deal has been invested in these plans, and we must therefore stay the path and continue our efforts for peace in Libya. On that note, let me focus on the following points. First, we support efforts for peace in Libya. In the pursuit of a lasting peace in Libya, Indonesia will consistently support regional and international efforts such as the Berlin process. We acknowledge the principles set out in the Berlin communique, including in supporting and respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya; international laws and agreements, including the arms embargo; and efforts to ensure a return to the political process for all Libyans. Supporting the Libyans in finding peace is the responsibility of all, not only those who were in Berlin. We reiterate our call on the international community as a whole to provide honest and sincere support to the people of Libya - support to enhance development and prosperity and not to increase insecurity and instability. Foreign interference must stop. It is important to align efforts with existing international corridors, including the relevant United Nations resolutions. We welcome the efforts made by the Secretary-General, including his phone calls to Prime Minister Serraj and General Haftar, and we support his plea for a political solution in Libya. We also reiterate our strong support for the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire, especially during the crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Secondly, we need to focus our efforts on saving Libyan lives. This includes those who are particularly vulnerable: women, children and migrants. The shocking recent discovery of mass graves paints a grim picture of the failure to protect innocents. We call on all parties to fully respect international humanitarian law and to take measures to protect all civilians. They must heed the call for a global ceasefire, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, and give space for humanitarian assistance. We continue to support the work that the United Nations Support Mission in Libya is doing for Libya and the appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya. Thirdly, I would stress the importance of regional roles for peace in Libya. The efforts made by neighbouring countries and by regional organizations such as the African Union and the League of Arab States remain relevant and should be further encouraged. We realize that, as neighbours, the countries in the region have felt the direct impact of the conflict. They should never be left out, as they provide a unique perspective for peace. The Council's engagement on Libya has been a long and winding process. We had hoped that during our term in the Council we could see its conclusion. The people of Libya have grown tired of empty narratives that have zero impact on the ground. They are tired of seeing brothers fighting brothers. They wanted us, the international community, not to meddle but to find political solutions and to find a lasting peace. Let us not throw away our opportunity for peace in Libya.
