Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is pleased to
see Mrs. Ogata address the Council once again on this
important issue. We benefited a great deal the last time

 

she addressed this issue and are particularly grateful to have
this latest update. Today's meeting of the Council on the
refugee situation in Africa keeps the focus on the continent
during this month-long consideration by the Council of
issues relating to Africa during the presidency of the United
States.

My delegation is grateful to Mrs. Ogata for her
overview of the refugee situation in Africa. We entirely
agree with her analysis of the problem and strongly support
her suggestions and proposals, which we hope the Council
will be able to act on.

No one can deny that the refugee problem affecting
Africa is one of great magnitude. No one knows exactly
how many people have been displaced, but we do know
that the numbers escalate daily and that the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons in Africa is not
going to go away in the foreseeable future. Yet, it is not
just Africa that is grappling with the refugee problem.
Europe and Asia, too, have their share of the problem in
the wake of the crises in Kosovo, Chechnya, East Timor
and many other places. Undoubtedly, this has posed a
tremendous challenge to the international community and,
in particular, to international humanitarian agencies like the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) and other relief agencies in addressing
the issue.
Various reasons have been given as the causes of
refugee movements. However, in the case of Africa, the
unresolved political crises on the continent are at the root
of the problem, highlighted by Mrs. Ogata, which has led
to the growing mass exodus of people from their homes.
Indeed, the crises have become virtually intractable and are
further compounded by other socio-economic crises faced
by many African countries. Because of its cross-border
character, the refugee issue has serious regional dimensions
precipitating or complicating conflicts among regional
States, as can be seen in a number of conflict situations in
Africa, such as Angola, Sierra Leone, Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. These conflicts have
led to a massive exodus of people who find themselves in
overcrowded refugee camps.

In spite of the commendable efforts of the
international community, particularly the donor countries,
to respond to these unending refugee crises, a permanent
solution remains elusive. The numbers of new refugees
swell even as efforts are being made, oftentimes
unsuccessfully, to deal with the old cases. Clearly, because
of the large numbers involved and other factors,
resettlement in third countries has its limitations and
therefore cannot be a viable option in resolving the
problem. More and more, a permanent solution to the
refugee problems in Africa must be found in Africa itself,
with, of course, the necessary international assistance.
Indeed, African Governments and societies have not been
found wanting in rendering assistance to refugees arriving
in their countries. Mrs. Ogata has many times commended
Africans' traditional hospitality towards refugees. But this,
too, has its limitations. Most host countries in Africa are
confronted with numerous and unparalleled economic
crises of their own and therefore can ill afford the luxury
of hospitality, which can be politically sensitive.

Clearly, for the millions of uprooted Africans, the
problem must ultimately be resolved in the context of
much-needed new commitments and political will on the
part of the African countries concerned to achieve peace
and reconciliation. Clearly, too, a permanent solution must
be predicated on adherence to the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) Refugee Convention, one of the
cornerstones of the organization itself. In this regard,
Malaysia hails the creation of the OAU award for service
to refugees, awarded last year to Tanzania and Cote
d'Ivoire.

But for Africa to resolve the refugee crisis, it will
require sustained support and solidarity on the part of the
international community, especially the donor countries,
which, unfortunately, are perceived to have been
somewhat lacking in recent times. This has been
highlighted by UNHCR itself, as well as by the OAU,
which has made an impassioned appeal to the
international community not to forget the millions of
refugees and displaced persons in Africa even as it rushes
to the aid of other refugees in other parts of the world.
We note with some concern the reduction in UNHCR's
programmes for Africa due to the declining resources at
its disposal, and hope that this will not affect its activities
too adversely, particularly in the more critical areas of the
continent. We hope that this is only a temporary setback,
and that the situation will improve, with renewed
generosity on the part of the donor countries, perhaps as
a direct response to this meeting of the Council.

Malaysia considers the twin issues of the protection
of, and access to, refugees to be matters of paramount
importance. In many war-tom African countries,
humanitarian access to the displaced is frequently
obstructed or denied, with impunity. Humanitarian
workers continue to find themselves under serious -

 

oftentimes permanent - threats to their security. Such
violations of human security are unacceptable and must be
condemned and redressed by the international community,
including the Governments and the peoples of Africa.

Malaysia also wishes to reiterate that humanitarian
assistance must be apolitical in nature and predicated on the
principles of strict neutrality and non-selectivity. Donors
should resist the temptation to use humanitarian aid as a
means of exerting political pressure on either party in a
conflict.

The refugee problem is one of the many ills afflicting
Africa, and no discussion of African issues will be
complete without focusing on that problem. We hope that
this meeting today, which is taking place so soon after the
Council discussion on AIDS in the context of African
security, will not be merely a briefing. We hope that it will
serve as a second wake-up call for the international
community regarding the need for concerted global action
to address the plight of Africa. In the Council and other
relevant organs of the United Nations, we should galvanize
ourselves and our partners and respond promptly to the call
for action just made to the Council by Mrs. Ogata.

In closing, let me reiterate my delegation's
appreciation to Mrs. Ogata and her staff for their tireless
efforts in alleviating the plight of refugees throughout the
world, which deserve the continued strong support of the
international community and this Council.

