Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, let me begin
by thanking you and the entire delegation of the United
Kingdom for having convened this important debate on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. I would also like to thank The Honourable
Joao Manuel Goncalves Lourenco, Minister of Defence
of Angola and Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), as well as Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, for their
respective briefings.

Before I start, allow me to also acknowledge
the presence among us of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His
Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N'tungamulongo;
Her Excellency Ms. Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula,
Minister of Defence and Military Veterans of South
Africa; and the Ugandan Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Henry Oryem Okello.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
Mrs. Robinson for her dedication to peace and
security in the Great Lakes region for the past
16 months - actually, I would say for over a decade,
since she was the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Geneva; we both served there.
I thank her warmly for her dedication and personal
support for peace in the Great Lakes region. I would
also like to pay tribute to His Excellency Jose' Eduardo
dos Santos, President of the Republic of Angola and
Chair of the ICGLR, for his wisdom and commitment
to peace and security in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Rwanda was pleased to see that the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has achieved some progress on important fronts, as
outlined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/450),
including working towards ending gross human rights
violations and consolidating State authority in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The setting of a
time frame for the organization of local elections, the
Government's increasing presence in areas cleared
of armed groups, including the islands of stability
supported by MONUSCO, military operations against
the Ugandan Allied Democratic Forces-National Army
for the Liberation of Uganda - these are all positive
and encouraging developments.

However, there is still much to be done, as we
have heard in the reports of extremely slow security-
sector reform, the horrific crimes against civilians that
continue to be carried out by armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the pervasive
impunity that accompanies these crimes. It is true that
MONUSCO is on the ground protecting civilians, but
we should not forget that the primary responsibility
to protect the Congolese people lies, of course, with
the Government, which should redouble its efforts in
implementing and enforcing accountability and justice
mechanisms.

There is another area of extreme importance which,
unfortunately, has not seen progress: the neutralization
of the 1994 genocidal movement, namely the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR). This
is one of the oldest armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which settled in that area after
committing the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis in
Rwanda. Despite its claims of readiness to disarm,
the FDLR continues to recruit and train combatants,
including children. The genocidal organization FDLR's
voluntary disarmament is the latest among the many
distractions that have stood in the way of a solution to
the FDLR problem for two decades.

General disarmament and surrenders have been
taking place under political and military pressure
for many years. As stated by Special Representative
Martin Kobler, more than 11,000 former FDLR
combatants have been successfully repatriated since
2002 through the Mutobo Demobilization Centre,
which the Council visited in October last year. Most
of those who surrendered, including top commanders,
have peacefully reintegrated into society. There is
a tendency to create a false dichotomy between the
military operation against the FDLR and voluntary
surrender. Yet this is not an either/or situation. On the
contrary, the two actually contribute to each other.
The main reason that more than 10,000 ex-FDLR have
disarmed and returned voluntarily to Rwanda over the
past 10 years is that political and military pressure, or
the credible threat thereof, have consistently triggered
mass surrenders of demotivated genocidal forces,
namely FDLR combatants.

On the other hand, the example set by successful
repatriation and reintegration within Rwandan society
presented a strong incentive for further surrenders.
I wish here to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kobler for sharing the statistics on
the repatriation of FDLR combatants since 2002, most
of whom repatriated owing to the pressure, I think, of
the joint Forces arme'es de la Republique democratique
du Congo (FARDC) and Rwanda Defence Force military
operations of 2009, code named "Umoja wetu".

It would have been good, in order to have a full
picture of the situation, if this graph were accompanied
by statistics on FDLR recruitment and on the atrocities
committed since 2002. Then we would better
understand the urgency of the matter. But even with
these statistics, it is clear that military pressure seems to
be the only viable option that can force the genocidaires
to repatriate.

Having said that, by entertaining the FDLR
genocidal forces' diversionary manoeuvres that are
neither new nor credible, regional international actors
are further complicating and prolonging a conflict for
which the region has already paid a tragic cost. Even
more disturbing is the fact that such an attitude might
be setting the stage for further conflicts in the region,
as some actors driven by hidden agendas may take
advantage of the genocidal movement, the FDLR's
presence. to pursue their own negative goals.

Rwanda knows first-hand what it takes to build a
nation from the ashes. We know that the focus should be
on national reforms, the reintegration of former rebels,
neutralizing remaining groups and establishinb State
authority. That is why we are committed to carrying out
all the tasks required of us as per the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework Agreement in order to
ensure that the region is moving towards peace and
stability throughout its borders. From 18 to 20 July, a
delegation from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government, assisted by officials from MONUSCO,
the ICGLR and the Office of the Special Envoy, carried
out the registration and initiation of the armies to
process the ex-Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) elements
interned in Rwanda.

When 453 ex-combatants, including all their
former leaders, were registered and filled out their
application forms, the process generated some positive
expectations on the part of the ex-combatants. Some
of the junior members who were not present during
the exercise have expressed interest in joining the
process. Signatories to the Framework Agreement and
others should ensure that reasonable incentives are
put in place and maintained for the ex-combatants to
remain committed to the implementation process. As
an active member of the ICGLR, a committed signatory
to the Framework Agreement, and the Government
that has been carrying a heavy burden by receiving,
disarming, moving away from the border and managing
ex-M-23 combatants without any international support,
we are determined to support the implementation of the
Kampala dialogue declarations and have requested that
its application be extended to include the ex-FARDC
General Laurent Nkunda.

We firmly believe that the international community
should engage with signatories in general collaborative
terms. They should build on regional initiatives to
achieve sustainable peace by addressing the root causes
of crises in the Great Lakes region. Chief among those
causes in the past two decades are the active presence of
the genocidal forces, FDLR, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The synchronization of
international and regional efforts is paramount to avoid
the progress achieved being diluted or reversed. For
example, the implementation of concrete resolutions
agreed upon unanimously during the ICGLR Summit
in Luanda in March was unfortunately diverted by
unrelated agendas, some of which only serve to worsen
existing problems.

The international community, through its special
envoys or other channels, should make greater use of
good offices to ensure that key actors in the region
continue to work in the spirit of confidence-building,
ownership and accountability.

I conclude by warmly welcoming Ambassador Said
Djinnit, the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region. I have no doubt that he is
expertise and extensive experience have prepared him
for the job. We have high hopes for the Ambassador
and the new team. We look forward to working with
them so that we may see all of our efforts bear fruit
for the benefit of the Congolese people, the Congolese
Government and for all the people of the region.

