Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the voting on resolution 2510 (2020), which was drafted by the United Kingdom and Germany in support of the Berlin Conference on Libya. We still do not have a clear understanding of whether all Libyan parties are ready to implement that decision, although we have repeatedly underscored the importance of that step both during preparations for the Berlin Conference and after its conclusion. It was a requirement due to the specifics of the Libyan crisis, which was the result of gross violations of the various relevant Security Council resolutions in 2011. It must be highlighted that, from the very beginning, Russian representatives played an active part in preparations for the Conference in the German capital. In addition to working on the final communique, we tried to support our German colleagues with practical steps to create favourable conditions for the success of the Conference. To that end, together with Turkey, we organized a meeting of the Libyan parties in Moscow on 13 January. Our initiative was aimed at achieving the establishment of a ceasefire in Libya and became a significant contribution to international efforts. Is that not proof that Russia demonstrated as much interest as anyone else in coordinating and implementing the Berlin decisions, if not more? Nevertheless, the way in which subsequent work unfolded at the United Nations suggests that many were more interested in simply adopting a Security Council resolution as quickly as possible, regardless of how it would be implemented. If the resolution is an end in itself, then it appears that we have achieved that goal. The Berlin Conference was designed as one of the steps in Special Representative Salame's three-point plan, namely, the consolidation of external actors in the interest of creating the necessary conditions to launch a peace process in Libya. We are all in agreement with regard to that goal. All of the participants in Berlin signed the document. If it were a matter of welcoming that result at the Security Council, we could have done so the very next day after the Conference. Instead, we were told that it was necessary to adopt a resolution that would look to the future and have more muscle. The idea itself is not a bad one, but it does have one defect that we are tired of repeating: the absence of clearly expressed consent by the Libyan parties themselves. That is the fundamental principle of the Libyan peace process, which is enshrined in Security Council resolutions on the matter. Allow me to reiterate that only the Libyans themselves should determine the future of their country. I stress that that principle must extend to the recommendations set out in the Berlin outcome document and apply to those aspects that are to be implemented by the Libyan parties, not by external actors. We spoke about that principle with both the organizers of the meeting in Germany and United Nations officials. Was the consent of the Libyan parties obtained? No. Were there any serious attempts to obtain it? No. Meanwhile, we urged our colleagues not to rush into adopting a resolution. That was also discussed by other members of the Council that were not invited to Berlin but have a direct interest in the Libyan peace process. The Libyans have just begun their dialogue, including within the framework of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, through which the ceasefire parameters should be formulated, as mentioned in the Berlin communique. Why could we not wait for the outcome of the Libyan consultations? Then we couldhave confirmed that the Libyans themselves were in agreement and the Security Council could have enshrined their decision. Instead, what we have today is a document that orders the execution of something that does not yet exist, provides for the possibility of imposing sanctions for the non-implementation of something that does not yet exist and requires the Secretary-General to provide his recommendations in that regard. We doubt that such ultimatums will encourage the Libyans to come to an agreement sooner. It is our sincere wish to see the provisions of Security Council resolutions on Libya implemented. We would like this document to be viable; however, we do not believe that it will be possible on the basis of this text. Therefore, we could not vote in favour of it. If resolution 2510 (2020) is not implemented, we will remind the Council of what we have said today. We have a number of other criticisms regarding the text of the resolution, the details of which I will not elaborate on, as we voiced all of our concerns during consultations. Unfortunately, they were rejected by the co-penholders. I would like to mention one more thing. Yesterday we adopted another resolution on Libya (resolution 2509 (2020)) (see S/PV.8719), a so-called sanctions resolution. We could not help but notice the liberal approach taken by some of our colleagues in reflecting the realities on the ground in the texts of resolutions. In one case, despite a particular event being a one-off, it was persistently inserted into documents and, in another, when an abundance of information and facts from a variety of sources was available, they were disregarded. In conclusion, yesterday and today we have adopted two resolutions on Libya on which there is no consensus. That is a result of the actions of some of our colleagues, about which we cannot express anything but deep disappointment and regret.
