Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate Jordan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for convening this open debate. Jordan's intimate
knowledge of the conflict will no doubt be an asset to
the Council's efforts to find a resolution to this long-
standing conflict.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The Council meets today at a moment of heightened
diplomacy in the Middle East, from the second Geneva
Conference on Syria, on Wednesday, 22 January, to
ongoing negotiations between Israel and Palestine.
Five months ago, following the concerted efforts of the
United States, we saw a positive development in the
political process with the resumption of negotiations
with a view to achieving a lasting and comprehensive
agreement between Israel and Palestine by April this
year. Whereas the resumption of negotiations remains a
promising sign, as it has brought an end to the paralysis
that plagued the peace process for some years, the
parties will have to make tough decisions in the weeks
ahead.

South Africa identifies with the struggle of the
Palestinians for self-determination and continues to
support the Palestinian people in their legitimate and
just struggle for the establishment of an independent
State. We welcome the launch on 16 January of the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, and South Africa joins other voices urging
that the observance be used to redouble efforts to
achieve a lasting and durable peace between Israel
and Palestine. We remain steadfast in our belief that
the only way a solution to that protracted conflict can
be found is through a peaceful and fair negotiation
process carried out in an environment conducive to
fruitful deliberations - that is, an environment free
of intimidation, fear, violence and other obstructionist
activities.

The construction of settlements by Israel remains
the biggest obstacle to progress in the peace talks.
Nonetheless, Israel's illegal settlement activities
continue with impunity. Again we warn that the
continued settlement construction changes the
geographical makeup of Palestine and could make
impossible the creation of two States, in line with the
overwhelming call for the creation of a sovereign,
independent, democratic, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully alongside
Israel, on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The parties need to continue their positive
confidence-building measures, and in that regard the
release by Israel of Palestinian prisoners in December
was a positive development. However, it is undermined
by the continued arrest and detention of Palestinian
citizens by Israeli authorities. Further, the release date
was followed by a new barrage of illegal settlement
activities with the announcement by Israel of the
expansion of 1,400 new settlements in the West Bank.
Those actions by Israel collectively serve to stifle the
very few positive actions in the process and puts the
sincerity of Israel's commitment to the peace process
in question. We therefore call on Israel to refrain from
actions that undermine progress in the peace talks.

We condemn all violence, which further
undermines the possibility of a peaceful settlement.
Mahatma Ghandi said that the worst form of violence
is poverty, and therefore the continued economic and
political isolation of the Gaza Strip further exacerbates
the fragile political process. South Africa once again
emphasizes the need for Israel to lift the illegal blockade
against the people of Gaza.

The Israeli-Palestinian peace process is currently
at a critical point, with the renewed efforts of United
States Secretary of State John Kerry to bring Israelis
and Palestinians together to agree on a framework for
permanent status negotiations. The test will be whether
current efforts will achieve a two-State solution and
also realize the vision of an independent Palestinian
State.

Allow me at this stage to turn to the situation in
Syria. The continuation of the crisis in Syria is of
great concern. Although progress is being made in
the destruction of Syria's chemical stocks, the conflict
continues. Without an inclusive political settlement,
the consequences for regional peace and security will
be greater. South Africa fully supports the efforts
of the United Nations in bringing about a political
solution to that protracted conflict, and looks forward
to participating in the second Geneva Conference on
Syria later this week.

South Africa has steadfastly maintained that it is
an unassailable right of the Syrian people to have peace
and democracy. South Africa remains convinced that
in a complex, divided society, such as Syria's, there
can be no military solution to the conflict, and we have
condemned the continuing supply of weapons to that
area, as it has entrenched the false notion that the use
of arms can end the conflict. We are convinced that if
the crisis continues to be fuelled with weapons, we will
witness in Syria, as we have elsewhere in the world,
that it is ultimately the people of Syria who will pay the
price, while those supplying weapons live in safety far
away from the crisis.

Furthermore, we are very conscious of the
importance of a greater role for women in ending
conflicts and building peace, and urge a proportional
participation of women in the talks in Geneva slated
to begin on 22 January. South Africa continues to
maintain that the only solution to the Syrian crisis is
a Syrian-owned process where all Syrian parties must
take responsibility to end the violence and commit to
finding lasting peace.
In conclusion, the delicate process of negotiations
between Israel and Palestine requires trust, and trust is
earned by action and not by mere words. We continue
to believe that peace in the Middle East is dependent on
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine.
Vacating occupied lands is also an imperative.

