Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): At the outset, let
me in my turn congratulate the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan on this historic moment. Both
parties have clearly made difficult compromises. They
have shown true political courage in respecting the
results of the referendum and in assuring peaceful
independence for South Sudan on 9 July.

The new State, as the Secretary-General just
remarked, will face tremendous early challenges,
including in the areas of domestic policy and security
and in its relationship with the North. As mandated by
the Council in resolution 1996 (2011), the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan will
work closely with the Government to address those
challenges, while supporting peacebuilding and
extending its good offices and backing to the
Government for the political transition, governance and
establishment of the State's authority.

The transition to the new Mission is well under
way. Ms. Hilde Johnson, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, took office on 9 July. She has
been working with an initial team to set up the Mission
in accordance with the Council's mandate. The
transition provides for the redeployment of assets and
11-41279
personnel from the North, which began several months
ago, as well as the deployment of additional personnel,
in compliance with resolution 1996 (2011).

Headquarters here in New York is currently
working closely with troop- and police-contributing
countries to finalize the transition to a new mission
within six months. In accordance with resolution 1990
(2011), on the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA), every effort is being made to
expedite the full deployment and operational capacity
of the mission.

We are planning an initial deployment of 1,640
troops before 20 July. Their equipment, shipped by
road from E1 Obeid to Abyei, is on the way and
scheduled to arrive before 28 July. Troops will be
initially housed in existing camps of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in Abyei. In
accordance with the 20 June agreement between the
parties (S/2011/384*, annex) and resolution 1990
(2011), all of the armed forces are to withdraw from
Abyei upon the completion of the first deployment.
One of the initial tasks of the UNISFA will be to
monitor the complete withdrawal of forces from all
parts of Abyei.

(spoke in English)

The deployment of the remaining UNISFA troops
and police will face several challenges. First, the rainy
season has already negatively impacted movement on
the road from E1 Obeid to Abyei and will continue until
at least September. In addition, new sites must be
established for the remaining troops deploying to
Abyei, given the limited capacity of existing UNMIS
sites. That will require negotiations with the relevant
authorities, access to land and the construction of team
site locations. Those factors could delay the full
deployment of troops significantly and will require fu11
cooperation by both Governments if the mission is to
become fully operational before 2012.

Given the uncertain time period required for the
full deployment of UNISFA, it is absolutely critical
that the first group of troops deployed this month be
given full freedom of movement and access to all parts
of Abyei, in order to carry out mandated tasks and
ensure the full withdrawal of all other armed forces
from the area.

On 29 June, the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North signed an
11-41279

Agreement on Border Security for the North-South
border. The Agreement stipulates that each side will
establish a demilitarized zone 10 kilometres wide, on
either side of the 1 January 1956 border. The
Agreement further states that UNISFA would provide
force protection for an international monitoring and
verification mission for the border.

We are currently working closely with UNISFA
and the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel to develop recommendations on the way forward,
to be reviewed by the Council. It is important to note
that any additional role for UNISFA beyond its
currently mandated tasks under resolution 1990 (2011)
would require modification of its mandate to
accommodate such additional responsibilities.

Following the decision of the Government of the
Sudan not to consent to the continued presence of
UNMIS, the Mission has begun its liquidation process
as mandated by the Council in its resolution 1997
(2011), adopted on 11 July. As of 9 July, the Mission
ceased operations and is working to expedite the
withdrawal of troops, police and civilians. While the
Mission is planning to withdraw all troops within the
two-month time frame provided by the Council, we
envision approximately six months for the full
withdrawal of all personnel and assets from the Sudan.

In that context, we remain deeply concerned by
the situation in Southern Kordofan, where ongoing
reports of fighting indicate that civilian lives continue
to be at risk. The African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and UNMIS have urged both
parties to agree to and implement an immediate
cessation of hostilities agreement. However, despite a
28 June framework Agreement laying out the broader
path to eventual political and security arrangements,
hostilities have continued and humanitarian access has
been extremely limited.

It is therefore even more critical that the parties
come to an immediate agreement to cease hostilities in
Southern Kordofan and move towards political
dialogue to address the needs and grievances of the
populations in both States. It is also important that the
parties work to resolve the unfinished processes of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and post-
independence issues, including the final status of
Abyei, popular consultations in Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile states, oil revenue-sharing, financial
transitional arrangements and border security and
3
demarcation. A rapid and peaceful resolution of these
issues will play a key role in ensuring long-term
stability in both countries and in the whole region.

I would like to conclude by reiterating on behalf
of the Secretary-General his congratulations to the
Republic of South Sudan for its independence and to
welcome it in advance into the United Nations as its
193rd Member.

