The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Senegal.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for the detailed briefing he hasjust given. The Senegalese

delegation welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016). More than 20 years have passed
since the signing of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement. Bosnia
and Herzegovina, despite the persistence of some
pitfalls, is continuing its inexorable march towards
reunification and nation-building. The Senegalese
delegation's statement will concentrate - as it did six
months ago here in the Chamber (see S/PV.7688) - on
all the political, economic, institutional and security
dimensions of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On the political level, progress has certainly been
made. On the one hand, we have seen the publication,
on 30 June, of the results of the population census that
had been under way since 2013. On the other hand,
on 2 October, local elections were held across the
territory, except, unfortunately, in the city of Mostar.
We must recognize that the past six months have also
been marked by a resurgence in some tension among
Bosnian, Croat and Serb communities.

The Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement, which ended
one of the most terrible wars in the very heart of
Europe, today seem fragile, not to say jeopardized,
by the referendum organized on 25 September by the
Republika Srpska. We warned against that referendum.
The holding of the referendum constitutes an additional
challenge with regard to carrying out the threats of
secession proclaimed by the Republika Srpska - which,
we remind the Council, had already called into question
the competence of the Constitutional Court and the
Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as the competence and the decisions of the
High Representative.

My delegation is of the view that such a step
undermines the work on the national construction
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which instead requires
renewed commitments to strengthen the institutional
architecture outlined in the Dayton-Paris accords,
a calm atmosphere and frank dialogue among all
the components of the State, all while respecting the
Constitution and laws.

During the period under review, Bosnia and
Herzegovina saw encouraging economic progress. In
July, there was the adoption of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement, followed on 23 August by
the adoption of the Coordination Mechanism of the
European Union. The country has also benefitted from
support and assistance from the International Monetary
Fund, which decided to earmark €553 million for a
period of three years. There was also a notable increase
in economic activity in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the first seven months of 2016, when compared with the
same period in 2015. The unemployment rate fell by
4.2 per cent, compared with the same months of 2015.
At the same time, the trade deficit saw a downturn of
4.1 per cent, and industrial production increased by
4 per cent, compared with 2015. That progress has
been consolidated with the ongoing assistance of the
international community, prioritizing harmonious
development, stability and the welfare of the population
in order to contribute to mitigating the fragility of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the region.

At the institutional level, the Senegalese delegation
reaffirms its support for the High Representative and
encourages all parties to cooperate with him. This
has to do with the preservation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity as well as the political independence
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as guaranteed by the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, by the
country's Constitution and by international law. It is
in that spirit that the Senegalese delegation call on all
three ethnic groups to collaborate more closely and to
further cultivate a common will to guarantee a stable,
strong and prosperous State that can take its rightful
place among the world's nations.

It is in that spirit that my delegation commends the
Council's decision to extend by 12 months the mandate
of the European Union-led multinational stabilization
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR ALTHEA.
As underscored by the report (S/20l6/9ll, annex) of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the presence in the country of European Union
military mission, which has an executive mandate, is
still important in that it allows his Office and other
participants from the international community to
discharge their respective mandates and to reassure
citizens from all ethnic groups regarding the safety and
security of their environment.

The fight against terrorism is a challenge that Bosnia
and Herzegovina must handle with discernment, in a
context of the return of foreign fighters and complex
migratory flows that constitute an additional risk for
the security ofthe country and the whole region. It goes
without saying that tangible results cannot be achieved
and maintained in the struggle without the indispensible
reinforcement, at all levels, of cooperation and dialogue
among the authorities of the different components of
the State.

Senegal calls on the international community to
continue supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts
for greater resilience in the face of socioeconomic
difficulties, support which should also involve
capacity-building of the police force and the defence
of the country so that they may overcome the strategic
and operational shortcomings in a context where the
terrorist threat remains pressing.

Finally, I would like to encourage the international
community, and first and foremost the Council, to
maintain its commitment and its current level of
cooperation in its approach to the situation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in order to assist the country in the
positive trend it has demonstrated during the past
two decades.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

