Mr. Eesiah (Liberia): I should like at the outset
to join previous speakers in welcoming you, Sir, as you
preside over this meeting, attended by foreign
ministers of the countries of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS). I bring you
greetings and felicitations from Her Excellency
Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of the Republic
of Liberia, and from the Government and the people of
Liberia, and I congratulate you on my own account.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank you for
having convened this Security Council open debate on
peace consolidation in West Africa.

His Excellency Ambassador George W. Wallace,
Foreign Minister of Liberia, would have very much

06-46 124
loved to participate in these deliberations, but, owing
to current developments in Liberia, he was not able to
be here.

Liberia, which has experienced more than 14
years of civil war, welcomes this open debate aimed at
finding equitable solutions to the many problems
affecting the West African subregion. We know too
well the magnitude of these problems and the
devastating effect they have on the youth of our
country. The conflicts have not only killed thousands
of our people, but have also brought about economic
deprivation and political instability in the subregion.

There is no doubt that the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union
(AU), the European Union, the United States of
America, the United Nations, the international
community and non-governmental organizations, as
well as peace-loving countries, made tremendous
sacrifices to bring about peace in Liberia, thereby
successfully resolving years of civil war, which left the
country devastated and in total ruins.

It is the View of my delegation that Liberia is
ready to support and implement the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later in this ministerial-level
meeting, aimed at promoting sustainable economic
development and putting in place a viable mechanism
and measures to stop the cross-border recruitment of
child soldiers in the subregion.

The Liberian delegation believes that that cross-
border recruitment is one of the most serious problems
affecting our region, and every effort must be made to
put an end to it immediately.

The Liberian delegation is, therefore, appealing
to you, Mr. President, and to this ministerial meeting to
make it an extreme priority to implement the decision
of this meeting in order to stop the importation of
weapons into the subregion, which has robbed it of its
young people.

My delegation would like to pay special tribute to
the Mano River Union, ECOWAS and the African
Union for their tireless efforts to help bring about the
peace that Liberia is enjoying today. We request those
organizations to consolidate that hard-won peace by
encouraging and promoting economic and employment
opportunities for the people of the subregion.

