Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank France for convening this debate, and
commend it for its unwavering dedication to the
cause of children and its role as chief architect of an
international plan of action, implemented early in the
millennium, aimed at addressing serious Violations
affecting children. This debate, which is in line with the
principles and commitments adopted in Paris during the
Free Children from War Conference of February 2007
and the Protecting Children From War Conference of
21 February, will continue to advance international
efforts to protect children, prevent them from being
recruited and sent into combat, and strengthen our
determination to work to ensure a better life for all
children. I would like to thank this morning's briefers
for their briefings.

For a number of years - and to be more precise,
since the Graca Machel report (A/51/306) was presented
to the fifty-first session of the General Assembly in
1996, drawing the entire world's attention to the specific
needs of children in armed conflict - the international
community has acted to protect children who have
fallen into that category of vulnerability. From that call
to action, a global instrument was born that facilitated
the release of tens of thousands of children who had
long been left to their own devices in regions ravaged
by violence and war and who were denied even the most
basic rights.

Children in conflict are thrown into a life marked
by Violence and horrors. They are separated from their
family members, deprived of their childhood and often
treated in the most barbaric manner. Many of them
are used as soldiers, messengers, sex slaves, spies,
traffickers or porters of munitions. Many are used as
human shields or deployed to perpetrate suicide attacks.
Some are drugged before being sent into combat, while
forced to commit atrocities - sometimes against their
own communities. That is unacceptable.

The work of the international community would
benefit from a multifaceted and strategic approach
not just in addressing current conflicts, but also in
stressing the dimension of prevention. At the same
time, adopting a pragmatic approach that combines
incentives and constraints, in particular with regard to
seeking justice and ending impunity, is indispensable.
Morocco condemns in the strongest terms all forms
of violence directed against children, including their
kidnapping and detention by armed groups, use as
human shields and hostages, recruitment in refugee
camps and forced separation from their families.

Morocco was one of the first countries to sign and
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict and to endorse the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups and Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups. Morocco has adopted a very
important measure of its own to combat all forms of
Violence perpetrated against children.

The Kingdom of Morocco is closely following with
great concern the dangerous developments in Yemen
characterized by the use of force and Violence by the
Houthis and their persistent attempts to undermine the
progress made by the Yemeni national dialogue and its
legitimacy. Against the backdrop of those events and the
dangers that they represent, the Kingdom of Morocco
expresses its full solidarity with the brotherly Yemeni
people during this decisive stage of its history and as
their suffering has increased following Violations of
laws that the parties have agreed in good faith in order
to establish legitimacy in Yemen.

Moreover, Morocco supports the coalition to
restore legitimacy in Yemen, established at the request
of the legitimate Government of Yemen in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and aimed at protecting civilians following the military
escalation by the Houthis, who have undermined the
peace, stability and security of Yemen. The main goal
of the coalition is to support the political transition
in Yemen in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the national dialogue and resolution
2216 (2015). Morocco subscribes to the open spirit of
collaboration that has been expressed by all members
of the coalition, which will work in close cooperation
with all involved parties to restore peace and stability
in Yemen, and arrive at a political settlement to the
conflict pursuant to the relevant resolutions, while at
the same time ensuring the protection of all civilians,
including children.

The primary cause of children's deaths in Yemen is
their deliberate and systematic recruitment as soldiers
by Houthis and their use as human shields, which
has been documented in a number of United Nations
reports. We regret that that issue is not mentioned the
report. We note that the lack of reliable, impartial and
credible information and the failure to consult with
members of the Coalition in Yemen has influenced the
neutrality of the data presented in the report.

Lastly, the report also does not mention the role
that the coalition is playing in providing humanitarian
assistance, in particular the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Aid and Relief whose new programme
aimed at reintegration has benefited more than 2,000
Yemeni children.

