Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully endorses the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. Let me make a few
additional comments in my national capacity.

We thank New Zealand for organizing this open
debate, which allows the Security Council to address
an important topic - the threats to peace and security
faced by the small island developing States. The
briefing of the Secretary-General and the statements
made by the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica
and the Minister of Finance of Seychelles highlighted
the fact that small island developing States face
special challenges in terms of peace and security. The
international community must help these countries to
overcome these challenges.

There is no doubt that, because of their size and
their geographical location, small island developing
States are particularly vulnerable to the activities
of transnational organized crime networks, be it
trafficking in drugs, human beings or small arms and
light weapons, or piracy. It is also obvious that small
island developing States are among the first affected by
the effects of climate change. Sea-level rise threatens
the very existence of these States and the security and
well-being of their populations; it may result in the
loss of territory, thereby undermining the territorial
integrity of small island developing States.

Who could have imagined 70 years ago, when the
Charter of the United Nations was adopted, that the
principle of territorial integrity - an essential principle
of international relations - could be endangered by
the effects of climate change? The challenge is real.
It can lead to the displacement of populations and
migration flows that may be the source of tensions if
they are not well anticipated, prepared and managed.
The international community cannot remain idle in the
face of this reality.

The best long-term response we can make to
the threats posed to small island developing States
by climate change will be to conclude in Paris in
December a legally binding and dynamic agreement,
enjoying global participation, to maintain global
warming below 2 degrees Celsius. Luxembourg, as
President of the Council of the European Union, will
spare no effort to contribute to the conclusion of such
an agreement at the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. Our Minister of the Environment reaffirmed
that commitment at the Arria Formula meeting
organized on 30 June by Spain and Malaysia on the
theme of climate change as a multiplier of threats to
global security.

In the Security Council, we continue to advocate, as
we did during our recent term as an elected member, for
the Council to take the implications of climate change
into account in order to better address the root causes of
conflict in the framework of conflict prevention. In our
view, it would be useful in this context for the Secretary-
General to report to the Council on the multiplication of
threats to small island developing States in particular.

Security and development are intrinsically linked.
In contributing to the security and progress of small
island developing States, Luxembourg is strongly
committed to their cause. In that regard, we support
Cabo Verde, one of Luxembourg's main cooperation
partners in the social sectors and in the field ofrenewable
energy. Luxembourg has supported the fight against
piracy off the coast of Somalia by deploying maritime
patrol aircraft based in Seychelles. We have made
our expertise in the field of satellite communications
available to States in the Caribbean region in order to
strengthen their capacity to respond to natural disasters.
We also support a multilateral regional programme that
helps Pacific small island developing States to develop
renewable energy and adapt to climate change.

Luxembourg, as a small State itself, will remain in
solidarity with small island developing States.

