Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It is a pleasure for me to
see you, Sir, preside over the Security Council for the
current month. I would also like to extend our
appreciation to your predecessor, the representative of
Singapore, for the splendid manner in which he guided
the Council last month.

It was not very long ago that the Security Council
adopted resolution 1397 (2002) with its vision of a
region where two States, Israel and Palestine, would
live side by side within secure and recognized borders.
It also recalled the two landmark resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), reaffirming the principle of
land for peace. Resolution 1397 (2002) was adopted in
the wake of the bold proposal of Crown Prince
Abdullah of Saudi Arabia and of the Beirut
Declaration, which underscored the commitment of the
Arab countries to peace and reconciliation in the
Middle East. Together, they constituted the configuration
of a peace settlement in the Middle East - an
opportunity to move back from the brink of violence
and destruction and to find a way out of this tragic
quagmire.

What was required was the establishment of
timelines for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions and the fulfilment of their objectives.
Unfortunately, instead of the sincere implementation of
this endorsed vision of peace, the Israeli response was
intransigence, accompanied by the continuing use of
force and violence. Once again, the prospects for peace
in the Holy Land are being crushed under the treads of
Israeli tanks.
Pakistan condemns Israel's latest military
incursion into Ramallah and the continuing
encirclement of President Yasser Arafat's headquarters.
This incursion, together with the raids into Tulkarm,
Bethlehem and Jenin, have resulted in civilian
casualties and the destruction of property. All these
Israeli actions constitute serious breaches of Israel's
legal obligations and responsibilities as an occupying
Power, under the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 12
August 1949. They also violate the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1402 (2002).

The goal in the Holy Land is to find a final
settlement, not to impose a final solution. The people
of Israel, no doubt, appreciate the distinction. Peace
cannot be durable if it is imposed through the barrel of
a gun. Durable peace cannot be achieved by
eliminating your interlocutor or installing one of your
own choice. Peace cannot come with one side literally
calling the shots.

When the avenues of dialogue and negotiation are
closed, the Security Council must assume its
responsibilities under the Charter in order to secure the
implementation of its resolutions and decisions. Israel
must cease its aggression against the Palestinian people
and their lawful Government.

The Security Council has agreed on the nature of
the framework of peace. What is needed now is to
identify the specific goals which need to be achieved to
realize the agreed vision of resolution 1397 (2002), and
the timelines for doing so. The Council and the
international community must turn their attention to
that task.

Violence begets violence. It is not the path to
peace in the Middle East or elsewhere. The present
deteriorating situation in Palestine warrants the urgent
attention of the international community. We much act,
and act with determination, to prevent the situation
from descending into chaos - chaos in which neither
side can realize its hopes for peace with security. The
prospects for peace in the Middle East will continue to
remain bleak without the immediate cessation of all
acts of violence, provocation and destruction. Those
with the responsibility to maintain international peace,
and especially the Security Council, must therefore act.
The Committee must act now to realize this objective
and revive the hopes for durable peace in the region.

