Mr. Wittig (Germany): Thank you for giving
Germany the opportunity to participate in this debate. I
would like to commend your Government,
Mr. President, for its continued constructive role in
promoting regional cooperation in Central and South
Asia, in particular through the Ankara Cooperation
process. We commend your hosting of the Istanbul
Summit on Friendship and Cooperation in the "Heart
of Asia" in January of this year. And we are looking
forward to the Fourth Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan, RECCA IV, in Istanbul in
early November.

Let me join previous speakers in welcoming the
Secretary-General's latest report on Afghanistan
(S/2010/463) and in extending my thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, for his very comprehensive briefing.
Furthermore, I would like to express our gratitude to
the Foreign Minister, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, for his
valuable and important remarks.

Germany fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union, which will follow later.

Germany would like to briefly share its views, in
particular with regard to the following four topics:
legal processes, including reconciliation, promoting
regional cooperation, transition of full responsibilities,
and recent elections in Afghanistan.

First, the London and Kabul conferences and the
Kabul process have strongly reaffirmed the partnership
of the international community with the Afghan people
and the Afghan Government. We note with satisfaction
that the Afghan Government is engaged in
implementing the political commitments outlined by
President Karzai in his inauguration speech for his
second term as well as at the London Conference. We
strongly encourage the Afghan Government to continue
with this process and to strengthen the Afghan people's
trust in their Government and in the democratic
process.

We commend President Karzai for the inclusive
debate with Afghan leaders in the framework of the
Peace Jirga last June and welcome the nominations for
a High Peace Council. We encourage him and his
Government to take further steps in this direction. This
process can only be and must remain an Afghan-led
process. The international community can and will
only assume a supporting role. In this context, the
Afghanistan peace and reintegration programme is a
very important element and Germany supports this
progamme through the United Nations Development
Programme.

Second, regarding the promotion of regional
cooperation, we would like to applaud the concrete
steps taken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
to Afghanistan (UNAMA). Special credit should be
given to the Silk Road initiative and its regional
leverage. We would like this constructive regional
approach to be continued.

Furthermore, as Foreign Minister Rassoul pointed
out in his speech in the General Assembly on Monday,
the international community's promise to the people of
Afghanistan of a life free from fear of the threat of
international terrorism remains unfulfilled.

The International Security Assistance Force and
the Afghan Government are about to enter the
transition phase, where the security responsibility will
gradually shift to the Afghan side. This will enable the
Afghan Government to fully exercise its sovereignty.
During this critical phase, we will remain a reliable
partner of Afghanistan and will continue to assist the
Afghan people in their struggle to live in peace and
prosperity and to enjoy their rights as enshrined in the
Afghan Constitution including human rights and
women's rights. Our support to the Afghan
Government and people will also continue after
transition is completed.

Finally, this year's Wolesi Jirga elections
constituted an important event for Afghanistan's still
young democracy. We would like to applaud the
courage of the Afghan people for their participation in
these elections, despite the security threats. We
encourage the relevant Afghan institutions to address
all alleged irregularities and fraud in order to ensure a
credible and legitimate electoral process. The lessons
learned at these elections will also show the
importance of electoral reforms. In this regard, I would
like to underline that Germany is prepared to support
the efforts of the Afghan Government in preparing the
ground for future elections.

In conclusion, we would like to encourage the
Council to support Staffan de Mistura and his team by
providing the necessary political guidance. Our
expectations regarding UNAMA should remain
realistic and focused on key priorities.

