Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on the Arab Republic of Egypt's
leadership of the Security Council for this month. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim at
today's important meeting. We are grateful to Egypt for
convening it.

Before I begin, I would like to express our sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of Egypt
for the victims of the heinous terrorist attack a few days
ago. I would also like to convey our condolences to the
Government and the people of Iraq for the hundreds
of victims of the car bombs today in Baghdad. They
are suffering from the very same terrorism that we
are enduring in my country, and thus today's topic is
therefore very timely.

Some five years have elapsed since the assassination
began in Syria of the principles of international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and good-neighbourly
relations around our territory. After exhausting every
possible means of destroying Syria - its State, its
people, its infrastructure - including terrorism, media
misinformation, recruiting foreign terrorist fighters and
mercenaries from every corner of the globe, facilitating
terrorist groups' use of chemicals, trafficking in
the suffering and hopes of millions of refugees and
internally displaced persons, creating opponents abroad
who are in alliance with every thief around the world
sponsoring terrorism and criminality - after all ofthat,
we are justified in telling those involved in fuelling and
lengthening the crisis to keep their hands off Syria.
Enough misinformation, enough intervention in our
internal affairs under pretexts that have been proven
to be false in Syria, Iraq, Libya and many other States.

Since the start of what some like to call the
Syrian crisis, the Security Council has held hundreds
of meetings and adopted dozens of resolutions and
statements. It has set up fact-finding mechanisms and
has quite seriously been unable to take a single step
to bring pressure to bear on the sponsors of terrorism;
to stop the export of terrorists and mercenaries from
abroad into Syria and Iraq; to control borders in order
to halt the flows ofterrorists; to end the Qatari-financed
treatment of injured terrorists in Israeli and Turkish
hospitals; or to prohibit broadcasts by television stations
from Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey and London inciting
people to sectarian terrorism that utterly violates all the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

My delegation has repeatedly stressed its full
support for any sincere effort to confront the threat
posed by terrorism and its poisonous ideologies and
to uphold the values of peace, dialogue and respect
for religious, ideological and cultural diversity. We
continue to assert that terrorism is the gravest threat to
the world today; it is the common enemy ofall mankind.
Therefore the United Nations and the Security Council
must take up their responsibilities to coordinate and
promote international cooperation to combat terrorism.
However, such cooperation must be very far removed
from selectivity and double standards.

It is unreasonable for persons to be deemed to
be terrorists in France, Belgium, Spain, the United
States of America, the United Kingdom, Australia
and Tunisia while elsewhere they are called jihadists,
non-State armed groups or the moderate Syrian armed
opposition, and showered with money, weapons, entry
visas, intelligence and protection. Indeed, they are
brought to Syrian borders and their entry into Syria is
guaranteed.

Some have created a State for terrorism called the
Caliphate, with an official flag and with media sites.
Words like "Islam" are used. It has two capitals, in
both Syria and Iraq, and therefore an international
coalition was set up to confront it. Today the scenario
of constructive chaos is complete. The entire world
is watching the theatrics of the so-called anti-Da'esh
coalition. That scenario is not serious. It is not credible,
particularly since, instead oftargeting Da'esh elements,
the so-called international coalition is destroying the
infrastructure of the Syrian State, of the Syrian people,
under the pretext of combating terrorism. At the same
time, the coalition is turning a blind eye to the Da'esh
trade in petroleum and archaeological treasures with
Turkey and their export through Turkish territory to
Israel and European countries.

The mask has now fallen from the faces ofthe States
that are sponsoring takfiri terrorism in my country,
the region and Africa. The efforts of those murderous
Governments are doomed to fail. The series of lies
and crocodile tears shed because of the suffering of
the Syrian people - caused by the very Governments
claiming to combat terrorism - have ended. Many
WikiLeaks documents have disclosed the role of those
Governments in targeting Syria following the invasion
and destruction of Iraq. Those who manufactured
Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front, Al-Qaida, the Al-Fatah
Army, the Army of Islam, the Al-Ahrar Al-Sham,
the Jund Al-Aqsa, the Liwa Al-Sultan Murad, the
Turkestan Liberation Party, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab,
the Salvation Front and dozens of Al-Qaida-affiliated
terrorist organizations; those who provide weapons,
money, training, fatwas, political and media protection
and describe them with such terms as "political
violence" and "jihadism" in order to hide their true
terrorist nature * they comprise the very party that
has been holding up the flag ofterrorism and should be
the common enemy of all mankind.

Confronting the poisonous ideologies of terrorist
organizations and their supporters and financiers is no
less important than confronting the use of biological
or chemical weapons by terrorist organizations. In that
regard, we cannot turn a blind eye to the important
role taken by the Governments of States sponsoring
terrorism. The Saudi and Qatari regimes are abusing
Arabs and Muslims through the dissemination of Wahabi
extremist thoughts and their erroneous thinking that
distorts Islam. Together with the Turkish regime, they
are providing all kinds of support to takfiri terrorism
that crosses borders and crosses continents - the very
terrorism that my country is confronting.

The honourable achievements of the Syrian Army,
with the support of our friends in the battle against
terrorism, including the liberation of the historic city
of Palmyra and its liberation from Da'esh, the return of
art and music to its old amphitheatre - those are the
victories of civilization and light over terrorist ideology.
My delegation stresses the need to end Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan and other occupied
Arab territories and to put an end to the practices of
the occupation forces that support terrorism and led
to the expulsion of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force from the separation zone in the occupied
Syrian Golan and to their replacement by terrorist
elements from the Al-Nusra Front and the Yarmouk
Martyrs Brigade .

In conclusion, my delegation stresses that terrorists
must not be rewarded. Their sponsors must not be
rewarded for their criminal acts. It is unfortunate and
shameful for Europe to conclude an agreement with
the Erdogan regime, which is supporting terrorism in
a way that allows Erdogan to blackmail Europe, to take
advantage of the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons and to profit from their suffering.
That is the result of the practices of Erdogan, thanks
to which his citizens have received visa-free travel to
Europe, a base achievement.

