Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): I would like to start
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and the brilliant manner
in which you have conducted the affairs of the Council
during the month of June. My delegation would also like to
extend its sincere congratulations to your predecessor for
the brilliant manner in which he conducted the deliberations
of the Council.

Allow me also to express my delegation's gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report before
us today and for his relentless efforts in search of real and
long-lasting peace and reconciliation in Angola.

When we last addressed the Security Council, we
rejoiced over the formation of the Government of Unity
and National Reconstruction in Angola as a major step
towards stability and normalization of the situation in
Angola and putting an end to the long years of suffering
in that sister country.

On that occasion, we affirmed that the Angolan
people were nearer than ever before to the final resolution
of the devastating conflict and to installing a new
dispensation of a well-deserved peace. We stated that,
although the establishment of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation was an outstanding step
towards the successful conclusion of the peace process in
Angola, it could not be taken as an end in itself. The
commitment and determination of both the Government
of Angola and UNITA remain imperative throughout the
whole process in order to ensure its successful conclusion.

With the formation of the Government of Unity and
National reconciliation and the return of UNITA deputies
to the National Assembly, a strong basis has been
launched for the normalization of life in Angola. While
commending the spirit of cooperation and tolerance
demonstrated by the parties in the initial steps of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation, we
sincerely hope that all parties shall continue to work in
close cooperation in this new phase, building confidence
and resolving the tensions prevailing in some areas of the
country.

We consider confidence building to be an important
factor that will allow parties to continue lending their full
cooperation towards the acceleration of the normalization
of state administration, the completion of the
demobilization of ex-combatants and their subsequent
integration into society, and the conclusion of the
formation of the unified army, thus consolidating national
reconciliation and peace in full compliance with the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol.

We continue to believe that post-conflict peace-
building is a necessary precondition for lasting peace and
stability. This should include not only the immediate
political, social and economic tasks, but also the medium-
and long-term programmes, thus building the bridge from
emergency to reconstruction and development. If such a
process is carried out, the Angolan people will enjoy its
benefits eternally.

The United Nations and the international community
at large should remain engaged in supporting the people

 

of Angola in overcoming these and other challenges they
have to face and thus enhancing political trust and creating
an environment conducive to long-lasting peace, stability
and sustainable development.

My delegation has carefully examined the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the third United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). We would
like to welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-
General contained therein on the establishment, as of 1 July
1997, of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola.

We are convinced that the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola, in fulfilling its mandate, will provide
the necessary international assistance for the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the
consolidation of the gains made so far in the peace process.

As the mandate of UNAVEM. III is expiring today, we
would like to pay special tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Blondin Beye,
to all civilian, military and police staff of UNAVEM. III, as
well as to the other personnel of the United Nations
agencies for their tireless efforts in support of the
consolidation of peace and national reconciliation in
Angola.

Once again, we would like to express our appreciation
to all those contributing to the attainment of an enduring
peace in Angola, in particular the three observer countries
and troop-contributing nations, and thus bringing about an
environment conducive to development not only in Angola
but in the whole region of southern Africa.

