Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank Mr. Qazi, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, for his quarterly report on
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), and Ambassador Bolton of the
United States for the update on the operations of the
Multinational Force.

My delegation wishes to commend UNAMI,
together with the other United Nations agencies, on
their dedicated service in Iraq under very challenging
circumstances. We are particularly grateful to the
Governments of Japan and Denmark, which have
provided much needed logistical support to UNAMI.
We are grateful to note that UNAMI and other United
Nations agencies have been able to continue to provide
and coordinate access and delivery of basic services,
including trying to restore public infrastructure and
offering much needed assistance to internally displaced
persons, whose numbers have been increasing as the
violence continues to escalate.

The high level of violence in Iraq is very
worrying, as it has affected all sections of the
population and resulted in death, damage to property,
extreme hardship and suffering. Particularly disturbing
to us is the fact that innocent civilians, including
women and children, have fallen victim to the attacks.
The violence bears all the hallmarks of both terrorism
and anarchism. Reports of the police picking up many
bodies in Baghdad and its suburbs that have been
bound, tortured and shot execution-style are now a
daily affair. The urgency of restoring order, especially
in Baghdad, cannot be overemphasized. Iraqis are
desperate for peace. Every action possible must be
taken to help them prevent what is now sectarian strife
from degenerating into anarchy and civil war.

We commend the Iraqi security forces, in
collaboration with the Multinational Force, for recently
launching a major security crackdown in Baghdad that
has resulted in a slight decrease in violence. Deliberate
and determined efforts must continue in order to free
the country from the armed gangs and militias that are
roaming around, terrorizing, kidnapping and killing
innocent people.

There is an urgent need to stand up to and
eradicate the extreme violence in Iraq and to replace it
with democracy, liberty and the rule of law. That will
require sustained engagement by the security forces.
We must also pay tribute to the resilience of the Iraqi
people and to the manner in which they are bearing
their current trials and tribulations.

As for the Government of Iraq, it has to continue
to demonstrate that it is effective, and it must be
applauded for some of its valiant performances on the
security front. We also welcome and encourage the
political efforts that Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki
has been making in the search for peace in Iraq,
including paying visits to neighbouring countries to
seek their support. Of particular significance was his
very recent visit to Iran, which ended in important
pronouncements on and commitments to good-
neighbourliness and peace. On the domestic front, the
need for national reconciliation through inclusive
dialogue cannot be overemphasized. It is the linchpin
of a political solution and future stability.

The preparatory work for the International
Compact for Iraq, under the auspices of the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations, is timely
and deserves full support from funding institutions and
donor countries. In spite of its economic focus, the Iraq
Compact may turn out to be an effective engine for the
restoration of peace and stability in the country. The
restoration of Iraq's war-torn and shattered
infrastructure will require an enabling environment
addressing the underlying causes of violence,
insecurity and gross violations of human rights.

Prime Minister Al-Maliki's National
Reconciliation Plan also deserves support. There is a
need for genuine efforts at consensus-building among
the many diverse communities in the country. An Iraqi-
led initiative can make an important contribution to the
Plan and has the potential to make it a real success.
Care must be taken to fully involve community and
religious leaders in promoting reconciliation.

We appreciate the support that the Multinational
Force is providing to the United Nations in Iraq
through the provision of military advisers, guard forces
and movement and aviation support. We also commend
the efforts of the Arab countries, which have been
organizing vital meetings aimed at restoring peace and
development in Iraq.

Iraq continues to face formidable political,
security and economic challenges at a time of new
political and security crises in the region, which
invariably have a negative impact on the internal
situation in Iraq. It is necessary for the building of
security forces that they continue to receive outside
assistance until they are ready to take full control of
the security of their country. Iraq shall also continue to
rely heavily on varied forms of support from the
international community. We urge generous and timely
support from all those in a position to assist the war-
ravaged country.

