Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
having convened, in such a timely manner, this open
debate of the Security Council on the situation in Iraq.
After several weeks of debate in the communications
media and selective meetings in the Security Council
on this question, it is now appropriate that the
Members of the United Nations should have the
opportunity to express their views on a matter of such
grave concern to the entire international community.

Circumstances require us to be brief and concise.
I should like first of all to draw attention to the nature
ofthe question that brings us here. The principal reason
for this debate is the repeated and contemptuous
disregard for the resolutions of the Council shown by
one of the States Members of the United Nations in a
matter that affects international peace and security -
the development of weapons of mass destruction. My
country has no doubt whatsoever that the existence of
such weapons, when they are not subject to inspection
by the United Nations, poses a clear challenge to the
international community. And it is the international
community, acting through the organs that it has
established for the maintenance of international peace
and security - in particular the Security Council - that
is responsible for ensuring the implementation of and
compliance with its own resolutions, pursuant to the
relevant Articles ofthe United Nations Charter.

Second, we must determine the nature of the
Council's task. This is none other than to achieve the
disarmament of Iraq - and it is on that task and no
other that Council members should focus in ensuring
compliance with Council resolutions. There is no doubt
that the success of that endeavour would strengthen the
role of the United Nations and the Security Council in
the handling of international crises. More importantly,
it would ensure peace in a region devastated by other
painful conflicts.

We are convinced that our collective international
security rests on the commitment of Member States to
multilateral cooperation. Disrespect for the United
Nations by showing blatant disregard for its decisions
will lead not to its irrelevance but to international
chaos. Participation in the international order as
embodied by the United Nations is not an option that
can be chosen or rejected at whim, because there is no
alternative order.

That is why we welcome the decision of the
President ofthe United States, George W. Bush, to deal
with the crisis within the framework of the United
Nations. Likewise, we welcome the letter from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council in which he informed the Council that the
Government of Iraq had decided to permit the return of
the United Nations weapons inspectors without
conditions.

We also welcome as a positive development the
fact that, based on the talks held in Vienna by the
Executive Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
Mr. Hans Blix, it will be possible to resume the
inspection process on the basis of clear and specific
agreements. We also appreciate the most recent efforts
of Mr. Blix and of the Director-General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
Mr. Mohammed ElBaradei, to advance the process of
clarification of those agreements through
correspondence with the Iraqi authorities.

In order to ensure compliance with the Council
resolutions, UNMOVIC must be able to operate
without hindrance of any kind. My country attaches
particular importance to the need to have an inspection
regime guaranteeing that the experts will be able to
fully carry out their mission without any obstacle. We
believe that in order for UNMOVIC to work
effectively, it is necessary for the Council to work
immediately on adopting another resolution that will
update and define in greater detail the Mission's
functions and powers. Once that is done, the inspectors
must return to Iraq as soon as possible and carry out
their duties without being subjected to any kind of
pressure.

As is everyone in the Chamber, we are deeply
concerned about the consequences that any deviation in
this difficult process might have for the world, for the
region and especially for the security of the civilian
population of Iraq, which for over a decade has been
the victim of an implacable regime and has suffered the
great human costs of the sanctions. Experience has
shown that it is the people who suffer directly from
punitive actions, more than the leaders whose conduct
has brought on those measures. For this reason, we
oppose the use of force, except as a last resort in the
face of grave violations ofthe inspection regime.

Chile believes that in this case, following the
report of the UNMOVIC inspectors, it is the role of the
Security Council to meet once again to determine the
gravity of any non-compliance and to decide on what
necessary measures to take in order to enforce the
Council's resolution. There should be no doubt in
anyone's mind that it was the Security Council, in
exercising its authority, which took the serious decision
to employ all the necessary means at its disposal to
enforce compliance with the resolutions mandating the
disarmament of Iraq.
Chile is a country whose identity is based on
respect for domestic law and the international legal
order. We therefore hope that this process will continue
at all times within the framework ofthe United Nations
and the authority of the Security Council. We have
confidence in the capacity of those conducting the
inspections to carry out the substantial task of
disarming Iraq. The decisive factor in resolving this
crisis lies in the work of UNMOVIC.

