Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): While we are meeting here, hundreds of
youth are leaving their families surreptitiously, finding
routes through open borders where they discover all
the facilities needed to join terrorist networks, which
are provided by specialized intelligence bodies. They
often fail to break loose from the networks after they
"awaken", which occurs too late, if it ever occurs
at all. Our responsibilities as politicians, jurists,
specialists, mothers and fathers require us to make
every effort to address the underlying reasons why
young people are joining terrorist organizations.
Tackling that phenomenon is not new to our societies.
The new factor is the unprecedented appeal of terrorist
organizations, such as Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front, the
Al-Shabaab movement, Boko Haram and others. They
use instruments and tools of deception, especially
media networks, provide money in order to galvanize
unemployed youth and incite youth through religious
fatwas.

Reports affirm that the majority of foreign terrorist
fighters who join terrorist organizations, estimated in
the tens of thousands, are in the 15-35 age group. The
new media technologies have allowed us to empathize
with the sufferings of many families who were bereft
of their dear ones. The young people they have lost
decided, in an impulsive moment, to join organizations
that instilled them with the notion that they will be
performing their sacred duty or performing a heroic or
novel moral act. Some organizations have even offered
them easy money.

Addressing this phenomenon means that we
also have to deal with its underlying reasons. In
that respect, my delegation wishes to affirm that the
flagrant interference of certain States in the internal
affairs of other States - under pretexts like the
spread of democracy and freedom, the protection of
civilians, and jihad, which lead to the prolongation of
conflicts, and prevent us from settling them peacefully.
Such pretexts serve to create justifications for direct
or indirect foreign interference in the affairs of other
Member States. They, in fact, are among the most
important drivers of radicalization, hatred, violence
and extremism. The same applies to certain regimes
that spread a discourse of hatred and radicalization, or
use educational curricula that have nothing to do with
true religions or humanitarian principles and that incite
people to barbarism, Violence and terrorism. That does
not mean that we have to disregard the other important
motivating factors, which include, but are not limited
to, discrimination based on religion, citizenship,
nationality, ethnicity, colour, gender or other factors
that constitute collective punishment against persons
who never opted for a "bad" place and did not choose
their religion or their skin colour.

Regrettably, various impulsive campaigns have
taken place that seek to stereotype the followers of a
certain religion and attempt to brand them as terrorists.
They have included various acts of discrimination,
marginalization and oppression, as well as security
crackdowns in States that claim to uphold humanitarian
values, citizenship and human rights. More regrettably
still, certain Islamic countries abuse anything Arab or
Muslim.

We are asked to work arduously and effectively
to protect young people, males and females, from the
campaigns running on social networking sites and
TV channels. These are campaigns that lure them
into leaving their families and homelands, espousing
fundamentalist takfiri and wahhabi ideologies,
and joining terrorist organizations abroad, where
they commit acts of murder and sabotage until they
are themselves killed in battle or suicide attacks.
Furthermore, when they return to their own countries,
they are called upon to create cells in order to carry out
attacks. We know which parties help and finance them
and facilitate their travel. Those parties call themselves
moderate and yet they train and arm young people to
fight in Afghanistan, Somalia, Chechnya, Iraq, Syria,
Libya, Tunisia, Egypt, Lebanon, Nigeria, Kenya and
other countries. The perpetrators here are not unknown.
They are the Governments of certain known States,
some of which are, unfortunately, represented in the
Council.

We should not leave young people with despair as
their only option as they try to decide between becoming
victims of the sponsors of terrorism or drowning in the
Mediterranean Sea en route to an imagined paradise.
That represents a major shortcoming in international
policy, for which young people are paying a dear price.
In our countries, millions of young men and women
are at risk - through social media and other online
platforms - of becoming the tools of terrorism. Why
do we not enlist them as agents in the fight against
terrorism and as soldiers of tolerance? Do we not have
the means to do so?

As a matter of fact, we already have appropriate
instruments in place, most notably the Security
Council's resolutions on counter-terrorism, the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and the
General Assembly's resolutions on the Alliance of
Civilizations and the culture of peace, which seek to
counter discrimination, intolerance and incitement to
terrorism. What we really need is a strong resolve to
counter terrorism and to hold its sponsors accountable
in order to spare humanity from this scourge and arrive
at the maintenance of international peace security, the
title of our meeting today.

