Mr. Benitez Seenz (Uruguay) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation felt the need to speak in the
Security Council on this subject because we consider the
peacekeeping process in Angola to be entering a phase
that is doubly important: it is important for my country,
Uruguay; and it is important for the peace process itself.
It is important for Uruguay because, with the recent
withdrawal of our troops, we feel that we have reached a
new stage in the long course that Uruguay has been
following for many years, contributing to peacekeeping in
many regions of the world. The first such mission was in
1935, many years before the existence of the United
Nations; since the creation of the Organization, we have

 

participated in 14 missions, contributing approximately
8,000 men.

In the case of Angola, the Uruguayan unit was the
first to be deployed in the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) area, shortly after the
1994 peace accords that enabled Angola to enjoy the
longest period of peace that it has known in the past 30
years. Twenty days ago, the withdrawal of the Uruguayan
battalion from Angola was completed, and of the original
800 men on duty just 70 remain in the region.

Together with other troop-contributing countries, we
have shouldered our responsibilities, conscious of being a
stabilizing factor in the peace process. We are proud of our
participation in this force in the service of the United
Nations.

As my comments suggest, my country is very pleased
to have contributed to yet another mission in the service of
world peace. The new experience gained has continued to
enhance the professionalism of our armed forces, and we
stand ever ready to provide the United Nations with our
support, whether in new peacekeeping missions, or by
passing on our experience - another means by which
Uruguay can contribute to the Organization.

We acknowledge and welcome in particular the
contribution of the Secretary-General through his visit to
Angola from 22 to 25 March 1997. The results of that Visit
are reflected in his comments on 11 April and also in his
report on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). I should also like to add that Uruguay
appreciates the responsible attitude and the sensitivity
shown by the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
and the Force Commander in carrying out their mandates.

Furthermore, we consider this to be a vital moment for
the peace process itself. Despite the optimism shown in the
report, the future still holds the challenge of attaining
lasting peace in Angola. The extension of State
administration to the entire territory is an objective that
should be met as quickly as possible. Social reintegration
of ex-combatants in Angola is still an issue of concern, and
we call for close monitoring of the general process of
disarming the population. The slow speed of integration
into the armed forces, as well as the latent threat that the
Angolan parties might intervene in Zaire, are the most
worrying aspects of this issue. In this context, there is a
need for greater cooperation on the part of the developed
countries so that assistance in demobilization can be
guaranteed and funding provided in a timely manner.

In his report, the Secretary-General referred
specifically to the need to prepare for the observer
mission that will replace UNAVEM. III. At the same time,
however, we must assume that the United Nations cannot
remain in Angola forever. Just as we have completed the
withdrawal plan, we must also be aware of our continuing
responsibility to strengthen the civilian and humanitarian
presence in the area. There is also a need for the
transition process to proceed smoothly, so that the
problems emerging in certain regions do not tarnish the
victory that has already been achieved: that of giving
Angola the longest period of peace that it has known in
the past three decades.

Uruguay is fully prepared to continue to participate,
within its means, in the reconstruction of Angola and is
prepared to offer its support for any other undertaking
planned for UNAVEM. III. In this respect, we can state
that we are now in a position to offer additional police
observers for deployment on the ground.

