Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) underscored the importance of
interlinkages between development, peace and security,
and human rights, and of their mutual reinforcement.
The urgent need to do everything possible to carry out
the vision presented in the Millennium Declaration
(General Assembly resolution 55/2) is now more
evident than ever. We therefore welcome the initiative
of the presidency of the Security Council to place this
issue on today's agenda.

Given the late hour and the long list of speakers,
my statement will be extremely brief and limited to
two points. For our other substantive arguments, I
invite the Security Council to refer to the statement
made by my colleague, the Permanent Representative
of Belgium, on behalf of the five Chairs of the country-
specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We fully associate ourselves with that
statement.

First, lasting peace and development cannot be
achieved in any society without the promotion of
human rights and justice. The reform processes of the
United Nations relating to peace and security,
operational development systems and human rights
must be implemented in a coordinated manner. The
Security Council could function more efficiently if it
were able to benefit from a more comprehensive
analysis of the situations it monitors, in particular of
the root causes of conflicts, taking account of the
socio-economic and environmental dimensions and
other factors that threaten peace and security.

Secondly, strategic cooperation between the
United Nations and the World Bank is essential. In this
regard, the World Bank's World Development Report
201]: Conflict, Security and Development comes at an
opportune time. Periodic exchanges with development
players and those involved in the peacebuilding
architecture could be more effective if they were
systematized and intensified. I am thinking of
processes such as the preparation of reports of the
Secretary-General, mission planning, continuing
education for personnel and within integrated mission
task forces. For the countries on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the importance of such
cooperation no longer needs to be proven, and we are
pleased to be able to actively participate in it with
regard to Burundi.

