Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
deep appreciation for Mexico's leadership in
organizing this important debate. Our appreciation
goes also to the former and current Chairs of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
Ambassador Ripert of France and you yourself,
Mr. President, for bringing this issue to the forefront of
the international agenda. Japan is committed to
extending its utmost support to the valuable work of
the Working Group.

I would also like to express gratitude to the
Secretary-General, the Deputy Secretary-General,
Special Representative, Coomaraswamy, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
UNICEF Executive Director for their presence here
this morning and for their vital contributions to the
protection of children. We particularly thank Ms. Grace
Akallo for sharing with us her painful but inspiring life
experience and her advocacy activities.

In recent years, we witnessed a marked
improvement in the condition of children in some
countries, as several conflicts have come to an end. We
are encouraged that noticeable progress has been made
through action plans to release child soldiers in several
countries, including Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Uganda.

At the same time, many other parties to conflict
have still not implemented action plans. Indeed, 19
parties have been listed for the past four consecutive
years in the annexes to the reports of the Secretary-
General on this subject. Japan is deeply concerned
about those vulnerable children, particularly in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo where the situation
is still serious, and also in places such as Afghanistan,
Iraq, Darfur, Somalia and Sri Lanka.

We appreciate the contribution of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, but its work is
not complete when it reaches conclusions. In the
coming weeks, it should focus more on following up
on and implementing its conclusions effectively. The
Security Council should mobilize all means available
to us to combat violations against children and send a
strong political signal, including peacekeeping
operations, special political missions, integrated
offices, the Peacebuilding Commission, and the
sanctions committees.

The Security Council should also respond to
other grave violations against children in armed
conflict, such as sexual violence. Systematic rape as a
tactic of war is impermissible. The Council should

react firmly and forcefully against any sexual violence
in conflict. It should strengthen monitoring and
reporting mechanisms. Japan supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to include
parties that commit rape and other grave sexual
violence against children in the annexes of his reports
in the future. We believe that expansion of the criteria
could enhance the capacity of agencies on the ground,
such as UNICEF, to carry out monitoring and
reporting.

Another serious threat posed to many children
comes from landmines, unexploded ordnance and
cluster munitions. Some 5,500 people were killed or
maimed by landmines and unexploded ordnance in
2007, and children account for more than one third of
all victims. We welcome the steady progress of the
Ottawa Convention, which has now marked the tenth
anniversary of its entry into force. The recent signing
conference for the Convention on Cluster Munitions
was also welcome.

It is imperative to prevent the deaths of innocent
civilians and children and to provide support to
victims. For this reason, we have contributed more
than $300 million, including for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Chad, the Sudan, Afghanistan
and Lebanon. We will continue to make similar
contributions.

Small arms and light weapons have the most
serious impact on the situation of child soldiers and on
violence against children, including recruitment and
abuse. Since small arms and light weapons frequently
circulate through illicit trade, we should encourage
every country to strengthen its implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. Japan has been
actively supporting projects related to the control of
small arms in conflict, such as the Disbandment of
Illegal Armed Groups (DIAG) in Afghanistan and the
Small Arms Control Programme of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

However, a more fundamental solution would be
to restrict the export of weapons to countries engaged
in armed conflict or where armed conflict is likely to
arise. Japan's long-standing policy of prohibiting the
export of weapons imposes strict criteria for the
transfer of arms to any country. Based on this policy,
we support the establishment of a common
international standard in order to ensure the
responsible transfer of conventional arms, and we
actively participate in relevant discussions within the
United Nations on this issue.

In conclusion, in many conflict situations,
children are the most vulnerable. Japan is a strong
advocate of the concept of human security. We are very
proud that, together with Mexico, we are promoting the
Friends of Human Security at the United Nations. We
work with interested partners to achieve the goals of
protecting and empowering vulnerable people on a
regional and local level, including through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security. By preventing
and alleviating the deleterious impacts of conflict, we
endeavour to enable children around the world to have
a brighter future.

