The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I would like to join other colleagues in thanking
Special Representative Fall for his briefing today. We
commend his efforts to bring prosperity and security
to Central Africa, and the United States is grateful for
his work in Cameroon to facilitate a peaceful resolution
to the crisis in the Anglophone North-West and South-
West regions. I would also like to thank Mr. Lezhnev for
his candid assessment and concrete recommendations
to address the challenges in the region.

As the Council seeks to highlight the most pressing
concerns to international peace and security, we
must clearly state that we are increasingly concerned
by rapidly worsening humanitarian and human
rights situations in Cameroon. Credible reports
detail persistent human rights violations, including
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary and unlawful detention
and torture, all conducted with impunity.

What started as a political and human rights crisis
in the region has become a humanitarian situation
requiring immediate attention. Parties to the conflict
limit humanitarian access, and a worsening security
situation has reportedly left as much as 65 per cent of
the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon
out of bounds to aid workers. Since 2016, when the
protests in Cameroon started, nearly 3,000 people have
died as a result of the ensuing violence, including 300
defence and security personnel.

The conflict has created more than 500,000
internally displaced persons and nearly 50,000
refugees. On 5 November, UNICEF reported that
around 1.9 million people, most of them children, were
estimated to need assistance. This is an increase of
80 per cent compared to last year and an almost 15-fold
increase since 2017. We call on separatist groups and
the Government of Cameroon to ensure humanitarian
access to these areas to deliver life-saving assistance
to those who now find themselves in need. We express
our condolences to the family of a local aid worker,
who was kidnapped and executed by unknown armed
men on 30 November during the official conduct of his
duties. We also call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as applicable, as well as the protections they provide.

The situation in Cameroon warrants immediate
action from all parties, including the African Union
and regional Heads of State. As this month is about
doing and not just talking, I want to briefly list a few
helpful steps that could be taken to restore a measure
of stability.
We urge the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and our partners to take a
more assertive role in resolving Cameroon's conflict and
to continue to urge both the Government of Cameroon
and separatist groups to enter into open-ended dialogue
without preconditions, relinquishing their focus on
a military solution. We also fully support the Swiss-
led mediation process between the Government of
Cameroon and the separatists, and we urge both sides
to take concrete actions to move the initiative forward.

The United States also appreciates the work done
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
to build regional support for the full implementation
of the 6 February Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The
United States supports the agreement and believes it
to be the best pathway to lasting peace, security and
stability in the Central African Republic. In a spirit of
reconciliation, we urge UNOCA to continue working in
coordination with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the African Union and neighbouring countries
to rally regional political support for the timely and
effective implementation of this agreement.

We would like to again thank Special Representative
Fall for all the hard work he does in UNOCA. Over
the coming year, we look forward to supporting his
promotion of peaceful electoral processes, as well
as his cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, so as to bring peace and prosperity to
Central Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As there are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers, I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 4. 35 pm.
