Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of cote d'Ivoire, and
welcome his participation in this debate as President
of the Security Council. We would also like to thank
him for choosing the theme for today's open debate,
namely, "Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security", which concerns the
prevention and settlement of conflicts. It is important
to start this debate by mentioning States, as they take
prime responsibility in those processes. We would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres;
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat; and the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi
Brou, for their opinions.

We share the goal of wanting to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to prevent conflict.
That is the goal that is enshrined as a priority in the
Charter of the United Nations. Why has it to date not
been given due attention? That is a good question. One
reason could be a lack of political will and sincerity
of intention. The Charter provides Member States with
all the instruments necessary to prevent conflict. I am
referring, first and foremost, to Chapters I and VI and
also other decisions, particularly resolution 2171 (2014),
which enshrined the basic principles of international
cooperation in that area. All of the decisions adopted
confirm that international assistance, including that
of the United Nations and regional organizations,
must be based on the consent of the host country and
complement the efforts of national Governments.

At the same time, each situation is, of course,
unique and arises owing to various factors. That means
that there can be no universal indicators of conflict.
History has shown time and again that conflicts
can arise both in contexts where there have been no
human rights violations as well as where there is a
rather developed State. At the same time, crises are
increasingly becoming the cause of external interference
or intended provocations. That is why it is important in
every situation to make sure that we take an impartial
approach and endeavour to seek unique solutions. The
work of the United Nations must be based on proven
diplomatic instruments, mediation and good offices.
Dubious concepts that are not unanimously supported
by States can only aggravate those situations and are
ultimately in the interests of a fairly small group of
countries.

In current conditions, when most crises are
domestic and intra-State in nature, the line is becoming
fine between mediation, preventive diplomacy and the
exertion of pressure on domestic political processes. It
should be sufficient to point out the number of crises
that have arisen from instances of blatant external
interference that were intended to topple Governments
that someone did not like i look at the situations in
Iraq, Libya, Syria, Ukraine, Venezuela and Nicaragua.
That is a far-from-exhaustive list of situations that have
recently been discussed in the Security Council. And
it is the international community, which is purportedly
facing some sort of new challenges to international
peace and security, that ends up having to pay for the
actions of the foreign puppeteers. In fact, the only thing
that is needed to prevent conflict is to stop interfering
in internal affairs and stop lecturing about how to build
democracy and how to respect human rights. Each State
arrives at those values in its own way, and one should
not try to impose one's own recipes or punish anyone
for non-compliance with them. It is high time for all of
us to understand that.

With regard to the settlement of existing conflicts,
one of the key instruments for the United Nations
remains peacekeeping operations. Given the complex,
ever-changing nature of peacekeeping missions, they
must be adapted regularly. That is something that
needs to be done in full compliance with the decisions
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
It would seem that everyone would be aware of that,
but in practice we have been encountering paradoxical
situations. On the one hand, we constantly hear
reasonable appeals to strengthen cooperation among
key stakeholders of United Nations peacekeeping: host
countries, troop- and police-contributing countries,
the Security Council and the Secretariat. On the other
hand, we see increasing attempts to circumvent the
agreement of documents in specialized platforms, for
example, through decisions of the Security Council
and all kinds of forums and conferences outside of the
United Nations.

In that context, we cannot overlook the International
Forum on Challenges of Peace Operations, held in
Sweden on 28 and 29 November. There, a high-level
member of the Secretariat stated that the Special
Committee is not supposed to rectify the implementation
process of the Declaration of Shared Commitments,
which was developed by the Secretariat. We do not
even know how to react to those words. As we know
very well, in the most recent annual report (A/72/l9)
of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which was approved by the General Assembly, it clearly
states in paragraph 19 of chapter V that the Special
Committee is
"the only United Nations forum mandated to
comprehensively review the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
including measures aimed at enhancing the
capacity of the Organization to conduct United
Nations peacekeeping operations."

And there are many such paradoxical situations
in the efforts to reform the peace and security pillar.
For example, we all agree that the mandates of the
United Nations missions must be clear, focused and
implementable; yet some of those Security Council
members who agree that peace, security, development
and human rights are closely linked are calling for
the broadening of mission mandates and requesting
unusual peacekeeping objectives.

Another example is provided by the attempts we
have seen to equate the protection of civilians with
human rights in United Nations documentation. Those
who advocate for that approach fail to acknowledge that
the protection of civilians falls under Chapter VII of the
Charter, and implies the use of force. Needless to say,
their actual intention is to obtain another way to exert
political leverage by using the authority of the United
Nations and Chapter VII, which is unacceptable. We
have already seen attempts to use Chapter VII with
regard to human rights at the United Nations Mission
in Haiti. The result of that was division within the
Council, where we always used to h consensus.

Lastly, Member States agree that strengthening the
safety of peacekeepers is a top priority. However, some
delegations have started advocating for robust mission
mandates. We do not understand how robust mission
mandates can improve the safety of the Blue Helmets,
or how they can be reconciled with the primacy of the
political settlement of conflicts. In that context, we
also cannot overlook the mention in this meeting's
concept note (S/2018/1064, annex) of so-called peace
enforcement operations. The United Nations cannot
afford to get dragged into such scenarios. The greatest
contradiction here is that everyone agrees with the
priority to pursue the political settlement of conflicts
and that the United Nations missions must help the
host country to create the conditions for that goal.
However, what we are hearing in fact are proposals
to replace the responsibility of States with United
Nations mandates. That is the reason why the Russian
Federation did not believe that it was in a position to
fully endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and why
we insist that it be discussed in the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.

The dialogue among Member States with regard to
the reforms needed in peacekeeping operations is not
over, but it is already clear that the current challenges
to peace and security require a collective approach. It
is important to strengthen United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations based onChapter VIII of the
Charter and to use their comparative advantages. It is
also important for the priority of regional organizations
to be to strive for the peaceful, political and diplomatic
resolution of conflicts. We note with satisfaction that
African countries are actively taking upon themselves
initiatives to address problems on their continent. The
leadership of the African Union can rightly be proud
of that, although it still has a lot of work to carry out.
We understand the desire of our African partners
to independently and effectively confront the new
challenges and, first and foremost, terrorism. A very
good example of that is the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), which is very active in combating
the Al-Shabaab terrorist group.

The situation remains worrisome in the Sahel,
where terrorists and radical groups are attempting
to extend their influence, and organized crime is
flourishing owing to the power vacuum in vast swathes
of the territory. The threat to security and stability
in that part of Africa has reached an unprecedented
level. We welcome the initiative of the Group of Five
for the Sahel to create a joint force to combat terrorism
and organized crime. That is an important factor in
ensuring stability.

Russia has extended assistance of various kinds to
our African partners. African peacekeepers can receive
training at the Russian centres in Domodedovo and
Naro-Fominsk and at the International Mine-action
Centre of the Russian Ministry of Defence in Nakhabino.
In 2017 Russian instructors in the Sudan and in the
Central African Republic trained 200 local military
personnel at each location. By the end of the year in the
Central African Republic, we will have trained 2,000
people. We provide $2 million in financial assistance
to the African Union Peace Fund, which is used for the
civilian component of AMISOM. and for the mediation
activities of the Committee of Elders and the High

Representatives for Somalia and Mali.

Furthermore, Russia provides financing for
humanitarian assistance and development strategies and
for the fight against terrorism in the Sahel countries. At
the same time, we understand the level of need with
respect to funding African peacekeeping. We therefore
believe that it is justified to have a discussion about
increasing the predictability, reliability and flexibility
of funding, and we stand ready to engage in further
dialogue with our African friends. At the same time,
we count on the fact that the text will not include
any non-consensual elements on peacekeeping, in
particular the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which would
prevent us from supporting that important initiative.

