Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): In line
with your wishes, Mr. President, I should like to read
only a condensed version of my statement. I would ask
that the full text be distributed later on.

I will skip the congratulations, but I wish to state
that I agree fully with the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands on behalf
of the group of like-minded countries.

While we welcome the important measures taken
by the Security Council in adopting resolution 1989
(2011) in June 2011, we cannot but note once again that
respect for the rule of law, including the right to a fair
public hearing before an independent and impartial
mechanism established by law, remains insufficient.
Many Governments, regional and national parliaments
and national and regional courts share that view, as
does the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism.

Until the United Nations system offers the
possibility of an effective and independent judicial
review of the sanctions lists, the dilemma faced by
Member States will continue, in that they are obligated
to apply Security Council sanctions while also possibly
required to comply with contrary rulings by a court of
law regarding their own human rights obligations. That
is my first point.

My second and last point is that the sanctions regime
under resolution 1267 (1999) is not, as members know,
the only body that has an impact on the enjoyment of
the human rights of individuals and entities affected by
targeted sanctions. Other sanctions regimes do not have
mechanisms that allow for the imperatives related to the
principle of the rule oflaw to be taken into account. We
therefore encourage the Security Council to consider
the proposal of the group of like-minded countries that
other sanctions regimes be provided with mechanisms
similar to those established by the Security Council in
the framework of the Al-Qaida sanctions Committee.
We believe that our concerted efforts and those of the
group are inspired by our sincere desire to strengthen the
sanctions regimes and to increase the effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Security Council. We are convinced
that the approach proposed by our group will help to
achieve those objectives.

