We welcome your personal participation in today's debate, Sir, in your capacities as President of the Security Council and the current Chair of the African Union (AU). We also welcome the participation of the high-level briefers, Secretary- General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission. We thank them for the information and assessments they have shared with us today. Russia consistently advocates for strengthening the cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union. The dialogue between the two organizations on issues of peace and security in Africa has made genuine and tangible progress in recent years. Two framework agreements have been signed and are being successfully implemented. The Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council have been holding annual meetings and full-fledged conferences. The discussion of key problems on the African agenda in those formats, as well as joint events, field trips and visits by special representatives, helps to enhance the effectiveness of joint efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts. The African Union- United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, which has now completed its mandate, and the assistance provided by the United Nations to the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel are examples of successful cooperation on the ground. We are pleased that the African voice in the Security Council is united and resonant. We welcome the high level of coordinated action between the three African members of the Council, together with the like-minded Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We appreciate the South African delegation's contribution to the work of the Security Council in addressing key problems in the maintenance of peace and stability over the past two years. It is important that Africans are increasingly taking the initiative in dealing with peace and security issues on their continent. In that regard, we should not omit to mention the efforts that you have made, Mr. President, to resolve the situation regarding the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam and the crisis in northern Ethiopia. The decisive attitude of regional players is clearly evidenced by the flagship AU initiative to put an end to armed conflict on the continent. We believe that United Nations cooperation with African regional organizations should be based on the understanding that regional actors should be the ones to take the lead in defining the paths to settling disputes on the African continent, based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The aim of our global Organization to provide multifaceted support to these efforts is in the spirit of the African Union's declared principle of African solutions for African problems. We believe that the effectiveness of further cooperation on this track will depend on how the following priority issues are resolved. First, we understand the concerns of our African partners regarding the provision of resources for African peacekeeping operations. It is important to improve their predictability, reliability and flexibility. We are ready for further constructive dialogue on this both in the Security Council and on other platforms within the Organization, once we have agreed on a united position on financing peacekeeping missions within the framework of the AU. It is also important to work on conflict prevention and the development of an early warning system on the African continent. Nor must we relax our efforts to counter the influx and spread of illicit weapons. We believe that the growing terrorist threat requires special attention. Terrorist organizations are taking advantage of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic to consolidate their positions. The recent severe deterioration of the situation in the Sahel-Sahara region is particularly alarming. We are ready to share our experience in countering terrorism with our African partners and to implement projects to help countries on the continent build their capacity to address threats of terrorism and extremism. Lastly, optimizing United Nations cooperation with African countries would also help to resolve problems related to the illegal unilateral sanctions that continue to be imposed on various States in Africa. In that context, we would like to once again express our support for the Secretary-General's call for an end to unilateral restrictive measures that undermine States' ability to address the COVID-19 pandemic effectively. We also continue to advocate for the timely review of Security Council sanctions regimes. They must not affect the ability of States to respond to the threats such as organized crime and terrorism through efficient security bodies. Also, such regimes must not aggravate the humanitarian situation. In pursuance of the decisions of the first of its kind Russia-Africa Summit that was convened in October 2019, our country will further develop equitable cooperation with African partners. At this point, our priority is to help Africa overcome the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and improve the epidemiological situation. We reiterate our readiness to promote cooperation on this track among other things in terms of supplies and the start of production on Sputnik-V, the vaccine that Russia successfully presented at the United Nations not long ago.
