I thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting on the situation in Libya. The participation of ministers in today's meeting reflects the gravity of the matter that we are discussing. The Secretary-General's briefing clearly indicates the distressing security and humanitarian situation in Libya and their potential repercussions for peace and security in the region and on the African continent. The increased military build-up intensified by the foreign intervention we have witnessed over the past 14 months, coupled with ongoing hostilities, has had a devastating impact on the day-to-day lives of Libyans. That has resulted in injuries and deaths of innocent civilians, in particular women and children. The recent discovery of mass graves in and around Tarhouna attests to the nature of the atrocities being committed. We welcome that there will be an investigation into those atrocities and that those responsible will be held accountable. South Africa urges the parties to the conflict in Libya to heed the call of the Secretary-General and the African Union (AU) and to urgently agree to the implementation of a ceasefire with immediate effect. Furthermore, we call on all Libyan parties, community leaders and non-governmental organizations to commit to a constructive political dialogue and to work towards a sustainable and lasting political agreement. We reiterate that lasting peace and stability in Libya can come only through a political solution designed and owned by Libyans for Libyans. To that end, South Africa welcomes the African Union's decision to convene an inter-Libyan reconciliation conference in Addis Ababa later this year, coronavirus disease permitting. In the build-up to that conference, we appeal to all today's participants to support that initiative. Through continued cooperation and collaboration, we can all collectively work towards a lasting political solution and reconciliation process, thus ensuring lasting peace. Our country, South Africa, and the Chairperson of the African Union, President Cyril Ramaphosa, supports the ongoing efforts of the African Union through its Peace and Security Council, its Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya and its Contact Group, as well as the work of the AU Special Envoy for Libya as they continue to engage with main stakeholders in Libya. It is vital to enhance the synergies of the efforts of the African Union and the United Nations as they work with common purpose to end the conflict in Libya. Under no circumstances should there be a military solution to the conflict in Libya. That must be avoided at all costs. We seek a peaceful solution and thus reiterate the support of South Africa and the AU for the conclusions of the Berlin Conference. However, we are increasingly concerned that several of the commitments agreed to six months ago in Berlin have not been respected or implemented. We should recall that at the Berlin Conference international partners committed to respecting the arms embargo and refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of Libya. Nevertheless, the parties to the conflict and external players continue to violate the embargo through the influx of weapons and foreign fighters to Libya. South Africa wishes to affirm the African Union's strong condemnation of all forms of violations of the United Nations arms embargo by whomsoever. In that regard, the African Union has called on the United Nations, through the Security Council, to fully assume its responsibility to ensure that the embargo is effectively implemented and monitored as part of efforts to end fighting and create the necessary conditions for a permanent ceasefire. In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that there can be no military solution to the conflict in Libya and that external actors' continued political meddling and military interference in the affairs of Libya must come to an end. Such actions undermine the fundamental interests and rights of the Libyan people and detract from Libyan national unity. In that regard, South Africa reaffirms its commitment to the unity and territorial integrity of Libya and the preservation of its natural resources for the sole benefit of its people. We hope that this meeting will lead to greater success in the implementation of the agreements of the Berlin Conference.
