Mr. Bakayoko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her six-monthly briefing on the activities of the
Court in the cases relating to the situation in Libya. Cote
d'Ivoire, a State party to the Rome Statute, reaffirms
its full support for the ICC's efforts to promote
international justice and the fight against impunity in
the world.

My delegation notes with regret the deterioration
of the security situation in Libya since the onset of
fighting, on 4 April, between the forces of General
Haftar and those of the Government of National Accord,
led by Prime Minister Faiez Serraj. In view of the ever-
increasing number of casualties and the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation, my country urges the
cessation of hostilities and respect for the ceasefire
signed on 4 September 2018, in order to return all the
parties to the negotiating table and thereby create the
conditions for a revival of the political process to end
the crisis.

My country is of the opinion that the deterioration
of the security situation in Libya could create
conditions for the entrenchment of the Libyan branch
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Indeed, the
attacks on the High National Election Commission in
Tripoli, the National Oil Corporation and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs in 2018 are a sad manifestation
of the violence perpetrated by terrorist groups and
deserve the combined attention of our Council and the
International Court.

Similarly, the issue of human rights requires the
greatest attention of the international community
and the increased vigilance of the ICC because of the
increased risk of human rights violations in such a
context. That is why my country commends the efforts
made to date by the Court, as well as its cooperation
with the Government of Libya in investigating the
alleged crimes committed in the country.

My delegation is concerned, however, that the
precariousness of the current context may further affect
the institutional capacities of the Government of National
Accord and its willingness to fulfil its obligations under
the Rome Statute. We note that the arrest warrants
issued against Messrs. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled and Mahmoud Mustafa
Busayf Al-Werfalli have not been executed to date. It
therefore reiterates its call on all parties to cooperate
with the ICC in bringing alleged perpetrators to justice
before the competent international tribunals.

The peace and security that are at the centre of
our Council's concerns are inseparable from the fight
against serious violations of human rights and human
dignity. In that regard, the Security Council and the ICC
must work together to achieve that noble goal, which is
one of the pillars of the process of restoring peace and
national reconciliation in Libya. In that respect, cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the statement made by the Prosecutor
on 16 April concerning the escalation of Violence in and
around Tripoli. In that statement, the Prosecutor urged
all parties to the conflict not to commit crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court and, in particular, invited
the commanders of the armed groups that take part in
these battles to fully respect the rules of international
humanitarian law.

My country sees this as an expression of the
Prosecutor's desire to remain seized of the human rights
situation in the Libyan crisis. I therefore remind all
Libyan parties of their obligation to protect civilians,
humanitarian personnel and hospital infrastructure.
Cote d'Ivoire also reiterates its call for the extension of
ICC jurisdiction to crimes against migrants.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate Cote
d'Ivoire's support for the work of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court to ensure respect for
human rights in Libya, and we call on the United Nations
and the African Union to pool their efforts to achieve a
rapid cessation to the clashes in and around Tripoli and
to achieve the restoration of peace in the country.

