Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I join
my colleagues in most warmly congratulating you,
Mr. President, and your delegation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are sure that your leadership and efficiency will bring to
the Council all the dynamism for which you are known.
I also wish to express my thanks to Mr. Hardeep Singh
Puri, Ambassador of India, and his entire team for their
leadership and the very serious way in which they led
the work of the Council in the past month.

I want to thank and commend Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General for Yemen Jamal Benomar for his
very important work in that country. We greatly regret
that the planned Security Council mission to Yemen
could not occur, but we are aware that Mr. Benomar's
influence and participation in the entire process have
been highly significant. We see great progress in
the developments he explained to us today, the first
anniversary of the signing on 23 November 2011 in
Riyadh of the historic Transition Agreement, which
ended the violence in Yemen and put the country on the
path of democratic transition.

The people and Government of Yemen have acted
valiantly, resolutely and in a timely way to save the
country from civil war. As the Secretary-General said
on his recent visit to Sana'a, the process of change that
has been set in motion is irreversible. We underline
the strong commitment of the United Nations and the
important role it plays in the progress made to date in
Yemen. The people and Government of Yemen need and
deserve our full support in building a more democratic,
prosperous and participatory society.

In our View, building strong foundations for the
democratic transition taking place in Yemen under the
leadership of President Mansour and his Government
of National Unity will require an inclusive and
participatory National Dialogue, and that the outcomes
of that dialogue be incorporated in the constitutional
process to be concluded by the end of 2013, leading to
general elections in February 2014.

We are therefore pleased that, through discussions
in the preparatory committee, an agreement has been
reached on appointments to open seats at the National
Dialogue Conference. The Special Adviser has proposed
that 112 of the 556 Conference seats be assigned to the
General People's Congress and its allies, 85 to Houthis,
40 to women and 40 to young people, which will allow
the protracted stalemate to be overcome. We commend
the dedicated efforts of the parties concerned, who
have opened the way for the National Dialogue to be
effective, broad, constructive and participatory.

We welcome the recent reports from the Geneva
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees that many internally displaced persons
are returning to their homes in southern Yemen.
According to the Office, in the past four months more
that 80,000 people have returned, which represents the
first significant reduction in the number of internally
displaced persons since May 2011. If that trend is to
continue, it will require the sustained and committed
support of the international community - all the more
so when more than 300,000 people remain displaced
because of the conflict between Yemeni Government
forces and the Al-Houthi group, which has now lasted
almost 10 years.

We must make every effort to ensure security
and stability in Yemen. We therefore welcome the
significant pledges made by various donors at the
3 September meeting of the Group of Friends of
Yemen in Riyadh to support reconstruction, to provide
for basic infrastructure and humanitarian assistance
needs, and consolidate security and stability in Yemen.
It is also essential to address such hugely important
problems as political dialogue and preparations for the
2014 elections.

Yemen has undergone a profound change since
President Mansour's accession to power last February.
However, many relics of the past persist, especially in
the military, and they must be overcome. We note that,
in the process of centralizing control over the armed
forces, President Mansour issued a series of directives
in August whereby he placed divisions and brigades of
the Republican Guard and the First Armoured Division
under his authority.

We reiterate our strenuous condemnation of the
terrorist attack of 11 September in which at least

11 people died. We call on all actors in Yemen to
reject violence in all its forms and manifestations,
and we encourage them to play a constructive role in
implementing the Transition Agreement.

The ongoing attacks in southern Yemen that have
claimed many victims clearly show the need to make
progress on the reorganization of the State's armed
forces. Reports of the broad influence of Al-Qaida in
Yemeni territory remain a cause for concern. We are
aware of the fragility of the transition process. That is
why we call on the authorities to commit themselves
irreversibly to creating solid institutions and to
establish more open and inclusive processes to ensure
Yemen's stability in the long term.

A National Dialogue driven by the Yemenis
themselves is essential to the country's democratic
future. The Security Council and the international
community must continue to assert with one voice their
support for Yemen's unique example of transition, which
enjoys the support of the majority of the population.

