Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (interpretation from French): The African States on whose behalf I speak wish
 

first to express their satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside
over the Security Council and to congratulate you. Your
country, the People's Republic of China, has always
supported the African cause, through the dark times of the
struggles for independence, in the various international
bodies and even in the bipolar confrontation, where it was
always at our side. It is hardly surprising, then, that, in the
course of your presidency of the Security Council, faced
with exasperation at the instability in Africa, you should
have taken the initiative of convening this debate on one of
the conflicts currently of concern to Africa and the entire
world.

This is not to say that the situations between Ethiopia
and Eritrea, in Angola, Sierra Leone, Somalia, the Comoros
and elsewhere are not worrisome. Far from it. But the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo -
because of its polymorphic nature, the overt and covert
involvement of the countries of the region and its stakes for
the belligerents - entails serious dangers whose
ramifications can harm the entire African edifice.

It will therefore be clear that our problem - how to
find a solution to the conflict - is complex. Forgive me
for saying, Sir, that it is a veritable Chinese puzzle. Since
it is an inextricable situation, it is easy to understand why
neither the OAU meetings nor the efforts of the countries
of the subregion have led to a conclusive settlement.

The futility of these efforts may have left the
unfortunate impression that Africa is complacent to the
tragedy in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such
thinking would be meagre thanks to all the good will of all
the apostles of peace who have devoted and continue to
devote themselves to restoring peace to that country.

This tireless quest for peace led the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to envisage a
special summit, to be held late this month, in order

"to consider all the ongoing initiatives and mediation
efforts and to find the deep-rooted causes of and
reasons for the problem of conflicts in Africa, their
persistence and the relative lack of success of attempts
to find ways and means of bringing our actions to
fruition."

Unfortunately, this special summit was a still-born
project, but nothing will stop the efforts being made, both
in Africa and by the international community, to find a just
solution to the conflict in the Congo.

At the African level, the OAU has taken
praiseworthy steps. In particular, the most recent summit
meeting of the Central Organ of its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, held on
17 December 1998, reaffirmed the guiding principles,
contained in the OAU charter, which alone can guarantee
a lasting settlement of the Congolese crisis.

First, it enjoined the parties to the conflict to respect
the sacrosanct principle of the inviolability of the frontiers
inherited from colonialism, passed down to us by the
founding father of the OAU in resolution AHG/Res. 16
(1) adopted in Cairo in 1964. Non-respect for borders in
Africa would open a Pandora's box from which disputes
without end would emerge. In the case of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, this is all the more necessary
because the country's size - 2,345,000 square
kilometres - and the dissimilarity of its peoples could be
the source of irredentist claims. The OAU therefore
recalls that this is an essential point that cannot be called
into question short of a tacit agreement to do so between
the States themselves.

Another fact of paramount importance is that the
African heads of State reaffirm their support for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
the sole legitimate authority, representative of the entire
Congolese people. Accordingly, they call on the rebels to
lay down their weapons with a view to promoting the
opening of talks with the Government. By this appeal,
they are addressing all the parties to the conflict.

However, the OAU takes into consideration another
requirement of its charter: that all African disputes must
be settled by peaceful means; in other words, negotiation
should always prevail. Therefore, the various sides in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must concretely
demonstrate political will. In this regard, we are pleased
to see that there has been positive development. Long
distrustful of considering such an eventuality, Congolese
power seems to have yielded to the inevitable reality that
only a discussion with the armed opposition can open the
path of genuine national reconciliation. It seems therefore
that henceforth neither the principle itself or the question
of venue will be an obstacle to this dialogue among the
Congolese.

We therefore appeal to the wisdom, patriotism and
political will of all the actors to silence the weapons and
to promote the establishment of real national accord. It is
clear that in order to be viable, this sincere peace should
be rooted in democratic values such as liberty, respect for

 

human rights, tolerance and so on. These, we believe, are
the basic considerations that can help define a platform of
understanding to bring calm to the situation.
It is also increasingly becoming a question of an
interposition force - a peacekeeping force - and an
international conference on the Great Lakes. Any peaceful
solution to extricate ourselves from the quagmire must
receive the support of the African countries. From this
standpoint, it should be noted that there is no antagonism
between the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity on the Congolese question. To the contrary, their
actions are complementary. How can it be otherwise, given
their shared ideal of promoting the search for peace? On
many occasions, the OAU has shown expertise in the area
of conflict settlement. For proof we need look no farther
than the platform it proposed for resolving the dispute
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, of which the Security Council
has recognized the relevance in recent resolutions. The only
obstacle thwarting its efforts is the critical lack of logistical
means. We expect that the United Nations and the
international community, will help reinforce those
capacities.

We wish, through this debate, to reach concrete
proposals which, together with the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and of the Southern African
Development Community, will bring the long-awaited peace
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the greater
well-being of the Congolese people, for it is clearly their
destiny that is at stake.

