Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I add my
words to those of others in congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of office and in expressing
full confidence in your chairmanship this month. I would
like to thank Ambassador Qin Huasun and his delegation
for having conducted our business so well last month.

 

In his report to the Security Council of 11 April 1996
(S/ 1996/258), Ambassador Ekeus noted that
"there are still significant deficiencies and gaps in
Iraq's disclosures" (5/1996/258, para. 118)

over its programmes of weapons of mass destruction, that

"The Commission has noted recent acquisitions of
prohibited items by Iraq", (ibid.)

and that

"a full accounting and disposal of Iraq's holdings of
prohibited items has not been made." (ibid.)

It is against this background that, once again, the
Security Council now has to adopt a draft resolution - in
this case, co-sponsored by the United Kingdom - in
response to Iraqi defiance of the will of the international
community as expressed in the Council's earlier resolutions
regarding Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programmes.

My delegation takes no pleasure in this. But it is right
that the Council has reacted quickly and robustly in the
wake of Iraq's obstruction yesterday and today of an
inspection team of the Special Commission.

It is clearly unacceptable for Iraq to declare that any
facilities or sites are off limits. Ensuring security in the
Gulf requires that Iraq's weapons of mass destruction be
eliminated. This can only be assured if Iraq is completely
open with the Special Commission. The Special
Commission has made it clear to Iraq that it is still not
satisfied that the information it has obtained and the
explanations it has been given provide a complete picture
of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programmes. It is
also apparent that Iraq continues to withhold information.

The Special Commission therefore has no alternative
but to continue with intrusive, no-notice inspections, which
are fully within its mandate. Inspections are not designed to
persecute Iraq or to infringe its sovereignty. It is in Iraq's
own interest to cooperate, as only by that means can
progress be made towards fulfilling the overall requirements
of Security Council resolution 687 (1991).

I would finally like to say a word of thanks to
Ambassador Ekeus and the Special Commission for the
efforts they have undertaken to fulfil the Council's
mandates in extremely difficult circumstances. The British
Government attaches great importance to the Commission's

 

work, and we shall continue to support fully its efforts, as
we have done in the past.
