Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for taking the initiative of convening today's
high-level debate on this important anniversary and for
your delegation's important work in negotiating
resolution 1894 (2009) adopted earlier today. Italy was
glad to join the list of sponsors. I also wish to express
my appreciation to the Secretary-General for providing
us with a complete picture of the progress achieved and
of ongoing concerns in the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden on behalf of
the European Union. I will now touch on some points
of particular interest to my country.

Ending sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict is a key element of the protection of civilians
agenda. The Security Council has shown great
leadership in this regard in the last year and a half,
starting with the adoption of landmark resolution 1820
(2008), which stated once and for all that sexual
violence, when used as a tactic of war, is a matter of
peace and security and therefore the business of the
Security Council. Resolution 1888 (2009), adopted in
September, is another important step forward, as it
provides the Council with effective new tools designed
to end impunity and to hold accountable the
perpetrators of these heinous crimes. It is now up to the
Council to use these tools and to implement these
resolutions in full and without delay. In this respect,
the Secretary-General's early appointment of a special
representative for women, peace and security will
provide much-needed leadership, coordination and
advocacy in this field.

Turning now to peacekeeping, the protection of
civilians by United Nations Blue Helmets requires, in
our opinion, three elements. First, it needs guidelines,
by which I mean the instructions and principles that
should inform peacekeeper actions on the ground when
civilian lives are at risk. In this respect, we encourage
the Secretariat's efforts to craft a policy over the next
few months that is shared by Member States.

Secondly, training should be standardized and
based on the aforementioned guidelines. It should
address the ability to manage crisis situations that pose
a threat to the lives of civilians, particularly women
and children. Italy is cooperating with the Secretariat
in this area through its Centres of Excellence. In this
spirit, it has helped to finance some Police Division
projects.

Thirdly, equipment is essential. Guidelines and
training should be accompanied by resources that
enable peacekeepers to protect civilians effectively and
securely.

I would also like to recall Italy's commitment to
combating impunity for international crimes. In
situations where any civilian population is the target of
attacks, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court provides the legal basis for holding accountable
those responsible for the attacks if a State is unwilling
or unable to do so. In this regard, we must reiterate our
commitment to ending impunity.
International criminal jurisdiction should thus be
increasingly viewed as a complementary instrument in
the repression of international crimes. It is the States,
by adapting their laws and jurisdictions, that should be
the first to respond to serious breaches of law, such as
war crimes and crimes against humanity, committed in
their territories. At the same time, it is up to States -
in collaboration with the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other competent institutions on this
issue - to raise awareness of the basic principles and
the importance of international humanitarian law,
especially in armed forces.

Allow me to conclude, on a more general note, by
recalling the reaffirmation in resolution 1674 (2006) of
the principle of the responsibility to protect, which is a
cardinal achievement of the United Nations. I also
welcome the reference to that principle made in
resolution 1894 (2009), adopted by the Council today.
That principle implies that sovereignty brings special
responsibilities. Governments must protect their own
populations, and the best way for them to do so is to
promote human rights, the rule of law and democratic
governance.

Only when a Government manifestly fails to do
so should the international community intervene. The
responsibility to protect should not be perceived in a
confrontational manner; it should be seen, instead, as
an instrument available to the international community
to overcome crises, provided that the conditions
referred to in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1) are met. In that context, we welcome
the debate that took place in the General Assembly in
July on the report of the Secretary-General (A/63/677).
We look forward to the follow-up during the current
session.

