Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Madam
President, we would like to thank you for having
convened this debate. We also welcome the Security
Council's practice regarding the inclusion of the rule
of law in peacekeeping missions. In that context, we
welcome the recent efforts of the Secretary-General
to ensure greater coordination on the ground by, inter
alia, designating the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme as thejoint global focal point for the police,
justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in post-
conflict and other crisis situations.

On the institutional front, we believe that the Rule
of Law Unit of the Secretariat has an important role to
play in defining a consistent and coordinated approach
to the rule of law throughout the United Nations system.
We hope that pooling our efforts will make a difference
on the ground.

That said, restoring and strengthening the rule of
law in the aftermath of conflict and building national
capacities are challenges that require our attention
in both mission and non-mission settings. We must
be consistent in our efforts from the very outset and
sustain our efforts in the long term.

Madam, we thank your presidency for preparing a
concept note (S/2014/75, annex) that rightly highlights a
number ofimportant steps that could be taken to ensure
that rule-of-law mandates are more effective. It is
very important that mandates be spelled out in a more
specific fashion to improve monitoring. Moreover,
mandates must be tailored to specific situations, inter
alia, through consultations with the host country, local
actors and other stakeholders.

In that regard, special political missions and United
Nations country teams could also be mandated in a
more systematic manner to do political work and to
promote the rule of law.

Mandates that assist international criminal justice
efforts by supporting both national processes and the
International Criminal Court, as was the case for Mali
in resolution 2100 (2013), are extremely important.
In order for them to be successfully implemented,
however, the international community must stand
firmly behind them.

Switzerland also wishes to draw the attention of
Member States to the fact that the Criminal Law and
Judicial Advisory Service of the Office of the Rule of
Law and Security Institutions is increasingly short of
funds and resources, although it supports and provides
advice to operations on the ground. As a result, experts
who should be quickly made available to support the
rule of law cannot be deployed in a timely manner in the
field. We therefore encourage the Secretary-General to
submit an appropriate budget proposal to the General
Assembly.

Finally, the United Nations must itself adhere to the
principle of the rule of law in order to credibly promote
it. We should continue to consider options to fill
existing gaps, in particular by holding United Nations
personnel accountable for any abuses.

