Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
all of our briefers. We are particularly grateful to
the Egyptian presidency and to Spain for convening
a meeting on the threats posed to the Sahel region
by climate change and terrorism. We, like those two
delegations and others in the Chamber, are really
concerned by the possible adverse effect that climate
change could have on the peace and security of what is
already a very fragile region. Add climate change to the
increasing threat posed by terrorism, and you see the
scale of the challenge facing these countries.

The Sahel is one of the most vulnerable regions
in the world to climate change. With a 2 per cent
temperature rise, scientists forecast that yields of millet
and sorghum could fall by a quarter by 2018, and 80 per
cent in Burkina Faso and Niger. Maize and rice yields
could also fall. This is not about productivity. This is
about stopping children from going hungry and stopping
people from slipping back into extreme poverty. With
one in nine people already going hungry across the
world, we cannot afford to let it become two in nine.
Sadly, that risk is becoming a reality, as our briefers
set out very clearly. Since the turn of the last century,
temperatures in the Sahel have already risen by 1.3
degrees Centrigrade, and rainfall has already decreased
by up to 30 per cent. This has led to desertification and
reduced organic soil matter. The effects of extreme
weather patterns, such as El Nifio, continue to test the
resilience of countries in the Sahel.

As Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim has just set out for
us, without access to diverse and productive livelihoods
and, crucially, livelihoods that are adapted to climate
change, the young people in and of the Sahel will
become increasingly disenfranchised and increasingly
hungry. They will get even poorer and they will become
even more vulnerable to extremist messaging.

The Niger has Africa's second-highest rate of
population growth and is ranked at the bottom of the
United Nations Development Programme's Human
Development Index. Competition over scarce resources
and employment opportunities will increase, and long-
term tensions between pastoralists and farmers will be
exacerbated. The call of extremism will thrive in these
conditions. That is why there needs to be a holistic and
coordinated response from the international community

that focuses on long-term factors. We welcome the
African Union Peace and Security Council's explicit
acknowledgment of the link between climate change
and peace and security in March. The Council, as Spain
has already said, has also recognized that link and must
continue to focus on it as a key part of its conflict-
prevention role.

The United Nations has a critical part to play in
supporting the countries of the region in facing up to
these challenges. The United Nations, at the request of
the Council, has developed an integrated strategy for
the Sahel, which has at its heart building resilience
against threats such as climate change and terrorism.
It now also has a more effective structure in place for
implementing that strategy, following the merger of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel.

The United Kingdom will play its part. This year
we will provide $26 million to the Sahel region to
build resilience to extreme climate events. By 2017 that
figure will be $79 million. Our projects are creating
new coalitions for civil society, of the private sector,
Government, media, universities and meteorological
offices, to build community resilience and strengthen
national and international planning. This year, the
United Kingdom is also providing $9 million to the
Sahel region for a social protection programme. This
programme will build stronger social systems that are
able to respond to shocks and stresses, including climate
change. By 2018, we will have provided $70 million
through this programme.

We all recognize the significant threat terrorism
and organized crime pose to the Sahel. Through
tackling terrorism and insecurity in a holistic manner,
by addressing the root causes, including the effects of
climate change, we can help those who find themselves
drawn to extremist groups. The United Kingdom
supports the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, and we support the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and efforts through other actors, including the
European Union, to that end. However, collective and
coordinated action from the countries of the region
will also be needed to combat terrorism. The efforts
of the Group of Five Sahel - Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger - to increase their
cooperation and tackle insecurity are a very welcome
step forward. It is only through regional ownership and
political engagement with international support that we
will be able to overcome these challenges and ensure a
brighter future for the people of the Sahel.

