Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. De Mistura for the
presentation he has just made on the situation in
Afghanistan, and I would associate myself with the
statement to be delivered in a little while by the
representative of the European Union.

I would also like to join all those who paid
tribute, in their statements, to Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke and his work in the service of peace and
security in Afghanistan.

The elections of 18 September 2010 were far
from perfect. They did, however, allow the Afghan
people to express themselves, and they allowed Afghan
institutions to prove that they were capable of
preparing, carrying out and ensuring, on their own, the
follow-up to those elections, which, let us remember,
were held in very difficult conditions. The results
announced on 24 November and 1 December 2010 by
the independent electoral entities must be respected,
and the new parliament must be convened as soon as
possible. I echo the Secretary-General's warning
against calling into question the entire election process
under the pretext of carrying out a judicial inquiry.
I would like to reiterate my country's support to
the independent electoral entities. Their role should be
at the heart of the new undertaking that awaits all of
us, that is, the reform of the electoral framework in
Afghanistan, a necessary reform that has been put off
for too long, as highlighted in resolution 1917 (2010).

By turning out to vote for their representatives,
Afghans of all ethnicities, religions and political
persuasions expressed the hope that their collective
future would be decided by a debate within their

institutions, and not by weapons. This is a powerful
message, and one that calls for inter-Afghan
reconciliation. There will be no military victory
without a political solution, just as there will be no
successful reintegration without true reconciliation. We
continue to support the efforts of President Karzai in
that respect, and we welcome the establishment of the
High Peace Council. The hostile statements by certain
Taliban leaders should in no way deter Afghans who
are acting in good faith from the goal of peace.

That process must, of course, be led by the
Afghans themselves. But we must continue to highlight
the fact that they must respect the conditions that were
clearly reiterated at the Kabul Conference, namely,
renunciation of violence; absence of links to
international terrorism; respect for the Constitution;
and protection of human rights and the rights of
women. We trust that the Special Representative will
transmit that message, and we welcome his enhanced
engagement in that process.

The sanctions regime established by resolution
1267 (1999) will, when the time comes, be a useful
tool, combining incentives for and pressure on the
armed opponents to join the democratic process.

Finally, an end to the crisis in Afghanistan and
the country's stability will depend on the strengthening
of regional dialogue, a dialogue that the United Nations
is best suited to support.

Since our most recent meeting, in September,
joint efforts by the International Security Assistance
Force and the Afghan National Security Forces have
allowed us to take the initiative with respect to the
Taliban and to strengthen the presence of the Afghan
State in some areas of the country. Little by little, the
Afghan army and police force are increasing in power.
Our efforts, whether in the military or training areas,
are thus starting to bear fruit, including in the Surobi
district and the Kapisa province, where the French
forces are serving. That is encouraging news for the
future of Afghanistan.

Our efforts are now aimed at implementing a
strategy to transfer all responsibility for security
matters to Afghans between now and 2014. That is one
of the main outcomes of the NATO Summit, which was
held in Lisbon on 19 and 20 November and at which
the Secretary-General and President Karzai were
present. That transition is in the same direction as the
path that we have been pursuing since the Bucharest
summit of 2008, namely Afghanization. It must be
carried out on the basis of security and governance
criteria, so that the transfer is lasting and irreversible
and takes into account the conditions on the ground.
That process will gradually redefine the outlines of our
civil and military engagement in Afghan. It is
important that UNAMA prepare for it.

Despite those encouraging developments, we do
not underestimate the difficulty of the challenges that
await us. The security situation remains a matter for
concern. In that respect, it is worrisome to note that
civilians are increasingly bearing the brunt of the
security problem. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/630) unfortunately confirms that the decrease
in the number of victims resulting from operations by
pro-Government forces, which was achieved through
the hard work of our soldiers and the increased risks
they assumed, is more than cancelled out by the
increase in the number of victims of the Taliban, whose
attacks target civilians and military personnel,
indiscriminately.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
gratitude to the staff of UNAMA and France's full
support for the work of the Special Representative.
United Nations personnel have accomplished
remarkable things in very difficult conditions, as
recalled by the attack in Herat on 23 November. It is
crucial that, in the period ahead, the United Nations
stay actively engaged in Afghanistan, with financial
means and a mandate adapted to the challenges that it
will have to face.

