Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his presentation, as well as Ambassador
Khalilzad for his briefing on behalf of the
Multinational Force.

Belgium welcomes the improvement in the
security situation in Iraq in general, and in Baghdad in
particular. However, the situation remains precarious,
and vigilance is still warranted. The improvement in
the security situation should serve as the foundation for
building the State to which the Iraqi people
legitimately aspire - one that provides for their
security and well-being and respects their fundamental
rights.

In that regard, we should emphasize the efforts
being made by the Government and security forces of
Iraq to regain control over the whole of its territory and
its monopoly on the use of force in maintaining order,
in particular the operations in the south of the country
at the end of March. However, those efforts should be
accompanied by a strengthening of the judicial
machinery and the security forces, which must be
impartial and inclusive if the entire Iraqi population is
to have confidence in the rule of law. In that context,
Belgium joins in the appeal made by the Secretary-
General to all those in a position of responsibility in
Iraq to honour the obligations flowing from
international humanitarian law and their duty to protect
civilians.

With regard to the issue of respect for
fundamental rights, we also welcome the positive
developments in the matter of access to Iraqi detention
centres by the United Nations and by independent
observers. That is an example of transparency that we
encourage the relevant authorities to continue and
expand.

By participating in two elections and a
constitutional referendum in 2005, Iraqis at last had an
opportunity to forever close the chapter on an
oppressive regime and to lay the foundations for a
democratic State, thereby realizing the aspirations of
the country's various communities.

In the context of ongoing efforts to strengthen the
State, already in 2008 we can welcome the adoption of
important laws in the areas of justice and transparency,
amnesty, the operation of the governorates, and
budgetary allocations. Belgium urges the Iraqi
authorities and the leaders of all political groups to
intensify their legislative and political efforts in
numerous crucial areas as they seek, with the
assistance the United Nations is mandated to provide,
to achieve the essential objective of national
reconciliation. In the first instance, we encourage them
to step up their efforts aimed at completing the
constitutional review process. The Constitutional
contract is indeed the only tool that will be able to
foster the confidence of the Iraqi people in a State that
guarantees the right of all communities to participate in
a shared future. Then, they must determine how the
country is to be organized. This will depend on the fair
and transparent sharing of natural resources through
the adoption of a hydrocarbons law and the
delimitation of internal borders on the basis of prior
consensus. Lastly, the Iraqi authorities and leaders
should make greater efforts to finalize the material and
legislative preparations that the Electoral Commission
needs to organize credible elections in the governorates
that will further strengthen the democratic legitimacy
of Iraqi institutions.

The situation of the very numerous Iraqi refugees
and internally displaced persons continues to be a
matter of concern. The countries hosting Iraqi refugees
and the specialized agencies should be commended for
their ongoing efforts in that regard. The international
community must continue its efforts, while the Iraqi
Government should step up its handling of the situation
of its refugees and internally displaced persons.

Although no one can substitute for the efforts of
Iraqis themselves, the international community and, in
particular, Iraq's neighbours can and should continue to
provide assistance to the Iraqi people. First, regional
cooperation should be increased. In that regard, the
ministerial meeting held in Kuwait last week was a
crucial event. The agreement on the mechanism for
providing support for the implementation of its
decisions, along with initiatives by specific working
groups, will make it possible to strengthen dialogue in
areas of common interest, including energy, border
security and refugees. Secondly, assistance should be
provided to ensure that political progress is
accompanied by tangible improvements in the living

08-3196]
conditions of Iraqis. In this spirit, and looking ahead to
the Stockholm meeting, to be co-chaired by the
Government of Iraq and the Secretary-General,
Belgium welcomes the progress made towards
enhancing the effectiveness of international
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance.

Lastly, I would point out that the United Nations
should remain at the centre of the international
presence in Iraq. We welcome the difficult and
courageous work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the rest of the United Nations
family, carried out in security conditions that remain
difficult. Belgium assures the Council that it will
continue to offer its support to this international
presence, which is essential for the reconstruction of
Iraq.

