Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): My delegation thanks the
Uruguayan presidency for convening this open debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his lucid
briefing and for his leadership in the search for peace
in the Middle East.

Nigeria is concerned about the upsurge in Violence
in the occupied Palestinian territory. That presents
a risk of a wider escalation of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. It also complicates the search for peace.
Extremists on both sides must be prevented from
dictating the political agenda. Provocative actions and
hostile rhetoric must be avoided. Political leaders must
take the lead in ensuring that calm is restored.

Reports of the Israeli Government's decision to
expropriate 150 hectares of land in the West Bank are
deeply worrying. If implemented, the expropriation
would constitute the largest seizure of land by Israel
in the West Bank since August 2014. The expropriation
of land, the construction of homes and other settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories violate
international law and fuel the resentment of the
Palestinians. They also undermine the viability of the
two-State solution, which the international community
broadly accepts as the only path to resolving the question
of Palestine. The Israeli authorities must freeze all
settlement-related activities in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, in compliance with their obligations under
international law.

The role of the Quartet remains vital to the Middle
East peace process, and Nigeria continues to follow
very closely the activities of the group. In that regard,
we welcome the recent visit of the Quartet envoys
to the region and their engagement with Israeli and
Palestinian officials. We take positive note of their
discussions, which focused on, among other issues, the
need for both sides to oppose incitement, de-escalate
the situation and take concrete actions to demonstrate
their commitment to the two-State solution. We urge
Israel and Palestine to maintain and indeed strengthen
their engagement with the Quartet in the search for
peace.

The current stalemate in the Middle East peace
process is neither ideal nor sustainable. Both sides
must take concrete steps to return to negotiations on
the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the relevant agreements between
them. Nigeria reiterates its strong support for a two-
State solution with Israel and Palestine, existing side by
side in peace and security.

