Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): First I wish to join
previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Miyet for his introduction of the Secretary-General's
latest report on the situation in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We think the report is quite informative and can serve
as a useful tool for the further preparation of the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea (UNMEE) under Security Council
resolution 1312 (2000). As for the UNMEE mandate
proposed in the resolution, and the structure and
concept of a peacekeeping mission, we would like to
note that the Secretary-General's report
comprehensively and competently deals with all the
related aspects. We fully agree with the observations
and recommendations contained therein.

As for the political situation in the region, we
welcome the decision of the thirty-sixth ordinary
session of the OAU heads of State and Government,
held in early July in Lome, to call upon the parties to
continue, under the auspices of the OAU, their
negotiations on the outstanding issues with a view to
establishing lasting peace. In this connection, we
would like to stress that we are somewhat concerned
about the fact that the latest round of proximity talks
between the parties, held early in July in Washington,
DC, was suspended and no official statement on the
results of the discussions was made.

It is my delegation's hope that the talks between
the parties will resume without delay, and we call upon
them to exercise restraint and to abstain from any
provocative actions in fulfilling their obligations under
the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities of 18 June
2000, as well as to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea in the context
of the implementation of its mandate.

In this connection, we consider it logical to take
into account the views of the parties so that the United
Nations peacekeeping operation could be terminated,
hopefully after the successful completion of the border
delimitation and demarcation process, because, as
stated in the report, UNMEE cannot remain deployed
indefinitely.

My delegation believes that one of the most
important components of the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the region is mine action,
and that it is not accidental that this issue figures so
prominently in the Secretary-General's report. Given
the fact that today there are numerous landmines and a
great deal of unexploded ordnance in the conflict zone,
especially in the "no man's land", and that neither party
has adequate technical resources to conduct the mine
action operation, this situation creates a direct threat to
the safe deployment and functioning of the
peacekeeping Mission, as well as to the local
population and to efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to them. In this context, we are seriously
counting on the efficient work of the mine action
coordination centre that is being established in
UNMEE headquarters.

My delegation believes that it would be useful for
the Security Council to study the findings of the
multidisciplinary reconnaissance mission headed by
Major-General Ford, which visited the region from 4 to
18 July. It may be expedient to invite him to brief the
Security Council on his views on the situation on the
ground.

We are extremely concerned about humanitarian
conditions in the region. The refugee situation in both
Eritrea and Ethiopia remains extremely serious. A
positive step in this context is undoubtedly the signing
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
Governments of Eritrea and the Sudan of a tripartite
agreement on the voluntary repatriation of Eritrean
refugees.

Finally, I want to reiterate our support for the
observations and recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General. We share the view that
a lasting peace can be ultimately established only by
the parties themselves, and that UNMEE and all other
United Nations entities present in these countries are
only an initial instrument in achieving the peace.

