Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted in favour of resolution 2218 (2015),
renewing the mandate ofthe United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), as we
are convinced of its important role in the supervision
of the ceasefire, reducing the threat of unexploded
mines and ordnance and promoting measures to build
confidence between the parties in order to achieve
the holding of the referendum, which is its principal
mandate under resolution 690 (1991).

In supporting the management, facilitation and
efforts of the Secretary-General to bring about an
agreement between the parties, MINURSO should
continue to extend its cooperation to a range of
assistance programmes aimed at addressing the plight
of Sahrawi families that are spread out and separated,
and bring new life into direct negotiations between the
Frente Polisario and Morocco.

However, we wish to express certain concerns
about the procedure used in the drafting of the
resolution just adopted. A text was presented to us that
had been previously agreed by the Group of Friends of
Western Sahara which did not address the legitimate
concerns and proposals that were made by numerous
countries that are interested in this specific issue,
Venezuela among them. These proposals were aimed at
strengthening the role of MINURSO in the promotion
and protection of human rights of the population of
Western Sahara, bearing in mind the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2015/246)
and the features of all United Nations missions. It is
therefore necessary that future negotiation processes
on the matter before us see an improvement in working
methods with the aim of helping to promote a broad,
inclusive and transparent discussion.

In the context of the proposals made, the
amendment that sought to increase the frequency with
which the Security Council reviews the topic was not
adopted. Another amendment was aimed at reaffirming
the responsibilities of the Council in facilitating a
fair and lasting solution to the situation in Western
Sahara through the holding of a referendum on self-
determination that would allow for completion of the
unfinished process of decolonization, a situation that
has lasted for more than four decades. It is essential that
we ensure the implementation of resolution 690 (1991),
which provided for the holding of the referendum. We
are concerned that, without a referendum, the process of
colonizing Western Sahara will continue, including the
deterioration of human rights of the Sahrawi people and
the illegal exploitation of their natural resources - all
of which is to the detriment of stability and peace in
the region.

Furthermore, we regret that the consultations held
on this topic were not preceded by an open meeting in
which we could ensure the participation of the Special
Envoy of the African Union for Western Sahara, former
President Joaquim Chissano, in the light of the request
made by that regional organization, which, together
with the United Nations, is facilitating the process of
negotiation between the parties. It is paradoxical that a
strategic United Nations ally in efforts to find solutions
to conflicts affecting peace and security on the African
continent would be excluded from discussions in
this body. We hope that this Council can correct this
omission in the near term.

To conclude, we reaffirm the Council's responsibility
in working with resolve towards a fair and lasting
solution to the colonial situation endured by the Sahrawi
people through the fulfilment of their right to self-
determination, including the option of independence,
pursuant to international law, and in particular the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

