Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this briefing and highlight
the importance of addressing the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula at the Security Council. We
would also like to thank Secretary of State Pompeo for
the important information provided and convey Peru's
support for the important efforts that his Government
has been making.

My country notes with deep concern the serious
threat to international peace and security posed by
the nuclear and ballistic missile programmes of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. As has been
mentioned, that threat constitutes a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and the specific mandates of
the Council.

In that regard, we emphasize that North Korea's
programmes and their related activities must be
abandoned in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. We believe that, for as long as that does
not happen, the sanctions imposed by the Council
must remain in force and be strictly implemented by
all States.

Peru complies with implementing those sanctions
within its jurisdiction and considers that the Council
must remain vigilant in determining and sanctioning
any possible non-compliance, wherever it occurs. We
wish to emphasize the unanimous commitment of
the members of the Security Council on that issue.
Peru attaches the greatest importance to maintaining
unity with a view to achieving denuclearization on
the Korean peninsula. In that regard, we would like
to commend the high-level diplomacy deployed by
the South Korean and United States authorities,
including you, Mr. Secretary of State, and we hope
that the latter can begin to produce concrete results on
denuclearization. This is clearly a complex issue, which
dates back to the Korean War. That is why we value
the progress made in recent months, which has so far
served to alleviate tensions, build confidence, reduce
the risk of misunderstandings or miscalculations and
ultimately lay the foundations for denuclearization.

We welcome the agreements that were achieved
at the third inter-Korean summit, held last week in
Pyongyang, which include concrete measures aimed
towards the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and reflect the intentions of both countries to create a
new platform of trust with a view to achieving peace.
In the light of those developments, we believe that the
sanctions regime imposed by the Council has proved
to be an effective means of bringing the North Korean
Government closer to the negotiating table, without
leading to a deterioration of the humanitarian situation
for the country's civilian population. In that regard,
we would like to acknowledge initiative of the United
States, under whose leadership the sanctions regime
has been strengthened, and to stress once again the
importance of multilateralism, international law and
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes to
face threats and challenges that are common to us all.

Peru, as a country committed to the nuclear
non-proliferation regime, is party to all the relevant
international instruments. That includes the Treaty
of Tlatelolco, which makes Latin America and the
Caribbean a region free of nuclear weapons, and the
most recent United Nations Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons. We aspire to a world free of the
threat posed by such weapons, and I would therefore
like to conclude by reaffirming Peru's full and constant
readiness to contribute to all the efforts being made to
achieve the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

