Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to welcome Mr. Filippo Grandi and thank him very
much for the comprehensive and detailed briefing that
he just delivered. I would also like to commend the
important role of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). I appreciate the
relations between Kuwait and UNHCR, particularly
because we are suffering from the refugee problem
in many States in our region. We have contributed as
much as we can through voluntary contributions to
UNHCR. We will continue to do so in order to alleviate
the suffering of refugees.

Mr. Grandi gave many important details in his
briefing, and I will not repeat the figures that he cited.
However, it is evident that there is a relationship between
the Security Council and UNHCR. When the Council
is unable to resolve, contain or manage a conflict, that
complicates the work of UNHCR and other relevant
specialized agencies. The relationship between the
Council and UNHCR, as well as with other relevant
organs, is therefore a proportional one. The inability to
prevent the outbreak of conflicts early on and address
their root causes leads to flows of refugees with an
enormous political and financial cost, subsequently
causing destabilization at the regional level. That is a
vicious cycle of conflict and displacement.

Kuwait believes in the importance of resolving
conflicts early on to prevent them from becoming
exacerbated, by tackling their root causes in order
to ensure that they do not break out again. That is
in line with the Secretary-General's vision and the
Organization's role, which, through all of its organs,
must achieve that objective. The Security Council must
play its role and shoulder its responsibilities by using
all the tools at its disposal to put an end to conflicts and
maintain international peace and security.

There is no doubt that a durable and effective
response to the challenges related to forced displacement
will be possible only by addressing them comprehensibly
and in all their dimensions. An international crisis
requires an international approach to tackle it, based
on regional and international cooperation. We attach
great importance to the efforts of UNHCR to respond
holistically to the refugee problem through the Global
Compact on Refugees. We also call for compliance
with international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, while also
ensuring the full implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Humanitarian assistance is an important element
in responding to the current displacement crisis.
Preserving dignity for all of those in need requires
effective and short term plans as well as sustained and
long term solutions. We continue to see generosity and
solidarity from the international community regarding
refugees all over the world, as noted by Mr. Grandi in
his briefing. It is necessary to stress the importance
of the role played by the communities and States that
host and support significant numbers of refugees. We
also stress the role of institutions, civil society and
non-governmental organizations that work tirelessly to
provide a dignified life and rehabilitation to all those in
need in conflict areas.

The United Nations and other humanitarian
organizationsmustbeallowedtodotheirworkandprovide
complete and unhindered humanitarian assistance as
well as basic services to the refugees, including health
care and education in addition to psychological and
social support. We call on the international community
to continue supporting UNHCR.

I have two questions.

First, with respect to the provision of humanitarian
assistance to those in need, we have witnessed crises
that United Nations agencies, including UNHCR,
have had to address in order to reach those in need
of assistance, and sometimes they have taken months
to achieve that. On several occasions, Kuwait has
proposed that the right to the veto within the Council
not be used to prevent the delivery of assistance to
displaced persons and refugees. Against that backdrop,
what can the Council do?

Secondly, with respect to the memorandum of
understanding between UNHCR and the Government
of Myanmar, Mr. Grandi mentioned the issue of the
Rohingya refugees and their return in a safe, dignified
and voluntary manner. That is an international
requirement. Myanmar says that it is not opposed
to the return of refugees, and Bangladesh says that
it also agrees on their return. As the memorandum
of understanding nears its end, and given that the
conditions on the ground are not yet conducive for
their return, how can we contribute to improving those
conditions and accelerate the return of refugees to their
places of origin?

