Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): Let me thank the
Prosecutor for her report on the situation in Libya. It is
just over one year since the end of the conflict in Libya
and the declaration of liberation from the misrule of the
Al-Qadhafi regime. Despite recent security challenges,
the political transition in Libya is continuing and the
country is fast getting back on its feet.

After 42 years, the fundamental building blocks for
Libya's successful political transition are continuing
to develop. Libyan Prime Minister Ali Zeidan has
appointed his new Government, including a new
Minister of Justice. Civil society is flourishing and
the economy is restarting. The 2012 budget projects
a surplus, the stock market has reopened and oil
production is back to near-pre-conflict levels. The
international community continues to play a role to
support the political transition, providing technical
assistance to meet Libya's needs.

The General National Congress and the recently
appointed Libyan Government are leading the process
of building a new peaceful and prosperoud Libya. In
his address to the General Assembly last month, the
new President of the Libyan General National Congress
reiterated the determination of the Libyan people to
ensure that human rights are respected (see A/67/PV.13).
We urge the Libyan authorities to ensure that they meet
those public commitments. In that regard, we welcome
the close cooperation with the Human Rights Council's
Commission of Inquiry, which has now completed its
work. The Libyan Government should investigate and
hold to account all those guilty of abuses, and press
forward with the implementation of the Commission's
recommendations.

Addressing security and transitional justice is
the immediate challenge for the Libyan Government.
We stand ready to assist the Libyan Government in
building up accountable and transparent security and
justice institutions to improve security and address
outstanding issues.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
International Criminal Court. We note the detailed work
of the Prosecutor and her Office during visits to Libya
over the past year, and we thank her and her staff. Their
efforts have played an important part in challenging
impunity and bringing accountabilty to a country where
it has been sadly lacking for some time. The United
Kingdom fully supports the ICC's investigations into
crimes against humanity, including those involving
sexual violence. We believe that there is more that can
and must be done to combat the issue, particularly to
address the culture of impunity for such crimes that
has been allowed to develop. We are exploring options
to support the development of capacity within Libya
to address the issue, as part of the Foreign Secretary's
initiative to prevent sexual violence.

Libya's continuing cooperation with the ICC
in relation to the arrest warrant issued against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi for suspected crimes against
humanity is essential. We note that the Libyan
authorities have submitted an admissability challenge
setting out the ongoing Libyan investigations into his
alleged crimes and that the Prosecutor and her Office
have suspended their investigations pending a ruling
from the ICC judges on the case. We encourage the ICC
and the Libyan Government to work together to address
matters arising out of the events in June. But, generally,
we are pleased that Libya and the ICC are continuing
to engage constructively on issues relating to the ICC
proceedings. It is important that the detention of both
Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi be
in accordance with international law, that they have
access to legal advisers and that any potential trial held
in Libya be consistent with Libya's international human
rights obligations.

The authorities of the United Kingdom have played
a part in the ICC investigations so far by providing the
fullest support as and when requested to the Prosecutor
and her team of investigators. We will continue to do
so.

