Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the your presidency, Sir, for organizing
today's debate.

As one of the leading troop-contributing countries,
Bangladesh has usually taken a pragmatic approach to
the protection-of-civilians mandate in both practice
and preparedness, while adhering to the underlying
principles of peacekeeping operations. Being part
of most of the highly challenging United Nations
peacekeeping missions, we can see the relevance of
the protection-of-civilians mandate first-hand on the
ground - and, in a number of cases, tackled it with
professionalism and some degree of creativity, even
when the mandate was not laid out in clear, specific
terms.

We have incorporated a comprehensive protection-
of-civilians component in our peacekeeping training
curriculums, with built-in demonstration exercises. In
2014, our premiere peace support operations training
institute organized a customized training course on
the protection of civilians, through the United Nations
Mobile Training Team and with support from Japan.
As announced by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina at the
summit on peacekeeping last year, we shall continue to
further mainstream the protection of civilians into the
peacekeeping training programmes designed for our
troops and police.

Drawing on our overall experience, we would make
five observations concerning the protection of civilians,
including in the context of peacekeeping mandates.

First, there needs to be greater emphasis on
strategic analysis and an assessment of threats to
civilians so that the Security Council can clearly set
out its expectations regarding the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates to protect civilians. To that
effect, it is imperative to have meaningful coordination
and consultation among the Security Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
country teams, with a view to improving guidance to
the missions and promoting a mission-wide coherent
approach to protecting civilians.

Secondly, in order to be effective, protection-of-
civilians mandates require the continued political
support of the Security Council, the main parties to
the conflict and, in particular, host Governments.
Protection-of-civilians mandates need to be backed
by viable strategies and adequate resources so that
the missions' capacity does not fail when faced with
belligerence from the parties to the conflict or the
lack of will or capacity of the host Governments to
cooperate.

Thirdly, concerted efforts are needed to bring
clarity to the operational aspects of the protection-of-
civilians mandates and to eliminate confusion as to who
to protect, so as to effectively reduce the gaps between
mandate design and implementation. Unpleasant
though it may sound, with limited presence and
resources in relatively large conflict areas, it is crucial
to appreciate that peacekeeping missions cannot always
protect everyone from everything and that the Council
is therefore required to manage expectations.

Fourthly, the ongoing global campaign to end
violence against women and children in armed conflicts
should gather further momentum to garner the support
ofall State and non-State actors. Resolution 1325 (2000)
and its successor resolutions provide an excellent basis
for effective national strategies developed through
an inclusive, consultative process. We must uphold
our zero-tolerance approach to any aberration by
peacekeepers to set the standards for dealing with
sexual and gender-based crimes.
Lastly, the renewed attention to ensuring compliance
with international humanitarian law and invoking
the norms of international criminal justice have
resulted in enhanced awareness on the prevention
and accountability aspects of the protection of
civilians. We have seen the benefits of setting up a
national international humanitarian law committee, as
advocated by the International Committee of the Red
Cross, and would urge that the existing accountability
mechanisms inherent in international humanitarian
law be utilized to their full potential. While we will
continue to promote the universalization of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, we would
underscore the need to give due recognition to national
efforts to seek justice for crimes against humanity and
other international crimes committed against civilians.

The security and protection of civilians in today's
asymmetrical conflict environment are now increasingly
seen as linked to the legitimacy and credibility of
United Nations peace operations and its humanitarian
assistance. As a number of seminal reports last year
duly underlined, the protection of civilians through
military means alone will always fall short unless
they are vigorously supported by meaningful political
processes to establish lasting peace.

