Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's public
meeting. I would also like to express Japan's sincere
appreciation for the efforts of all parties concerned,
especially those of Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen and his
staff.

Japan is pleased that the election for the Kosovo
parliament was held democratically and without major
incident on 23 October. However, from the perspective
of ethnic reconciliation in Kosovo, it is regrettable that
most of the Serb electorate did not participate in the
election. We hope that, based on the results of the
election, new Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government will be established and start fulfilling
their mandated tasks as soon as possible. We also call
on Kosovo Serbs and on the Government of Serbia to
join in a constructive manner the discussion on the
creation of a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo.

We believe that the recommendation the
Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council
based on the report of Ambassador Eide deserves our
utmost attention. My Government recognizes that the
most important goal of the international community is
the creation of a multi-ethnic and democratic society in
Kosovo and that it should be realized through
implementation of the "standards before status" policy.
On the other hand, the violence that occurred in March
indicates that the current situation is unsatisfactory not
only for Serbs but also for Albanians in Kosovo. In
order to improve that situation, it is essential that
multiple strategies, including the recalibration of the
standards policy and the rehabilitation of the economy,
be implemented effectively. From that viewpoint, we
would like to express our support for the
recommendation of the Secretary-General.

The comprehensive and integrated strategy
incorporates a number of different elements, but we
wish to state our view today with regard to the matter
of the recalibration of the standards policy. We believe
that all international institutions must pay attention to
outside opinions concerning their policies and
strategies, but the Security Council has a special
obligation in that regard. Ambassador Eide stated in his
report that the current "standards before status" policy
lacks credibility, and we must face that criticism head
on. The Secretary-General's call for recalibration of the
standards policy is therefore of great significance.
Needless to say, the recalibration must be implemented
in such a way as to give the right momentum and
direction to the political process in Kosovo. We wish to
reiterate, however, that, as the recommendation of the
Secretary-General made clear, implementation of the
standards is, above all, for the benefit of Kosovo and
its people. That is why we are compelled to express our
concern in response to the Secretary-General's
observation that the progress made so far in
implementing the standards has been limited.

Japan has repeatedly stated its view that, in order
to create a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo and
realize the consolidation of peace, it its essential to
tackle the problems of economic difficulties, security
and sustainable returns. We therefore highly appreciate
the emphasis that the comprehensive and integrated
strategy has placed on formulating a more robust
economic development policy involving both short-
term and long-term measures, strengthening efforts to
deal with the causes and consequences of the March
violence, sustainable returns and cooperation on
improvement of the security situation and freedom of
movement.

Japan regards two criteria as key to the success of
the comprehensive and integrated strategy. First, the
people in Kosovo should take ownership. And
secondly, the relevant international institutions, such as
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), must function efficiently. We hope
that the staff of UNMIK, led by Mr. Saren Jessen-
Petersen, as well as the staffs of other agencies, will
keep those two points in mind as they proceed with
their activities.

In April, Japan co-hosted the Ministerial
Conference on Peace Consolidation and Economic
Development of the Western Balkans, based on our
firm belief that stabilizing the region, including
Kosovo, is crucial for the stability of the entire region.
We wish to reaffirm our commitment to the region,
including our intention to provide assistance, in
cooperation with the entire international community, in
advancing the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan.

