Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Today's
briefing highlights once again the horror of the situation
in Syria. After nearly six years, the conflict gets even
more brutal and shocking. The situation currently
unfolding in eastern Aleppo, where the presence of a
few hundred terrorists is being used as a pretext for
indiscriminate attacks that are bringing misery and
death to more than 250,000 civilians, presents a new
and profoundly disturbing low. We need to ask ourselves
how the situation has been allowed to get so bad, but
more importantly, what are we going to do about it?

Bringing humanitarian relief to the people of Syria
remains an urgent priority. New Zealand will continue
working with Spain and Egypt as co-leads in the
Council's consideration of humanitarian issues in Syria,
but it should be clear to everyone that even if, by some
miracle, the Syrian Government decided to relent in its
wilful obstruction of humanitarian assistance - and
we see little hope of that happening - that alone
cannot make much of a difference on the ground unless
the bombs stop dropping and the cessation of hostilities
is restored.

It was that fundamental reality that led New
Zealand to push Council members to set aside the
recent history of failed efforts and focus on what the
Council can now agree to do to help stop the slaughter
and make space for humanitarian relief and a return to
dialogue. We knew that it would not be easy and that
we would get pushback from various quarters. Even so,
we considered it our responsibility as a member of the
Council to try to find a way for the Council to act. The
continued inability of the most powerful members of
the Council to effectively address this issue is nothing
short of tragic. General Assembly politics are being put
ahead of people and, once again, preventing agreement
on effective international action.

We are appalled that Russia will not step back from
its current assault on eastern Aleppo for long enough to
allow the seeds of peace to begin to take root, or use its
influence to change the Syrian Government's behaviour.
Humanitarian pauses may give some glimmer of hope
but, for now, the bombardment of eastern Aleppo
and its civilian population has resumed. It is brutal,
cruel and indiscriminate. It is fundamentally at odds
with international humanitarian law. It must stop. We
must also register our deep disappointment that other
permanent members declined to engage meaningfully
on the key provision in our draft of what effective
Council action might look like, other than to insist on
language that had already proven unacceptable.

Earlier this week, we had a curious situation in
which one side of the debate said that the key paragraph
in our draft resolution (S/2016/846) was not acceptable
because it would stop all air attacks over Aleppo, and
the other side said that it was not acceptable because
it would not. Both cannot be right. Yet for now, there
is no prospect of navigating through these mutually
inconsistent positions.

We understand that a third failed draft resolution
in as many weeks would serve no one, and certainly
not the people of Syria. But the problem we are looking
to address has not gone away, and neither will we. We
will continue to push for effective political action to
halt the catastrophe that is unfolding, and our draft
remains available as a basis for possible future action
by the Council. But for any Council action to be
effective, the Council has to come together and live up
to its responsibilities under the Charter. We know that
the divisions on the issue are acute and reflect the sad
realities of today's international situation, but while we
cannot escape those realities, the Council must be more
than an echo chamber of developments elsewhere. We
need to at least be willing to try to get past the current
divisions and distrust. If we do not, the performance of
the Council and its members in addressing the Syrian
tragedy will be judged harshly by history.

Sides with influence over the parties on the
ground, and those directly involved in the conflict, bear
responsibility for the ongoing slaughter. But Council
members bear responsibility for how the Council
responds, or fails to.

