Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank France, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to hold this meeting on the cooperation between the

United Nations and the European Union. We have
listened carefully to the briefings by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Federica Mogherini.

In recent years, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the Security Council, the European Union
(EU) has played an active role in efforts to address
regional hotspot issues such as the nuclear question in
Iran, and conflicts in the Middle East, Mali, the Central
African Republic and Burundi, which China welcomes.
We encourage and support the EU to continue to
play a constructive role in maintaining regional and
international peace and security. We hope that, in
carrying out cooperation with the United Nations and
the Security Council, the EU will above all uphold the
basic principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
such as the sovereign equality of States and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and commit itself to addressing
hotspot issues through mediation and good offices.

Secondly, it must respect the sovereignty and
specific conditions of countries when it comes to human
rights, engage in dialogue and exchanges on the basis
of mutual respect and equality and play a constructive
role. Thirdly, we hope it would leverage its resource
advantage to provide economic and social assistance
according to the needs of the countries concerned and
on the basis of respect for national ownership, so as
to enhance their self-development capacity in order to
address the root causes of conflicts. This year marks
the seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations and of the world's victory in the war against
fascism. In February, at China's initiative, the Council
held an open debate on maintaining international peace
and security (see S/PV.7389). We hope that that debate
may prompt Member States to learn the lessons ofhistory
and recommit themselves to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of United Nations and, looking forward,
to explore effective ways of maintaining international
peace and security in changing circumstances and
dedicate efforts to building a new type of international
relations, with win-win cooperation at the centre.

In the face of the current proliferation of global
and regional challenges, the security interests of all
countries are closely linked. The United Nations is at the
core of the international collective mechanism, and the
European Union is an important force for maintaining
international peace and stability. Further strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the European Union is conducive
to advancing multilateralism and consolidating and
strengthening the international collective security
mechanism.

Just as pointed out by Chinese President Xi Jinping
in his statement at the College of Europe, in Bruges,
Belgium, on 1 April 2014, whatever the vicissitudes of
the international situation, China always supports the
process of European integration and a united, stable
and prosperous European Union playing a greater
role in international affairs. China will continue to
support the EU in further strengthening cooperation
with the United Nations in maintaining regional peace
and stability and promoting economic development so
as effectively to complement the work of the United
Nations.

China attaches great importance to its relations
with the EU. Chinese President Xi Jinping made a
successful visit to the headquarters of the EU last
year, where he agreed with the leaders of the European
Union to establish partnerships for peace, growth,
reform and civilization, and set down important plans
for the development of China-EU relations. This year
marks the fortieth anniversary of the establishment
of relations between China and the European Union.
China stands ready to continue to strengthen efforts
to implement the common understanding reached
by the leaders of both sides, to promote the strategic
framework for China-EU cooperation towards 2020,
strengthen communication and coordination on major
issues, promote the sustainable, healthy and stable
development of the strategic partnership, and work
togethe to make new contributions to world peace,
stability and prosperity.

