Mr. Khalil (Egypt): Egypt associates itselfwith the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

At the outset, I would like to commend the Indian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today's open debate on the working methods of the
Council. I would like also to seize this opportunity
to congratulate Argentina, Australia, the Republic of
Korea, Luxembourg and Rwanda on their election as
non-permanent members of the Security Council for
the years 2013 and 2014. I would also like to thank
the outgoing members Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal, and South Africa for their efforts during the
years 2011 and 2012.

Reforming the Security Council's working methods
is an important component of the overall reform and
expansion of the Council in accordance with General
Assembly decision 62/557. It is indeed a positive step
to have annual open debates in the Security Council
on improving the Council's working methods in order
to systematically analyse the progress achieved in that
regard. Convening such open debates, however, is not
an end in itself. The outcome of such debates should
reflect the views expressed by non-Council members if
the Council is to achieve efficiency, transparency and
inclusiveness.

A major concrete step towards improving the
working methods of the Council would be to reach
an agreement on the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, which have been in force for more than 60
years now. The effective functioning of the Council
has a direct impact on the general membership of the
United Nations.

Egypt appreciates the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, under the chairmanship of the Permanent
Representative of Portugal. We note the adoption of
presidential note 402 (S/2012/402), which contains
measures on the use ofconference services and proposals
to enhance interaction during the consultations of
the whole. However, greater effort should be made
to promote full implementation of presidential note
S/2010/507, which was prepared two years ago. For
its part, the Secretariat should continue to update the
repertoire of the practice of the Security Council as
a valuable source of information about the Council's
evolving practices on procedural and substantive
matters alike. We appreciate the Secretariat's efforts to
develop the Security Council web page, making it more
informative and user-friendly.

The Security Council's annual report should be more
comprehensive and analytical. The General Assembly
should be well informed not only about the decisions
adopted by the Council but also about the reasons for
those decisions and the backdrops against which they
are taken, as well as their impact on situations on
the ground. We also expect the Council, in its future
annual reports, to add more detailed information on
measures taken to improve its working methods in
order for progress achieved in that area to be properly
assessed. The Council should submit special reports
for the General Assembly's consideration, pursuant to
paragraph 1 of Article 15 and paragraph 3 of Article 24
of the United Nations Charter. The General Assembly
may also take the initiative and request such reports if
it deems them necessary.

Public meetings of the Council, including briefings
and debates, should take into account the contributions
of non-Council members, particularly those that
may be directly affected by the Council's decisions.
Private meetings, informal consultations and closed
meetings should be kept to a minimum. They should
have written records, which should be available to
non-Council members. Such records could be made
publicly available - at least after a certain period
of time, in the way that some Member States release
restricted documents after a certain number of years
have passed - for the sake of transparency and also as
a historical record for the benefit of future generations.

Issues to be covered at any briefing by the
Secretariat should be determined in coordination with
the concerned State or party and after approval by
all Council members. Statements after such briefings
should not be restricted to Council members, and the
parties concerned should be given the opportunity to
express their views on such briefings. Any decision
of the Security Council to initiate formal or informal
discussions on the situation in any Member State or
on any other issues that do not constitute a threat to
international peace and security is contrary to Article
24 of the Charter. We urge the Council to observe its
mandate strictly in accordance with the provisions of
the Charter.

Members of the Security Council should consult
informally with interested Member States, including
countries directly involved or affcted, when drafting
resolutions or other outcomes of the Council. The
penholdership of draft resolutions should not be limited
to permanent members.

Egypt welcomes the Council's continuing briefings
and consultations designed to help troop-contributing
countries plan and fulfil peacekeeping operations
mandates. The Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations should engage troop-contributing countires
more frequently in its deliberations. The Chairs of the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the countries concerned, should
be invited to participate in the Council's meetings when
situations in those countries are considered.

When the brutal Israeli military campaign against
the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip began, the
Security Council managed to convene only one
private meeting and closed consultations to address
the situation and was unable to decide on convening
a public meeting. A body that is entrusted with the
responsibility for upholding international peace and
security should be able to do more than that. This is
a fresh reminder of the urgent need for reform of the
Council's working methods.

In conclusion, what is needed is not additional
proposals but the political will to implement the
multitude of ideas that have been proposed for improving
the working methods of the Council. The General
Assembly and the Security Council should forge a
mutually reinforcing and complementary relationship
while respecting each other's mandate. This is essential
to achieving the objectives of the United Nations and
to enabling it, and us, to remain relevant in addressing
the existing and emerging challenges facing the
international community.

