Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me start by recognizing with deep appreciation the
important successes of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as the
increased regional cooperation of the countries where
the crimes judged by these courts were committed. The
United States is deeply committed to bringing to
justice those responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
We welcome this chance for the Security Council
to focus on the work of the Tribunals, to take stock of
what has been accomplished over the past six months
and to work together to examine the Tribunals'
completion strategies and specific ways in which the
countries of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda may
assist the Tribunals.

The Tribunals have had many successes: more
than 250 people have been indicted, proceedings
against approximately 170 people have been concluded
and about 70 persons are on trial or have appeals
pending. Just eight days ago, the ICTY delivered a
judgement in the trail of seven high-ranking Bosnian-
Serb military and police officials accused of a range of
crimes, including genocide. The judgement reaffirmed
that the murder of Bosnian Muslim men at Srebrenica
was genocide and convicted all seven of the accused
for related crimes - a particularly important verdict
since it comes as the international community prepares
to gather at Srebrenica in less than a month to
commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the 1995
genocide.

We applaud the many accomplishments of the
Tribunals, but we also note that the projected timelines
for completion have significantly slipped. We urge the
Tribunals to take every possible step to move their
remaining cases forward in a disciplined, fair and
efficient manner. We also urge them to focus on
completing their core mandate: prosecuting those
responsible for violating international humanitarian
law.

Nevertheless, we recognize that some factors are
well beyond the Tribunals' control and we encourage
our fellow Council members to take a practical
approach to dealing with such matters as extending the
judges' terms of office, so that we do not find ourselves
dealing with further delays caused by premature
departures from the bench. Retaining experienced staff
is a growing and real concern, and it will become even
more important as completion dates near. We
encourage the Tribunals and relevant United Nations
offices to develop flexible and cost-effective solutions
to these challenges.

Despite the Tribunals' efforts to finish their work,
indicted individuals remain at large. They must be
apprehended and brought to justice without further
delay. We call on all States to fulfil their legal
obligations to cooperate with the Tribunals and to take
the steps necessary to ensure that the remaining
fugitives are apprehended.

In particular, let me underscore what has already
been said about the need to apprehend ICTR fugitive
Felicien Kabuga. The Government of Kenya has still
not responded to the Prosecutor's requests, last made
on 27 March 2009, for access to investigative files and
other Government records related to Kabuga. Nor has
it provided details to support the claim that he has left
Kenya. The Kenyan authorities have also not
responded to the Prosecutor's requests for meetings
with Kenyan officials to discuss these issues. We urge
the Government of Kenya to immediately respond to
the Tribunal's requests, to make good-faith efforts to
locate and seize Kabuga's assets, and to cooperate with
the Tribunal to find him and arrest him. Similarly, we
urge regional cooperation to apprehend two other
major figures in the Rwandan genocide: former
Commander of the Rwandan Presidential Guard Protais
Mpiranya and former Minister of Defence Augustin
Bizimana.

The United States applauds the cooperation
among the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the
Government of Uganda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which resulted in two fugitive arrests last
year. This type of cooperation must continue, to bring
the remaining fugitives in the region to justice.

The United States commends States' efforts to
cooperate with the ICTY. For States in the former
Yugoslavia, full cooperation with the ICTY remains
not only a fundamental obligation but also a key to
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. As our
colleagues here know, the United States also supports
those countries' European Union aspirations,
realization of which would promote regional stability,
economic prosperity and judicial reform.

The most critical unmet duty is the arrest of the
two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladie and Goran
Hadzic', and their transfer to the Tribunal to face
justice. In addition, we urge all States to support
requests from the Prosecutor in connection with
ongoing trials, including cooperation on protecting
witnesses and providing access to archives, documents
and witnesses. We welcome the Government of
Serbia's cooperation and commend the seizure of
materials, including 18 notebooks, containing Mladie's
handwritten wartime notes, and associated audio tapes.
We urge Serbia to do everything in its power to locate
and arrest Mladic' and Hadzie and to transfer them to
the Tribunal. Their arrests are vital for the successful
completion of the ICTY's mandate.

We commend Croatia's cooperation with the
ICTY and its renewed high-level commitment to
continue a credible ongoing investigation to locate
artillery documentation from Operation Storm and, if
that documentation cannot be located, to expand the
investigation into its fate. We encourage the Croatian
authorities to continue to explore additional
investigative techniques that might help recover
responsive documents, or account for them.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made good progress
in its cooperation with the Tribunal. We would
encourage the Bosnian Government to take a more
proactive approach in implementing the national war
crimes strategy adopted in December 2008. In addition,
all possible measures must be taken by countries in the
region to apprehend Radovan Stankovie, who escaped
from prison in Bosnia while serving his 20-year
sentence.

As we noted last December, the ICTY has done a
commendable job supporting the development of
domestic courts, particularly in Bosnia. International
judges and prosecutors in Bosnia have performed
critically important work to bring justice on behalf of
the victims, regardless of ethnicity.

We cannot speak of the completion of the
Tribunals' work without addressing the critical need to
establish a residual tribunal to continue the essential
functions of the Tribunals after the completion of their
pending trials. We must work together to establish a
strong, effective and efficient residual tribunal that will
encourage, among other things, ensuring that the
remaining ICTY and ICTR fugitives do not escape
justice.

Let me thank the Tribunal Presidents and
Prosecutors for their presentations today and for their
written assessments. The United States extends its
gratitude to the representatives and staffs of both
Tribunals for their effective and important work to
ensure that the perpetrators of some of the most
horrific crimes known to humankind are brought to
justice. One reason we continue to push for a
successful completion of the Tribunals' work is very
simple and clear: we owe it to the victims; we owe it to
all those who have worked so hard to provide them,
their families and their countries with a measure of
justice. Our collective conscience will not rest until
this task is done.

