Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting, which provides a welcome opportunity
for the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council to take stock of their work and share some
personal reflections.

Over the past two years, the Republic of Korea has
had the honour to chair the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea.

With regard to the 1540 Committee, I already
briefed the Council in my capacity as Committee Chair
in November. I therefore do not have much to add today,
except to once again offer my heartfelt appreciation to
all members of the Committee, the Expert Group of the
1540 Committee, the Secretariat and the wider United
Nations membership for their support during the two
years of my country's chairmanship.

Looking back, the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) was an opportune moment
to renew our political commitment and explore future
strategies for the full and universal implementation
of the resolution. I hope that those efforts will give
renewed impetus to the work of the Committee in
the years ahead, including its preparations for the
comprehensive review to be conducted by 2016. I also
wish the incoming Chair every success in his new
chairmanship role.

Let me turn to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. While chairing
this Committee, I have organized the work of the
Committee around three core principles.

First, I have focused on enhancing the credibility
of the sanctions regime, while considering how
sanctions can further promote peace and stability in
the region. The situation in Somalia is complex and
requires a holistic and comprehensive approach. While
we have seen considerable progress in recent years,
there is still a variety of obstacles to overcome, such
as the continuing military threats from Al-Shabaab,
arms embargo violations, the humanitarian crisis and
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights laws, to name a few.

In the light of the fragile situation, the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime, including
an arms embargo and charcoal ban, remains of vital
importance for the country's path towards stability.
Accordingly, we have been vigilant with respect to
the potential flow of arms into the hands of armed
groups. In particular, following the partial lifting of the
arms embargo on the Federal Government of Somalia
as authorized by resolutions 2093 (2013), 2142 (2014)
and 2182 (2014), the Committee paid special attention
to the implementation of the relevant resolutions,
including the Somali Government's advanced
notification and reporting obligations. We also tried
to support the Somali Government in improving its
weapons-management capacity. Furthermore, cutting
off Al-Shabaab's financing derived from the charcoal
trade is also a significant tool that will ensure a safer
and more secure environment in Somalia. This year, the
Committee adopted its first implementation assistance
notice, which outlines practical recommendations
and guidance on measures to assist Member States in
implementing the ban more effectively.

Secondly, I have always sought to strengthen
engagement with the countries concerned. I believe
that the effective and responsible implementation of
sanctions cannot be accomplished without the support
and cooperation of the countries concerned and other
regional actors. During my two years as Committee
Chair, I met with representatives from Somalia and
Eritrea as well as other countries in the Horn of Africa.
Their views on the Committee's work helped provide
a balanced perspective on relevant issues. On multiple
occasions, we also invited the representatives of
Somalia and Eritrea to Committee meetings to share
their views, which gave us a better understanding of the
issues and challenges they have faced in implementing
the sanctions regime. As a part of such constructive
engagement efforts, I was privileged to contribute to
the improvement of relations between the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group and the Government of
Eritrea, which at the outset of my chairmanship had
reached a low point. I appreciate the strong support of
Council members for my initiative to engage Eritrea.

Since last December, I facilitated two face-to-
face meetings in Paris and Cairo, and one meeting via
videoconference between the Monitoring Group and the
Government of Eritrea. Those meetings were important
for promoting dialogue and building confidence.
Following that constructive dialogue, the Eritrean
Government's opinion was reflected in the Group's
final report. While it unfortunately was not possible
for the Monitoring Group to visit Eritrea during my
tenure, I strongly encourage my successor to continue
facilitating dialogue in the lead-up to the Monitoring
Group's visit to Asmara.

Finally, I believe that the successful implementation
of the Committee's mandate requires close working
relations between the Monitoring Group and the
Committee. In that regard, we took into serious
consideration the analyses and recommendations made
by the Group on the most effective ways to implement
the sanctions regime. I am pleased to note that we have
a competent Monitoring Group, which provides us with
an excellent basis for deliberation.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Committee for their cooperation, active
participation, valuable contributions and enriching
discussions during my tenure as Chair. Despite the
many challenges, I believe that the Somalia and Eritrea
sanctions regimes have contributed to the Council's
shared goal ofpromoting peace and stability in the Horn
of Africa, a region whose peoples have experienced far
too much suffering during the past two decades. I hope
our sustained efforts will bear fruit.

