Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It is very pleasant to see you presiding, Sir, and
we confirm our readiness to strive for the success of the
Security Council's work during this month, while the
presidency of the Security Council is entrusted to the
Republic of Korea. We are also grateful for the statements
made at this meeting by Under-Secretary-General Akashi
and the representatives of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations
Children's Fund and the International Committee of the
Red Cross.
The Security Council is devoting increasing attention
and energy to the humanitarian dimension of crises and
conflicts. The link between the Security Council's work
and the mechanisms of the United Nations system that
react to emergency humanitarian situations is an objective
one. The nature of the threats faced by the humanitarian
community has changed. Fewer and fewer peacekeeping
operations have "classic" parameters. Increasingly, we are
faced with protecting people in conflict situations. This
involves also care for the safety of the human person -
the most important dimension of the phenomenon of
comprehensive security.

The destructive dynamics of many modern crises are
such that the victims of violence include not only
civilians but also the organizations that are providing
them with humanitarian assistance. As a result, the
mandates of these humanitarian organizations are in
jeopardy, as are the lives of their personnel. This raises a
complex question: can a peacekeeping operation designed
to protect humanitarian activities in a "hot spot" be
carried out in such a way that the United Nations Blue
Helmets do not become embroiled in the hostilities?

The Security Council as a rule should lend vigorous
political support to the work of the humanitarian
organizations. This is obvious in cases where a United
Nations peacekeeping operation has a clear humanitarian
component. However, the problems arising in this
connection are understandable. We cannot forget that the
Council's main task is the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The humanitarian agencies within and outside the
United Nations system have other tasks to perform.
Therefore we cannot really talk about any automatic or
stereotypical linkage between a peacekeeping operation
and a humanitarian operation.

Let us not forget that as a matter of principle,
humanitarian operations differ significantly from the
operations set up by the Security Council. Their decision-
making processes and financing methods are different.
While United Nations personnel act on the basis of the
principles of neutrality and impartiality, the humanitarian
"profile" of the agencies of the United Nations system
means that in the context of comprehensive peacekeeping
operations, these humanitarian organizations retain a
certain independence from political and peacekeeping

 

efforts. While these peacekeeping operations are conducted
under the general leadership of the special representative of
the Secretary-General, the humanitarian organizations still
answer to their own headquarters.

Exploiting a human tragedy for political purposes is
inadmissible. The forcible or unauthorized return of
refugees, or the giving of humanitarian assistance to armed
elements posing as refugees, cannot be supported either by
the authority of the Security Council or by United Nations
peacekeepers.

Also inadmissible is any attempt by one party to the
conflict to use civilians as an instrument for achieving
military or political goals, as took place, for example, in the
case of the safe areas in Bosnia. It is also very important
clearly to establish the peacekeeping operation's mandate
and to set attainable humanitarian goals that are backed up
by material and financial resources. In formulating a plan
of action, the Security Council could draw to a greater
extent on the expertise of the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
humanitarian organizations, and on their evaluation of the
prospects for the settlement of a situation involving
refugees, displaced persons and other vulnerable sectors of
the population.

So far, in a number of cases the strategy employed,
though basically correct, has not been backed up by the
necessary expertise or by clear-cut, concrete actions. Much
has already been said in the Security Council, for example,
about the serious underestimation of the situation of
refugees in eastern Zaire and its impact on the military and
political situation.

Another example is Abkhazia, Georgia. As no solution
has been found to the key task of returning refugees, all
political efforts are at an impasse. In March of this year, at
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) summit of
Heads of State, a decision was taken to implement a
number of measures - currently being elaborated - aimed
at the organized return of refugees and displaced persons.
It is important, however, that these measures receive
concrete material support from the humanitarian
organizations and from States that are trying more actively
to promote a Georgian-Abkhaz settlement. The necessary
resources, including those earmarked for demining and for
rebuilding the socio-economic infrastructure, could be
channeled through the special fund established by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

In Tajikistan, there is also an acute need for
additional efforts by the international community to
provide, safeguard and distribute humanitarian assistance
in order to create conditions for the safe return of
refugees. This was the subject of the appeal contained in
the resolution recently adopted by the General Assembly.
Active assistance in fulfilling these tasks would represent
genuine support for the process of the inter-Tajik
settlement.

The problem of the return of refugees is a key one
for the successful settlement of a number of other
conflicts, such as the one in Bosnia and in Eastern
Slavonia. It is precisely this type of practical measures
that will prove the ability of the United Nations fully to
bring into play the humanitarian factor in its efforts to
maintain international peace and security.

The Security Council's task is not merely to
safeguard humanitarian assistance for people in distress.
Today's debate should primarily help us to enhance the
effectiveness of the work of the Council in settling
specific conflict situations by more fully taking into
account the bitter experience of humanitarian crises.

