Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like first of all to congratulate you, Sir, and your
fraternal country, on having assumed the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I would also like
to pay tribute to your predecessor, the representative of
fraternal Slovakia.

More than two years have passed since the
criminal assassination of Rafik Hariri, Prime Minister
of Lebanon, and his colleagues. During that two-year
period, political killings and assassinations have
continued, as have terrorist attacks in Lebanon, which
are affecting all citizens as they go about their daily
lives and as they work to earn a living.

All of that only strengthens the resolve and
persistence of the Lebanese people to find out the truth
and to ensure that justice is done by identifying and
prosecuting the perpetrators of those atrocious crimes,
which have affected various parts of Lebanon, thereby
putting an end to the series of violent and alarming
attacks. That determination on the part of the Lebanese
people has been matched by the sincere will of the
international community, including the Security
Council, to see that justice is done through the
establishment of the International Independent
Investigation Commission, which has been working
intensively and has, to date, submitted seven reports on
its work.

Having listened carefully to the briefing given by
Commissioner Serge Brammertz today, we would like
to make several points.

First, we read with interest the Commission's
seventh report, in which Mr. Brammertz and his team
demonstrated a great deal of expertise and consistency
in their methodical investigation, which was based on
very clear legal principles and a specific chronology,
07-27703
with a view to obtaining information before submitting
the final results to an international court.

Secondly, we also appreciate the progress that has
been made by Commissioner Brammertz in a number
of areas. We hope that there will be serious follow-up
of the work being undertaken with a view to achieving
the hoped-for results.

Thirdly, we would also like to pay tribute to the
Commission for the technical cooperation that it has
provided to the Lebanese authorities, with the consent
of the Council and based on the request made by the
Lebanese Council of Ministers, in the criminal
investigation into the aggression against Lebanon, in
particular with regard to the Ain Alaq attack on two
buses. In this context, I would like to say that the
Lebanese authorities have revealed the identity of those
who committed that crime. Some of them have been
put in prison; they are within the Lebanese justice
system.

Fourthly, we would like to stress that the
Lebanese authorities are cooperating closely with the
Commission, pursuant to the relevant Security Council
resolution. We also call on all parties concerned to
provide all the necessary assistance and cooperation to
the Commission in order to facilitate its tasks.
07-27703

Fifthly, because the Lebanese Government is
convinced of the vital need for more time so that the
investigatory work can be completed, we have
requested that the Commission's mandate be extended
for one year, beginning in June 2007. The Secretary-
General has looked favourably on that request. In its
most recent report, the Commission made the same
request in the hope that the Council would meet it.

Finally, I should like to thank Commissioner
Brammertz and his team for their persistent efforts. We
commend them for the professionalism that they have
demonstrated with a view to shedding as much light as
possible on the circumstances of the assassinations so
that justice can be done, which will help to restore
peace and security to Lebanon and its people. In that
regard, we should like to recall the Secretary-General's
statement that there can be no real peace without
justice.

