Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
Spain for the information provided and his leadership
in chairing the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I also
thank the Panel of Experts for the preparation of the
report (S/2015/401, annex) that is before the Council.

The changes taking place in the Middle East region
are striking. Member States are waiting to see the final
details of the agreement regarding the situation.

Jordan hopes that the agreement will contribute
to strengthening trust and allaying fears regarding
the Iranian nuclear programme, establish the basis for
peace and stability in the Middle East and strengthen
the nuclear non-proliferation regime in the Middle East
and worldwide.

It is ofutmost importance that the agreementbe fully
aligned with all international standards, particularly in
terms of the physical security of nuclear installations,
through full oversight by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). Impacts on environmental
issues must also be considered.

It would be important for the agreement to include
a number of mechanisms to address possible future
violations. Furthermore, we believe that we must begin
by examining more seriously issues related to the arms
embargo against Iran, in particular in the light of the
information on violations contained in the Panel of
Experts' report. It is a major challenge that must be
considered extremely carefully.

Once again, we stress that the 1737 Committee
should continue its work in the most effective manner
possible and carry out the necessary inquiries regarding
Violations, in addition to continuing to cooperate
positively with the Iranian Government in order to clear
up issues regarding past violations. We also encourage
those countries that have not yet submitted reports
on the measures they have adopted to implement the
Council's relevant resolutions, to do so with utmost
haste. They must also cooperate positively with the
Panel of Experts, as the success of the Committee's
work is highly dependent on the reports submitted by
Member States.

Finally, we value highly the role of the 1737
Committee, which assists countries and international
organizations in the implementation of the Council's
relevant resolutions through the consideration of
countries' requests for the provision of technical
assistance to Iran in various areas. We encourage such
action, as it will facilitate States' and organizations'
effective implementation of Council resolutions.

