Mr. Manongi (Tanzania): We commend the
Pakistani presidency for convening this meeting on a
multidimensional approach to peacekeeping.
Over the years, the nature and complexities of
conflicts have demanded an evolution of peacekeeping
into more complex and multidimensional operations.
That requires an ongoing evaluation of their relevance
and efficacy. Peacekeeping has always presented and
will always present challenges. What distinguishes
one approach from another rests on what lessons
are learned from past experiences. In that regard,
one of the enduring lessons learned in the twentieth
century - from Rwanda to Bosnia and Somalia - is
that peacekeeping has to be robust and effective. It is
therefore not surprising that peacekeepers are today
deployed to undertake acutely Challenging operations.

Consequently, we subscribe to the view that the
idea of only sending troops into areas where there is a
peace to keep is a nice theory but a quaint idea. It is an
illusion to hope and assume that the mere deployment
of a peace operation will engender requisite peace. The
current situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo reminds us ofthat truth. To be fair, the United
Nations has made remarkable contributions to stability
in that country. However, much more remains to be
done for the Congolese people, and it is within the reach
of the peacekeeping mission there, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is essential that the Council
remain supportive ofa more responsive peace operation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

What we witnessed in Goma last November
illustrates that a robust military presence continues to
be critical in peacekeeping operations in order to deter
potential spoilers and to reinforce missions' credibility.
In addition, the presence of contingents with the resolve
necessary to undertake complex and often dangerous

tasks becomes a key determinant of an operation's
success.

The impunity with which rogue and armed militias
inflict widespread suffering and loss of life and
displace hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians is
a stark reminder of the collective resolve we need to
sustain and continuously muster. We therefore welcome
the Council's commitment in support of ongoing efforts
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, the Council will find
strong partners in the African Union, as well as in the
membership of the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, or, in the case of Mali, the
Economic Community of West African States.

It is only proper that, where feasible and meaningful,
United Nations and regional institutions should share
responsibility for security. Indeed, if cooperation can
engender success, the United Nations should not fear
losing its overall position in such peace operations.

The multiplicity of actors involved, be they political,
humanitarian, military, economic or any positively
supportive elements, need to accept that the collective
achievement of the goals of peace and security will, at
times, require accepting a degree of risks. That may
be especially true of the military components of a
multidimensional peacekeeping effort. It is therefore
imperative that the forces deployed remain capable of
demonstrating the collective will and resolve to deter
and prevent escalation, especially to protect innocent
civilians.

Ultimately, the United Nations must remain
worthy of the image that it has fostered over decades
of peacekeeping, namely, that of a renewed sense of
hope and promise and the chance of a fresh start for
people previously shackled by conflict and a lack of
good governance.

