The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of Angola for the kind words addressed
to me.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China. I thank Mr. Kassem and the
Panel of Experts for their efforts in completing their
final report. I also wish to welcome the presence of Mr.
James Wapakhabulo, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.

My country has always held the view that the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo violates the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country,
while exacerbating the conflict throughout the entire
Great Lakes region. Such activities are unacceptable
and must immediately cease.

Mr. Kassem and members of the Panel of Experts
carried out extensive investigations, providing a lot of
specific material to the Council. We are sincerely
grateful for their efforts. However we should, at the
same time, see that the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of that country is a complex issue
linked to such questions as the withdrawal of foreign
troops and the disarmament demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation programmes (DDRR).
As such, the Panel calls for a comprehensive and
integrated solution. We are gratified to learn that the
withdrawal of foreign forces and the DDRR
programmes are now under way, and that the inter-
Congolese political dialogue is yielding results.

Progress in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will help solve the question of
illegal exploitation. We hope that, with the assistance
of the international community, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will soon exercise
control over the natural resources throughout its
territory.

As demonstrated in the statements made today,
there are divergent views over the contents of the
report, including the recommendations contained
therein. I wish to take this opportunity to point out that
the report alleges that there are Chinese companies
engaged in the illegal exploitation. We have carried out
careful investigation but found nothing that would
justify those allegations. We believe that, in discussing
such questions, the Security Council should distinguish
between illegal exploitation and day-to-day economic
and trade exchanges, so as to avoid negative impact on
the economic development of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the livelihood of its people. Also, the
views of that country and others concerned should be
carefully listened to.

I now resume my function as the president of the
Council. I now give the floor to Mr. Kassem to respond
to questions and comments made.

