Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to express my great pleasure at
seeing the brother country of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya at the helm of the Security Council as the
Council is addressing the situation in the Middle
East - something that has been on the agenda of the
Organization since its creation. I must commend the
professionalism and effectiveness displayed by the
Japanese presidency last month. I also wish to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing and report on
developments in the Palestinian situation.

After the Israeli aggression against Gaza, the
entire world has been able to see the atrocities
committed against Palestinians and their property.
Palestinians have been orphaned and dispersed and
their homes destroyed. That has happened in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, as stated recently by the
Special Rapporteur for human rights in the Palestinian
territories. The aggression has halted, but the
Palestinian people are still awaiting the opening of
border crossings, the lifting of the siege,
reconstruction, and a return to normal life with all its
components.

In solidarity with the Palestinian people in these
trials, His Majesty the King of Morocco, during the
first week of aggression, ordered that food and medical
supplies be provided and medical teams sent to lend
support to Palestinians in hospitals. Contributions for
reconstruction have also been made by the Moroccan
people, including for the reconstruction of Gaza and a
wing of the Al-Quds Hospital. Fifteen million dollars
has been committed by His Majesty for the
reconstruction effort.

The statements made by Israel on returning to
negotiations do not absolve it of its crimes and its
collective punishment, its intensified settlement
activities, and its occupation of the Palestinian
territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The policy of
demographic change and the Judaization of East
Jerusalem is contrary to resolutions of international
legitimacy, the Road Map and the principle of land for
peace. The destruction of a historic cemetery, with a
museum to be built in its place, is a violation of
Palestinian rights and a desecration of holy places as

defined by UNESCO. His Majesty the King, as
Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee, has addressed a
letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and to the permanent members of the Security Council,
in which he condemned the intentions of the Israeli
authorities against the inhabitants of al-Bustan
neighbourhood near Silway, near Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which was built before the Israeli occupation of East
Jerusalem. His Majesty the King urged that those
practices be abandoned and that the pursuit of peace
and the rule of international law prevail.

Morocco supports a return to the negotiating table
and wishes to encourage an environment conducive to
that and to reunifying Palestinian factions on the basis
of intra-Palestinian dialogue and reconciliation,
including the consolidation of the Arab and Palestinian
positions in all international forums. We also urge that
all good offices continue to be deployed, in particular
the good offices of our Egyptian brothers, in order to
achieve that goal.

My country states that it is important that an
international process fostering the Arab Peace Initiative
commence. The Arab Peace Initiative is indeed an
essential and realistic basis for resolving the Arab-
Israeli conflict. The Initiative is based on the Arab
strategic choice of peace, the principle of land for
peace, the creation of a Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, and respect by Israel of its
international and regional agreements.

Lastly, on behalf of Morocco, I wish to state once
again our full and continued support for the Palestinian
people's right to an independent viable State of their
own, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and also our
support for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict so
that there might be peace and stability for all the
peoples of the region, to make cooperation and
recovery possible.

