Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the presidency of New Zealand for having convened
this meeting on the challenges to threats and security
facing small island developing States (SIDS). I also
welcome all of the distinguished personalities and
ministers present here today. I thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the Prime Minister of Samoa, the Prime
Minister of Jamaica and the Minister of Finance of
Seychelles for their statements.

The United Nations Conference on the Environment
and Development, held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992,
recognized the existence of a group called the "Small
Island Developing States" (SIDS). That recognition was
formalized by the Programme of Action to assist them,
which was adopted at the Global Conference for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States in 1994 in Barbados. The Mauritius Strategy for
the Further Implementation of the Barbados Programme
of Action listed a number of priority fields.

If small island developing States share a great many
specificities with other States, it has been recognized,
however, that they also face challenges that are specific
to them. They suffer from excessive vulnerability in
terms of their environmental systems, economic and
social factors and humanitarian disasters related to
climate change. Threats to peace and security are not
related solely to armed conflict, but can also stem from
nature herself as a result of humankind's activities and
their impact on the environment. Global warming of the
oceans has led to the melting of glaciers and to the rise
in sea levels, which has threatened the future of many
islands around the world. That constitutes a real threat
to international security and requires urgent measures
and the firm commitment of mankind to find a rapid,
global solution to that problem.

The impact of Cyclone Pam, which struck the
coastlines of Vanuatu and took place during the third
United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction in Japan last March, claimed many lives
and caused great material damage. It was, of course,
a strong signal sent to us by nature herself. We must
learn to listen to nature so as to better understand the
new types of challenges to international peace and
security. To that end, the Security Council should think
deeply about its role and its place in tackling those new
challenges to international peace and security.

Small island developing States also face a great
many other challenges relating to access to international
markets for their products, energy requirements, access

to new technologies, and the development of tourism.
That is also compounded by human trafficking,
transnational organized crime, cyber crime and, of
course, piracy, which continue to undermine the
development efforts of many countries, including SIDS.
To better assist small island developing States in facing
up to the aforementioned challenges, it is important to
focus on the establishment of early warning systems at
the national, regional and international levels, as well
as on the strengthening of international cooperation
and international strategic partnerships.

The Third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States, which was held from 1 to
4 September 2014 in Apia, was an opportunity for the
international community to renew its commitment
to assist the development of those countries during
the upcoming decade and to determine the path to be
followed. This path needs to be reflected in the post-
2015 development programme, whose main objective
is the building of a better future for succeeding
generations without leaving anyone stranded on the
sidelines. In that regard, we call upon the solidarity of
the international community as a whole to assist small
island developing States.

In conclusion, I would like to welcome the
appointment by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon of a
high representative responsible for the least developed
countries, landlocked developing countries and small
island developing States.

