Mr. Tessema (Ethiopia): I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. We welcome this opportunity
to exchange information and views with Council
members in particular, and the international community
at large on the effort to bring lasting peace to Somalia.

I would also like to join those who spoke before
me in welcoming Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional
National Government of Somalia, who is here among
us. I would also like to welcome and recognize
Mr. Winston Tubman, the newly appointed
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and wish him great success. I want to take this
opportunity to assure Mr. Tubman of the full
cooperation of my Government in discharging his very
heavy responsibility.

Ethiopia commends the Secretary-General for his
report on the security situation in Somalia and for his
tireless efforts towards and support for peace in
Somalia. We welcome the observations and the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the
overall situation in that country and on the peace
process.

The situation in Somalia needs a comprehensive
approach. The establishment of a broad-based
Government in Somalia as urgently as possible is not
only in the interest of the Somalis themselves but also
in the vital interest of the countries of the subregion,
and that of the international community as a whole.

The IGAD peace process adopted at the 9th
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Summit of the Heads of State and Government on
Somalia on 11 January 2002, and further elaborated by
the communique' issued following the IGAD Foreign
Ministers committee meeting on Somalia on 14
February 2002, has this basic purpose and plan at its
very centre. We believe the consensus achieved by the
IGAD countries has laid the basis for coordination
among the IGAD countries for peace in Somalia and
for harmonizing their position to this end. We strongly
hope that this encouraging and positive step by the
IGAD countries to bring about lasting peace in Somalia
will enjoy the full support and cooperation of the
Security Council in particular and the international
community in general.

Ethiopia hopes that the combined readiness of the
IGAD countries and the international community to
make a real difference for peace and the establishment
of a broad-based Government in Somalia is bound to
lead to a breakthrough and bear fruit. We do not see or
have any other option to this end. We have proved for
the last 11 years that various efforts, including the Arta
process, have failed to achieve peace and to establish
an all-inclusive and broad-based Government in
Somalia.

Throughout these past 11 years, what various
peace efforts in Somalia had to contend with was a
structural logjam in the country created by those who
have a stake in the status quo and who benefited from
the state of anarchy and from the statelessness of
Somalis. This structural logjam in peacemaking in
Somalia, which external actors were unable and
unwilling to remove, must come to an end. We believe
Somalis have no other option but peace and an end to a
decade of anarchy. As stated by the press release issued
by the Somali Reconciliation and Restoration Council
(SRRC) at the end of its meeting held in the city of
Dire Dawa, Ethiopia, on 1 March 2002, in which they
agreed to participate in the upcoming meeting,

"There is no other option for all Somali parties
than to commit themselves to fighting terrorism
and establishing a broad-based and viable
government for Somalia."

In view of this, as adopted by the 9th IGAD Head
of State and Government Summit in Khartoum, we call
upon all Somali parties and groups to participate in the
forthcoming IGAD Foreign Ministers committee
meeting in Nairobi on the basis of equality and without
any preconditions for solving the crisis in Somalia.
Ethiopia is fully committed to support such an
outcome, which will work towards the establishment of
an all-inclusive and broad-based Government for
Somalia. Ethiopia strongly calls upon all concerned
States in the subregion and those outside the subregion
to contribute constructively to the peace efforts in
Somalia. We once again appeal to this Council to
continue its support and to encourage the regional
peace process being under taken by IGAD.

