Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Representative Salame for his briefing
to the Security Council. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/429) reminds us, the situation in Libya
remains very difficult, and we commend his tireless
efforts to implement the United Nations action plan and
to work towards a peaceful and stable Libya. I would
like to highlight three areas today.

First, the security situation in Libya remains
fragile. The terrorist attack on the High Commission
for National Elections Commiss, which we condemn,
was a stark reminder of that fact. Nonetheless, we
note the gradual improvement of security situation in
Tripoli. Every effort should be made to consolidate and
build upon such improvements. It is imperative that all
parties refrain from destabilizing threats or actions that
risk reversing that trend.

We share the concern expressed by the Special
Representative and echoed by other speakers about
the escalation of violence in Derna. While we note
that commitments to spare civilians have been made,
the potential for further significant civilian casualties
cannot be ignored. We echo the call on all parties to
respect human rights and international humanitarian
law. That includes protecting civilians and allowing
their free and safe passage. We are also concerned
about the escalation of violence in the south, not least
in Sabha, where we encourage continued regional
cooperation to defuse the conflict as outlined by the
Special Representative this morning.

We welcome the focus in the Secretary-General's
report on human rights and the rule of law. We welcome
in particular the visits to Libya's prisons and detention
facilities and the documentation of widespread abuses
such as torture, sexual and gender-based violence
and arbitrary detention - in the east as well as the
west. It is clear that thousands of individuals now
languish in detention, many without knowing the
charge against them or what their future holds. That
is entirely unacceptable. Accountability is needed for
crimes committed against those in detention. We call
on all parties to ensure access for the United Nations,
and other humanitarian organizations, to detention
centres under their control, including to the Mitiga
detention facility.

We applaud the cooperation between the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on those issues. We encourage continued
collaboration and support, not least for the International
Criminal Court's important work in Libya.

Secondly, we reiterate our firm support for the
United Nations-facilitated political process in Libya.
We urge all Libyan leaders to engage constructively
and to create the legal, political and security conditions
necessary to hold free and fair elections to end Libya's
protracted transition.

We are impressed by the ambitious bottom-up
approach being taken in the ongoing national conference
consultations across the country, including the valuable
online activity to engage more Libyans in the political
process. Such initiatives help build trust in the political
process and contribute to increasing the legitimacy of
the elections.

Moving forward, every effort must be made to

promote women's equal representation and participation
in the political and election process. That includes
ensuring that women from all parts of the country will
have access to information on election procedures and
an opportunity to run for election. Concrete efforts to
prevent stigma and address all types of security threats
facing female candidates are essential. As co-Chair
of the Council's Informal Working Group on Women
and Peace and Security, we are pleased that Libya has
been added as a country of focus for 2018. We aim
to continue to provide the Council with up-to-date
information and analysis on the women and peace and
security agenda in Libya, which we hope can better
inform our deliberations.

Finally, I should like to turn to the situation of
refugees and migrants, as many others have done
this morning. We remain deeply concerned about
the situation of the more than 5,000 refugees and
the estimated 700,000 migrants currently in Libya.
Refugees and migrants are often vulnerable and risk
being exploited or arbitrarily detained. We would like
to highlight the work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration to assist refugees and
migrants under difficult circumstances, and underline
the importance of full access for humanitarian actors.
Serious efforts are needed to safeguard against human
rights abuses and violations, create accountability and
promote changes in behaviour in order to end impunity.
We believe that the Council must come together and
send a strong signal in that regard. That includes the use
of sanctions to target those responsible for smuggling
and trafficking in persons.

The political, security and humanitarian situation
in Libya is one of the most complex on the Council's
agenda. We have given UNSMIL, under the leadership
of Special Representative Salame', a huge task to support
the Libyan people to move their country forward.
We must continue to stand united and give them our
full support.

