Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation, and congratulate
South Africa on its successful presidency and leadership
of the Council this month.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic
of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We would like to make the following additional
remarks in our national capacity.

Nigeria once again expresses its deep concern
about the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. All efforts being made by the
international community to reduce tensions between
the Israelis and the Palestinians seem to not be
moving in the intended direction of finding a lasting
and comprehensive solution leading to the peaceful
coexistence ofthe two parties. This fact was manifest at
the Ministerial Committee Meeting of the Non-Aligned
Movement on Palestine convened in Baku, Azerbaijan
to review developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, on issues that
regrettably remain unresolved.

The question of Palestine is a lingering issue
affecting international peace and security. Nigeria's
position on the issue is clear and unambiguous. We
continue to call for a viable, contiguous Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and based on
the 1967 borders, in accordance with numerous United
Nations and Security Council resolutions. We once
again call on States with influence over the parties
concerned to encourage them to re-engage in dialogue
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace
Initiative and other existing agreements. We reaffirm
our unwavering support for a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine existing side by side in peace. The
relevance of a two-State solution needs no reiteration in
these debates, as we believe that there is no alternative
to it. All parties and interlocutors should take concerted
measures to create the necessary conditions conducive
to the achievement of a comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate
will offer new suggestions on how best to address the
prevailing challenges and gaps for the implementation
of all relevant United Nations and Security Council
resolutions on the matter. To this end, we once again call
on Israel to take concrete steps to freeze all settlement-
related activities in the West Bank and occupied East
Jerusalem as a confidence-building measure. In the
same vein, we call on the State ofPalestine to play its role
in building confidence by signalling, through enhanced
efforts, its readiness to return to the negotiating table in
order to forge unity and deal with acts of militancy for
the achievement of a just solution.

My delegation would once again like to reiterate
its call on Israel and Palestine to exercise the utmost
restraint in their actions and utterances. The two
parties should heed the well-meaning appeals endorsed
by the international community to resume negotiations
without further delay. Progress in the direction of a
two-State solution will depend on the resumption of
direct negotiations, demonstrable political will and
commitment to the process. My delegation would
therefore like to call on the international community to
continue to support and encourage Israel and Palestine
to sheathe their swords and embrace the peace process
as a means of resolving the lingering conflicts.

Nigeria reaffirms its support for the rights of the
Palestinian people, including the protection of their
fundamental human rights, particularly their right to
free movement and self-determination.

In conclusion, it is my delegation's belief that
achieving lasting peace in the Middle East will depend
on the commitment and determination of both Israel
and Palestine to make painful sacrifices. This would
bring about the much-desired peace and justice and
reduce the serious threat to regional and international
peace and security.

