Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), I am
presenting to the Security Council and the membership
of the Organization the report covering the six months
since the presentation of the most recent joint report to
the Security Council, which took place on
14 November 2007. The report summarizes the
activities that culminated in the approval of resolution
1810 (2008), relative to the continued implementation
of provisions in resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006).

(spoke in English)

Resolution 1673 (2006) called upon States not yet
reporting on progress made to implement resolution
1540 (2004) to do so without delay, and also
encouraged all previously reporting States to submit
additional information on progress made as well.

Six months before the deadline for submission of
its biennial report to the Security Council, the
Committee decided to make a special effort to
encourage States to meet the reporting requirements.
By mid-November 2007, the matrices of all Member
States-based on previously submitted information or, in
the case of non-reporting States, compiled from official
websites of Governments and international
organizations - were sent to all Member States to be
checked for accuracy and to provide a first report or
additional information on relevant measures taken or
planned to be taken.

As of 27 April 2008, more than half the Member
States have responded to the Committee's request for
more information, bringing the number of States that
have submitted at least one report since 2004 to over
150. Within this group, the number of States submitting
additional information at least once has now reached

100. The Committee takes this opportunity to thank all
the States that have responded promptly and to
encourage the remaining States that have not yet
reported to do so as soon as possible.

The Committee has continued to rely on outreach
activities to promote full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Since mid-November 2007, the Chairman
or some members of the Committee, officially
representing the Committee, and its experts
participated in 11 outreach conferences, seminars and
workshops. The purposes of that participation ranged
from raising awareness about the requirements to
achieve full implementation of the resolution and
encouraging States to submit reports on the status of
their implementation efforts to sharing experiences and
lessons learned and engaging in dialogue with
participating officials from Governments and
organizations particularly interested in the work of the
Committee.

The Committee has been engaged in three types
of outreach activities.

First, the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs has organized workshops on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). A workshop
on the reporting requirements and assistance needs was
organized in Botswana on 27 and 28 November 2007
for participants from 22 African countries.

Secondly, we have held common-strategy
workshops to encourage non-responding States to
submit reports. With sponsorship by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), another
workshop was held in Botswana on 29 and
30 November 2007, an event organized jointly with the
1540 Committee's experts, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities. The Committee appreciates the
cooperation extended by the UNODC in this regard.

Thirdly, we have also organized other outreach
events. Upon invitation by other bodies, the
Committee's Chairman or some of its members,
officially representing the Committee, and several of
its experts participated in relevant meetings on subjects
ranging from the implementation of the universal
conventions against terrorism and of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to the legal

aspects of international instruments countering terrorist
acts in the nuclear, chemical or biological fields and
other specific subjects such as proliferation, financing
and illicit trafficking in nuclear materials.

The Committee expresses its appreciation to the
Governments of Andorra, Belarus, Botswana, the
Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Norway, Slovakia
and the United States of America, the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) and UNODA for their
sponsorship and organization of the different activities,
and the European Union for its ongoing support of the
Committee's outreach activities.

(spoke in French)

The Committee continued to operate as an
information exchange centre on issues relating to
assistance through formal and informal contacts and
dialogue with States that might be interested in
requesting assistance and those that might be in a
position to offer it. To this end, it organized a dialogue
with participants in the outreach activities. In
December 2007, it put the final touches on a model
request for assistance adapted to each case and, taking
into account its centralizing role, sent it to all Member
States in order to better understand their needs in
specific areas and to match their requests with offers of
assistance from other States.

Since the jointly drafted common strategy paper
was presented to the Security Council in November
2007, the 1540 Committee has continued to work
closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
1267 Committee. Moreover, the groups of experts that
assist the three Committees have increased their
collaboration, as was seen in the subregional African
workshop mentioned previously. One important aspect
of those joint activities is the Committee's interaction
with delegations of national officials from each of the
concerned countries, representing two or three different
competent ministries, with a view to promoting
coordination and alleviating the task of responding to
so many requests for information.

Efforts to further strengthen cooperation with the
competent regional and international organizations and
machinery continue. The exchange of information and
the reciprocal participation in outreach activities have
facilitated progress in this area. In December 2007, the
Committee sent letters to the heads of more than 30
international, regional and subregional organizations
and to authorities of the export control regimes and

other mechanisms, requesting them to draw to the
attention of their member States to the important links
between the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the objectives of their
respective institutions. By April 2008, the Security
Council had received 12 positive replies from these
organizations.

Since January 2008, the subcommittees of the
1540 Committee have concentrated their work on
examining the information that is in the matrices of
Member States, as reviewed by experts, on the basis of
new information coming from the States and other data
from official sources. The information has provided the
factual data used as a basis for preparing the report of
the 1540 Committee that will be submitted to the
Security Council, covering the period starting on
28 April 2006. The report will be presented to Council
as soon as possible, or by 31 July 2008 at the latest.

On 25 April 2008, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1810 (2008), by which it extended the
mandate of the 1540 Committee for a three-year period
and, among other provisions, decided that the
Committee would continue to intensify its efforts to
promote complete implementation by all States of
resolution 1540 (2004).

