The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Brazil, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic
and the United Arab Emirates in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
9 November 2006 from the representative of Qatar in
which he requests that an invitation be extended,
pursuant to rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, to His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations, to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

As I indicated in this morning's session, I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than five minutes in order to enable the Council to
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Azerbaijan.

