At the outset, I would like to thank the briefers for their informative briefings and to highly commend their work on the ground. I welcome the Permanent Representative of Somalia to our meeting today. We are encouraged by some positive developments in Somalia vis-a-vis the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the maintenance of security, economic recovery and preparations for the forthcoming elections. On the overall situation in Somalia and the way forward, I would like to share the following points. First, we are concerned by the recent serious developments in the relations between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states, especially the armed clashes between the federal and state forces in Jubbaland. We support the efforts of the Government and political leaders of Somalia to maintain a stable environment for national unity and reconciliation. We call on all parties concerned to make further efforts to strengthen relations between the Government and the federal member states and to engage in constructive dialogue, for the sake of security, sustained stability and the development of Somalia, and to refrain from any act that may escalate tensions or see them spill over into a regional conflict. Secondly, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have adverse impacts, delaying the resumption of Parliament and preparations for national elections in 2020. We emphasize the need for the National Independent Electoral Commission to adopt the draft amendments to the political parties law and to step up protection measures needed for civilians in the electoral process. We call on the Government of Somalia and other stakeholders to fully comply with the electoral law to ensure the preparations and the participation in one-person-one-vote elections for all people and political parties. We are of the view that the political representation of women and minorities must be strengthened, including in all decision-making processes. Thirdly, the COVID-19 pandemic also has caused severe consequences for the livelihoods of the people of Somalia, aggravating food insecurity and humanitarian difficulties in areas affected by flooding and the desert locust outbreak. It has also compounded the magnitude of the dire humanitarian issues, as 30 per cent of the population is in need of assistance. We commend the Government's swift measures to fight COVID-19, but we would like to emphasize that the risk of exponential increase in infections is high across countries. It is therefore necessary to maintain the precautionary and preventive steps, as well as to address economic and social consequences. In this regard, we welcome the statement by the Secretary-General reiterating the commitment of the United Nations to working closely with Somalia, and calling on international partners to unite in the fight of the COVID19 pandemic and support the Federal Government of Somalia in mitigating current and future risks and alleviating the suffering of the people of Somalia caused by COVID-19 pandemic and weather-related crises. Fourthly, we condemn the terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab against the United Nations and personnel and facilities of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) as well as local security forces in Mogadishu and other regions. In this connection, we urge the Government of Somalia continue to work closely with AMISOM to take all necessary security measures. It is also incumbent on international partners and relevant parties to uphold their responsibilities to strengthen cooperation measures against Al-Shabaab to protect civilians, especially women and children. Fifthly, in March 2020, AMISOM completed the reduction in its troop ceiling as provided for in resolution 2472 (2019). But many more efforts are needed for AMISOM to assist the Somali security forces in providing security for the political process at all levels and relevant support to the Somali police and authorities to create a secure environment in the run-up to the election. We look forward to the handover of security responsibility to Somali security forces, in line with the transition plan, by 2021, and call on international partners, the Federal Government of Somalia and Member States to assist AMISOM in fulfilling its mandate to support Somalia and its people. In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the assistance of, and coordination with, regional and international partners in these important undertakings by the Somali Government. We commend the tireless work and efforts of AMISOM, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United Nations country team and the Special Representative, and reiterate our support for their continued assistance to Somalia in maintaining peace and stability and pursuing development.
