Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Mr. Mark Lowcock
for his sobering update today. He and all humanitarians
working tirelessly to alleviate suffering and save
lives have our full and wholehearted support.
He should be congratulated on an ambitious and
effective relief effort under what we understand to be
overwhelming circumstances.

The briefing today demonstrates the desperate
urgency of the humanitarian situation. The people of
Yemen are already suffering from the world's largest
humanitarian disaster, and with the recent deteriorating
security environment, the situation is getting worse by
the day. Civilian causalities are increasing, medical
facilities are no longer functioning, disease is spreading,
hunger is growing and the humanitarian space to reach
those in need is again shrinking.

The recent fighting on the main road between
Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a is now an urgent concern.
The disruption of that critical supply chain would have
disastrous humanitarian consequences. Hundreds of
thousands of people are at risk in Al-Hudaydah and
millions more in other governorates, if Al-Hudaydah
is cut off from the northern parts of the country. An
additional 1 million children in Yemen are now at risk
of descending into famine, bringing the total number of
children at risk to 5.2 million, as we have heard.

In the face of such a dramatic humanitarian
situation, the demands from the Security Council, as
agreed in the presidential statement adopted in March
(S/PRST/2018/5), needs to be repeated loud and clear.
First, steps need to be taken towards an urgent cessation
of hostilities in order to promote the political process
and, above all, protect the civilian population. Secondly,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access needs to be
ensured, including the full functioning of key ports
and roads. Humanitarian personnel must be allowed to
carry out their mission to save lives across the whole
country - unhindered and without risking their own
safety. Thirdly, respect for international humanitarian
law needs to be safeguarded, including the protection
of civilians, and medical and humanitarian personnel.
The three asks by Mr. Lowcock today - stabilize
the economy, protect civilians and ensure medical
assistance and evacuation - make perfect sense and
should be heeded.

After years of bloody conflict, it is evident that
there is no military solution to the crisis in Yemen.
Intensified diplomatic efforts are instead urgently
needed to find a peaceful solution. We commend the
Government of Yemen for its constructive approach in
those recent efforts, and we find it deeply regrettable
that the Houthis did now show up in Geneva and have
continued their military activities. But the temporary
setback in Geneva cannot be an excuse for a return to
violence. The recent escalation not only aggravates
the humanitarian situation, it also undermines the
prospects for a political process. All sides will lose.

We have again today been put on notice. It is
unbearably frustrating that this year, 2018, we are hearing
about massive famine and cholera outbreaks - fully
preventable things. We simply cannot sit idly by as the
lives of millions of innocent civilians are at risk. The
Security Council must remain actively engaged and
step up its efforts in support of Special Envoy Martin
Griffith and Mr. Lowcock. We must call in unison on
all parties - and repeat that call and remind them - to
engage in good faith in an inclusive United Nations-
led political process without preconditions, but with
dedication, energy and serious commitment. The high-
level week, as the United Kingdom Ambassador said,
coming up now should be used as an opportunity in
that regard. The people of Yemen have already paid an
unacceptably high price for this senseless war.

