Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I would first
like to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on the
Republic of Korea's accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May, and to express
our appreciation for Nigeria's outstanding leadership of
the Council's work in April.

I would also like to thank the Council for convening
this emergency meeting on the situation in Mali and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his

account of the serious events that occurred in Kidal on
Saturday, 17 May.

We should recall that on 23 April (see S/PV.7158),
when we were considering the Secretary-General's
third report (S/2014/229) on the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
I spoke to the Council about the Government of
Mali's firm commitment to reaching a definitive
solution to the crisis affecting the North of our
country, and emphasized the importance of respect
for Mali's sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity.
At that meeting I discussed the joint preparations for
inclusive peace talks led by the Government of Mali
and MINUSMA, as well as the appointment of former
Prime Minister Modibo Keita as High Representative
of the Head of State for the inclusive inter-Malian talks.

Less than a month later, and at a time when every
effort is being made to restart the talks aimed at
achieving a lasting peace, the armed groups that have
benefited from the status quo to remarshal their forces
chose to declare war on the State of Mali by attacking
our Defence and Security Forces as they were carrying
out their peaceful and pacific mission to secure the
Prime Minister's visit to Kidal on 17 May.

In his capacity as head of the Administration, the
Prime Minister undertook a tour the Mali's northern
regions with a group of 10 Ministers, including Gao,
Timbuktu and Kidal. Among other things, the purpose
of the visit was to ensure the Administration's gradual
redeployment in the northern regions of Mali; to assess
the achievements and shortcomings on the ground in
order to address in order to create the best conditions
for the success of the inter-Malian inclusive talks and
the intercommunity and intracommunity meetings
under way to prepare for the return of displaced persons
and Malian refugees; and, finally, to give a boost to
the process of restoring the State's authority, national
reconciliation, strengthening social cohesion and
consolidating our country's national unity. That is the
purpose of the battle waged by the Malian people, along
with the international community, to bring about peace
and national reconciliation and to rebuild the country.

While they were warmly welcomed in Gao and
Timbuktu, the Prime Minister and his delegation were,
unfortunately, received in Kidal with bullets and the
firing of heavy weapons by armed groups in collusion
with international terrorism. That resulted in dozens of
dead and wounded and in civilians being murdered in
cold blood at their places of work. Hostages were also
taken, and subsequently released.

If your camera will allow, I would like to show the
Council some pictures of people whose heads were cut
off. The photo below shows one of the assailants - a
woman - who is wearing the hat of one of the prefects
who was savagely murdered. Those are crimes against
humanity, and the Security Council should take strong
action to demonstrate the Council's determination to
put an end to impunity and atrocities.

In that regard, I should point out that large banners
of the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Ansar Dine
flew over the aggressors' vehicles, alongside those of
the Mouvement national pour la liberation de l'Azawad
(MNLA). The links between the partners of the peace
process and the terrorist groups is therefore clearly
established and should be rejected and condemned by
the Council in the strongest terms.

We consider that attack a heinous act and a
flagrant, deliberate and premeditated violation of all
the commitments previously underaken, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The attack on the
delegation of the Prime Minister and the Governor of
Kidal is a despicable act - as the Council can see in
the photo - in the face of which no one can remain
indifferent. The Government of Mali welcomes the
expressions of compassion, solidarity and support
shown to our people.

However, we note that the Government's delegation
did not benefit from the support and protection to
which it had a right to expect under the circumstances.
This situation could have lead to much more tragic
developments. The few troops of the Malian armed
forces present on the ground - "few" because that was
what was stipulated in the Ouagadougou Agreement
and respected by the Malian side - had to make do
against throngs of heavily armed narco-terrorists.

Under the circumstances, I think that the Council
should take the clear position that there is an agressor in
this case-namely,theMNLA and its accomplices-and
that they attacked the Prime Minister and his peaceful
delegation, who were travelling as part of a routine
administrative visit. I hope that the Council's statement
and recommendations will clearly make clear that there
are not two beligerents: there is one agressor here,
which must be clearly identified. The Government of
Mali deserves the Council's support.

In accordance with resolution 2100 (2013), the
international community as a whole recognizes
Mali's sovereignty throughout its national territory.
Furthermore, it defends Mali's territorial integrity,
unity and the secular and republican form of the Malian
State.

Kidal is part of Mali's northern region, and of Mali
as a whole. Kidal has always been, and will always
remain, an integral part of the Republic of Mali. There
is no reason that Mali's senior officials should not be
able to go there. The Malian army is in Kidal today and
will remain deployed there to ensure that the State's
authority is in effect in every centimetre of our national
territory. Kidal is no different from Timbuktu or Kayes.
I hope that the Council will likewise take note of that
fact.

The attack in Kidal cannot go unpunished. We
ask that an international commission be established
to verify the facts so that the perpetrators are brought
before national and international courts.

The Republic of Mali will assume and respect all
its international commitments, as it has always done.
I can assure you of that, Mr. President. Nothing and
no one will distract the Government of Mali from its
objectives, including the opening of a sincere dialogue
that leads to a comprehensive and definitive peace
agreement.

We solemnly reiterate here the desire for dialogue
and peace resolutely expressed by His Excellency
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President of the Republic
and Head of State - a desire widely shared by the vast
majority of the Malian people. Despite the criminal acts
of armed groups, the Kidal region is made up primarily
by Malians who aspire only to peace and well-being.
The Government will also continue its development
efforts throughout the territory of Mali.

Based on the lessons learned since the deployment
of MINUSMA, and against the backdrop of the renewal
of its mandate, among other things, we ask the Security
Council for a much more robust mandate under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, so as to
address the risks in the field, especially based on what
we have learned from the events in Kidal on 17 May,
as well as to disarm all armed groups, in particular
the MNLA, as has been done elsewhere. I think there
are precedents in the Council's work to better respond
to the situation in our country. I hope that all of those
paths can be explored and that our country can benefit
from that type of support.

Once again, Mali will never lose sight of one of
its core values, namely, respecting its commitments.
We will therefore pursue dialogue, as we are convinced
that it is the apporpriate solution, if, of course, all
parties - the Government of Mali, the international
community and the armed movements - fulfil their
commitments, each at its own level, with resolve and
the utmost commitment.

That will be the price of capitalizing on the great
solidarity of the international community, from which
our country has benefited and for which I reiterate the
gratitude of our entire nation. It is the price of being
able to support the fragile process of stabilization in
Mali to which the Council has devoted so much time
and energy and so many resources. We must now move
beyond rhetoric to truly ensure that what happened
never happens again and that the Malian State and
Government are affirmed in its desire for dialogue and
to restore State authority throughout its territory.

