Mr. Ryan: In my capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in
Angola, I wish to express my thanks to you, Sir, for
arranging this meeting ofthe Council in open format.

The situation in Angola continues to be of
concern to the United Nations membership as a whole
and to the international community. It requires the
attention and scrutiny which this meeting of the
Council permits. We are here to discuss the final report
of the Monitoring Mechanism, which has been
presented to the Council pursuant to resolution 1295
(2000). I should like at the outset to welcome the
presence of the Minister for External Relations of the
Republic of Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda. I
also wish to extend my appreciation and admiration to
my Canadian predecessors, who chaired the Committee
for the two years before I assumed this position. Their
work was widely commended. It has also had, I
believe, a wider, beneficial knock-on effect. Its
dynamic, its sharply focused character and its
persistence in dealing with the hard realities thrown up
one by one in the specific case of Angola have
impacted significantly upon the ongoing wider debate
within the United Nations regarding our sanctions
policies, both in general and in specific cases.

I speak today as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
864 (1993), rather than in my national capacity. Ireland
will not be making a national statement today and
associates itself fully with the statement which
Sweden, the Presidency of the European Union, will be
making on behalf ofthe Union.
Following the adoption last April of resolution
1295 (2000), the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Committee, established on 11 July, 2000, a
Monitoring Mechanism consisting of five experts. It is
important to recall that the decision to establish the
Mechanism was taken by the Council after its
consideration of the report of the Panel of Experts on
Angola Sanctions (S/2000/203). It was clear to the
Council that the ongoing realities of the situation
required systematic, sustained further action. For this
reason, the Monitoring Mechanism was established.
The Mechanism was mandated to collect additional
relevant information and to investigate relevant leads
relating to ongoing violations of resolutions 864
(1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998). It was also
charged with investigating any relevant leads initiated
by the Panel of Experts.

Four of the five members of the Mechanism -
Ambassador Juan Larrain, its Chairman, Ms. Christine
Gordon, Mr. James Manzou and Mr. Ismaila Seck -
are here at the Council table. Ambassador Lena Sundh
is in Africa on official duties. They are to be
commended for the commitment and diligence they
have demonstrated in discharging a complex task
characterized by frequent apparent intractabilities.

The Mechanism commenced its work on 20 July
and submitted its report to my predecessor on 21
December last. It had earlier submitted to the
Committee, on 23 October, its interim report. Its
members visited 19 countries in connection with their
agenda, which evolved directly from the report of the
Panel of Experts. In conducting its work, the
Mechanism employed only the strictest evidentiary
standards in its investigations. It also allowed the right
of reply to all those against whom allegations
concerning sanctions violations had been made. These
exemplary procedures further enhance the authority
and transparency which, I believe, characterize the
report before us.

Following the submission of the report of the
Monitoring Mechanism, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) forwarded the report to the President of the
Security Council on 21 December to enable its
circulation for the information of all the States
Members of the United Nations. Subsequently, the
Committee undertook detailed analysis of the report of
the Mechanism at meetings which I convened on 16
and 26 January last, and the Committee then decided to
recommend today's meeting ofthe Security Council.
The work of the Mechanism had two points of
departure: first, the report of the Panel of Experts and,
secondly, the current situation on the ground in Angola.
As regards the report of the Panel of Experts, the
Mechanism focused its efforts on four main areas
which the Panel had exposed as susceptible to

sanctions-busting. The first area - arms and military
equipment - is detailed in parts 11, III, IV and V ofthe
Mechanism's report. The second area - UNITA

representation and travel and residence outside Angola
of senior UNITA officials and their adult families - is
detailed in part VIII. The third - the role of transport
in the violation of the sanctions against UNITA - is
detailed in part IX. The fourth - sanctions on diamond
trading and financial assets - is detailed in part X.

Based on its findings, the Mechanism has made a
number of specific recommendations in all four areas.
These are contained in part XI, paragraphs 228-243, of
the final report. I would draw the particular attention of
the Security Council to these recommendations and to
further recommendations contained in paragraphs 224
and 244-245. I would also draw the attention of the
Security Council to the conclusions drawn by the
Mechanism, which are contained in part XII,
paragraphs 246-254.

Resolution 1295 (2000) expresses the intention of
the Security Council to review the situation regarding
the implementation of the measures contained in
resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998)
on the basis of information provided, inter alia, by the
Monitoring Mechanism. Today's meeting provides us
all with an opportunity to take stock in this regard. The
Mechanism's recommendations range from the general
to the highly specific. What is clear about all ofthem is
that they require action by the United Nations, by
individual States and by the international community. It
is also clear that effective response to and action on
these recommendations will require committed and
sustained engagement not only by the Security Council

and the United Nations system - including,
for example, the International Civil Aviation
Organization - but also and essentially by certain

organizations outside the United Nations system.

If the international community is to implement
effectively the recommendations contained in the
report, it will require persistence and financial
resources. I am confident that, collectively, we possess
and will demonstrate such resolve. The history of
sanctions against UNITA has been and continues to be
an incremental one. Beginning in 1993 and continuing
today, we have worked to put into place, piece by
piece, the crucial elements of a regime that would
undermine and, over some time, eradicate UNITA's
capacity to pursue violently its political objective - an
objective on which the people of Angola have
adjudicated democratically.

The Security Council resorts to a sanctions
regime only in prescribed, restricted circumstances
when it has exhausted all other available approaches.
Sanctions regimes, by their character, also require
careful judgement, in addition to tenacity, to make
them work effectively and to keep them on target. The
Council has recently done innovative work on
sanctions issues, not least in developing mechanisms
such as experts' panels and monitoring mechanisms.
This new thinking has breathed a renewed sense of
capacity into some intractable cases which had hitherto
been regarded as close to the outer edge of our
collective capacity, if not beyond it. We have reached
this point only recently, as was correctly noted by
Minister Miranda in this Chamber last April. However,
progress - real progress - on the most difficult cases
requires not only good new thinking; it also requires,
essentially, good, old-fashioned ingredients, including
political will and determination, preparedness to stay
the course for as long as it takes and a direct
engagement with all involved States, international
organizations, agencies and individuals. All these
ingredients, new and already familiar, are needed in
full measure over the next phase and for as long as it
will take in upholding the sanctions regime against
UNITA.

A particularly important aspect of the work of the
Panel of Experts and the Monitoring Mechanism is the
clear evidence of the involvement of the same people,
as well as the same organizations and corporations, in
two at least, and very probably more, of the major
conflicts in Africa with which the Council is presently
preoccupied. The Angola case history and the work of
the Monitoring Mechanism have directed a sharp,
investigative beam into hitherto largely uninspected but
highly organized and active networks, driven for the
most part by State, commercial or personal greed for
profit, regardless ofthe cost in human lives and misery.
This monitoring work, together with the wide publicity
the various reports have received, will, if we reiterate
our determination and match it with sustained
cooperative action, encourage very careful reflection
by any States, organizations and individuals, whoever
they may be, who might hitherto have considered it
safe to seek to derive financial gain from these
conflicts or who, at Government level, might be
tempted to turn a blind eye towards the now largely
identified profiteers, whether within or externally
connected into theirjurisdictions.

Against this background, it should be noted that
the United Nations presently lacks the necessary
permanent capacity for following up on the findings of
the report of the Panel of Experts and of the report of
the Monitoring Mechanism. In this connection, it
should also be noted that, for now, the Monitoring
Mechanism has been granted a limited extension of its
mandate. In the case of UNITA, it will clearly be
necessary for the Council to maintain the effectiveness
of the sanctions regime until the established objectives
ofthe resolutions concerned are achieved.

The United Nations sanctions regime against
UNITA is working. This is the result of sustained
efforts over time on the basis of the Security Council's
decisions and, flowing from them, the work of the
established Monitoring Mechanism and the cooperation
of involved States and relevant organizations. It is now
much more difficult and more expensive for UNITA to
conduct business with the suppliers of essential
materials. Crucially, and largely because of our
incremental progress, it is riskier and less attractive for
State and commercial suppliers to engage in business
with UNITA.

In my role as Chairman I will work in a positive,
forward-looking manner to convince all concerned that
they can and must end their assistance to UNITA -
assistance that is in defiance of the will of the
international community. Determination and financial
resources will be required to implement the
Mechanism's essential recommendations. However, the
challenges that they pose and their cost do not diminish
their absolute necessity. An effective, monitored
sanctions regime will, over time, remove any
international support for politically motivated violence
in Angola.

With the Council's support, the Committee will
work closely with all States, international
organizations, agencies and individuals to erode
systematically UNITA's remaining military capacity.
Our ultimate objective is to bring closer the day when
all the people of Angola, 1 million of whom have lost
their lives in this 30-year war, will be freed from the
threat of violence and will be able to work together in
peace to rebuild their country.

