Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic commends
the initiative of Cote d'lvoire to hold this open debate on
the role of States, regional arrangements and the United
Nations in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
At the same time, we thank the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States for their briefings
this morning.

Today's debate comes at a particularly opportune
time, as threats to international peace and security
have become increasingly complex, with cross-border
elements and regional dimensions. The Dominican
Republic believes that the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations is vital
to address the current global security challenges. In
addition, the multifaceted partnership between the
Security Council and regional organizations could
serve as a solid foundation for the future global security
agenda.

Latin America and the Caribbean is a zone of
peace, which has allowed us to cooperate in the pursuit
of sustainable development as one of the pillars of
stability. For us, meeting the needs of the people
constitutes, essentially, support for peace. That vision
guides the Organization of American States, the Union
of South American Nations, the Southern Common
Market, the Central American Integration System and
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States.

The Charter of the United Nations underlines
the critical importance of conflict prevention as a
responsibility of the entire United Nations system. That
is the Dominican Republic's interpretation of Chapter
VIII of the Charter, which prompts us to promote
multilateralism as an effective means for including
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
crises or conflicts that may affect security and peace.
We therefore believe that collective action can be
strengthened by involving regional and subregional
bodies, particularly in prevention, development and
post-conflict work. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, with its objective of peaceful, inclusive
and sustainable societies, together with the sustaining
peace agenda, is the blueprint for prevention.

In order to overcome the great challenges of our
times, it is becoming increasingly imperative to address
the immediate and deep-seated causes of conflicts,
allowing communities, civil society, Governments,
organizations and other international institutions to
participate in a more meaningful way. It is crucial to
address the root causes of conflict and instability long
before they reach the agenda ofthe Council. The United
Nations must continue its excellent effort to cooperate
closely with regional partners, whether in a leadership
or support role, to prevent conflict and to maintain
international peace and security. We have seen
many successful examples of regional organizations
responding to emerging crises in order to prevent
an escalation into conflict. However, for successful
cooperation over the long term, a more systematic
arrangement is needed based on recognizing threats
and working together to deal with them.

Finally, we must identify and tackle the social roots
of violence. As the international community continues
to struggle to address destabilizing conflicts and their
repercussions, it is necessary to establish guidelines
for increased United Nations participation in efforts to
address conflicts. Prevention work requires a political
commitment on the part of the relevant actors to deal
with situations that, due to their nature, pose the risk of
a resurgence of or a return to conflict. In that regard,
the Dominican Republic reiterates its commitment to
international peace and security, which is the objective
towards which we must work together so that the United
Nations can consistently fulfil its fundamental tasks.

