Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside over this
meeting, and we thank you for having convened it.
We welcome also the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, who is here with us today. In addition, we
would like to thank Mr. De Serpa Soares, Mr. Maurer
and Ms. Bellal for their thorough and valuable briefings.

With the passage of time and as we move from
one generation to another, it is important to recall
the reasons behind the adoption of the Geneva
Conventions and to consider the obstacles that hinder
the implementation of their objectives. We therefore
welcome the convening of meetings and events aimed at
focusing on the importance of this legal system, which
constitutes a basic guarantee for protecting human
rights during conflict.

We are commemorating the seventieth anniversary
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions this year, which were
signed following the most devastating war the world
has ever seen - the Second World War. This very
Organization, the United Nations, was created following
that war as a result of the terrible loss of human life and
to prevent the outbreak of another equally devastating
war. But the violence and suffering that we have seen in
various conflict-affected areas during the past decades
are nearly equal to the violence and suffering that the
world witnessed during the Second World War, 74
years ago.

Consolidating the rule of law, in particular
international humanitarian law, has become more
important than ever. The four Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols form a vitally important legal
framework for protecting people during war and armed
conflict. However, it is important to note that although
those Conventions were globally ratified, they do not
enjoy the necessary respect and compliance. The world
can see that the texts of those conventions have been
largely ignored and neglected recently; an example
is what is happening in the occupied Palestinian
territories, in Syria, and in Myanmar concerning the
Rohingya minority.

The question, therefore, is, how do we put an end
to such violations and alleviate the terrible and tragic
suffering of human beings in conflict zones? The
response thereto is very much the point of today's
debate, that is, through consolidating the rule of law
and respecting humanitarian principles during armed
conflict. However, the most important question is, how
do we achieve that?

First, and above all, the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular play a crucial and
pivotal role in upholding international humanitarian
law and consolidating the rule of law by ensuring the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, notably those concerning the protection
of civilians, and the compliance of parties to the
conflict and international organizations on the ground
with international humanitarian law. United Nations
peacekeepers are also responsible for protecting
civilians by taking the necessary measures, within
their mandates, to ensure the security of displaced
persons' camps, the medical evacuation of the injured
and the strengthening of the capacities of the national
police forces.

Secondly, there must be accountability for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. All
violations of human rights must be condemned by
all parties to a conflict. It is also necessary to ensure
that those responsible for attacks against civilians
are held accountable. Sanctions, if used effectively
and transparently, can also play an important role
when it comes to accountability for those who violate
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

Thirdly, and lastly, we as Member States have
a responsibility to ensure that international law is
respected more comprehensively through the adoption
of precise and practical measures. We cannot deny
that our priorities and national policies may differ, and
that it is frequently difficult to unite around a position
every time. However, this should not undermine our
obligations or responsibilities under international
law, notably concerning the humanitarian aspect and
humanitarian assistance, as well as providing access,
without obstacles and conditions, to such humanitarian
aid for those who need it. In that regard, we call
once again on States not to use the right of veto and
not to hinder international humanitarian convoys
for those who are in need of them. Efforts could
also be redoubled bilaterally through the sharing of
experience and best practices between countries and
by coordinating our efforts in order to comply with
international humanitarian law, as well as by urging
parties to a conflict to respect their obligations under
international law.

