Judge Pocar: I am honoured to present before
the Security Council the ninth report of the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1534 (2004). Before making my
08-36538
remarks, I want to express on behalf of the Tribunal
our deep gratitude for the crucial support for our work
that has been provided by the United States. As we
come closer to fulfilling our mandate, and in a climate
of Tribunal fatigue, we more than ever need the
continued backing of your country, Sir, as well as that
of other members of the Security Council, so that we
can fully and successfully achieve our mission.

In my address to the Council today, I want to
reflect on the profound significance of the International
Tribunals' mandates and on what lies ahead for all of
us who care about the future and the lasting strength of
international justice.

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council changed
the course of history by creating the first truly
international criminal jurisdiction. Aside from its
revolutionary character in political and legal terms, this
decision was fundamental. In depth, it expressed the
international community's commitment to the deeply
held and universal values of human dignity, justice and
the rule of law.

We - and by that I mean not only the
International Tribunal but also the international
community that established it - are now at a

crossroads. As in 1993, the decisions we make now
will be crucial to the enduring success of international
criminal justice.

Over the past 15 years, the Tribunal's
jurisprudence has contributed to the exponential
development of international criminal law and has in
fact led to the creation of an entirely new body of
international law, namely, international criminal
procedure. Our jurisprudence is now widely used by
other criminal jurisdictions, international, mixed and
domestic. We have trained an entire generation of
lawyers and judicial staff and developed new
standards, practice and methodologies for the
management of international criminal jurisdictions and
of complex war crimes cases.

During these years, we also embarked on a long-
haul effort to streamline our procedures, with a view to
completing our mandate and ensuring compliance with
the right of the accused to a fair and expeditious trial,
one of the most fundamental components of due
process. The result is that we are now able to
simultaneously conduct eight trials involving 28
accused, the highest number since the Tribunal's
inception. Seven appeals from judgement are pending,
08-36538
while only six accused are awaiting trial, and the trials
of three of these accused will start in July and another
one in October. Thus, except for the two accused
Tolimir and Djordjevic, who were arrested in 2007
only, all of our trials will have commenced before the
end of the year.

All other cases have been completed. Out of the
161 individuals indicted, 113 have had their
proceedings terminated, and we expect that, by the end
of 2009, all but three of the International Tribunal's
pending trials will be completed. The remaining cases
include those of the two accused who were arrested
only last year. Had these fugitives been arrested at an
earlier time, their cases could have been joined to the
ongoing multi-accused trials, and we would have had
almost all of our cases completed by 2009.

I should add that, while there is much that we
have accomplished to expedite our cases, procedures
can always be improved further. As Council members
know, in the past few years we have adopted and
implemented numerous measures in that regard, which
are presented in the report. In order to carefully assess
the impact of these measures and consider new creative
approaches for the expeditious conduct of trial and
appeal proceedings, I decided last April to reconstitute
the Working Groups on Speeding up Trials and on
Speeding up Appeals. We are also very grateful to the
Council for the adoption of resolution 1800 (2008),
which authorizes the assignment of up to four
additional ad litem judges for the period until
December 2008. This measure allowed us to commence
new trials and make maximum use of permanent judges
as well. Ad litem judges have taken on an onerous
workload to ensure the expeditious conclusion of our
mandate, and they make an outstanding contribution to
the Tribunal's mission.

However, while we have clearly been continuing
to make headway, and our achievement has surpassed
by far that of any other international or hybrid court, I
must emphasize that a number of challenges remain,
and we clearly need the Council's help and support in
order to address them. One of these hurdles concerns
the status and benefits of the staff and judges of the
Tribunal. Once again, I must state the obvious. Without
these highly skilled and experienced people and their
continued commitment to our institution, it will be far
more difficult for the Tribunal to successfully fulfil its
mandate. At this juncture, we need additional support
from the Security Council and States Members of the
3
United Nations in developing other incentives to retain
our best staff until we complete our work.

A positive resolution of the legal entitlement of
the judges to receive full parity with the judges of the
International Court of Justice is also called for. That
principle is provided for under our Statute, which was
adopted by the Council, and the independent
consultant's study commissioned by the Secretary-
General recommended a rectification of the current
situation. I therefore again ask the Council to actively
support measures to ensure the retention of our best
staff and to address the inequality suffered by judges in
the assessment of their pension benefits.

The Council will remember that, when the
Tribunal was established in 1993, the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia was still raging. The involvement of
the international community in the resolution of the
conflict and the decision to create the International
Tribunal remain one of the shining examples of the
international community's coming together and acting
decisively. Too often, however, interest wanes once a
country or region is not in the headlines anymore, and
as years go by, political and financial support from
international actors dries up. That often proves to be a
fatal miscalculation and jeopardizes the slow and
fragile progress accomplished towards reconciliation
and the development of a society based on the rule of
law.

That is the scenario that we are currently facing
in the former Yugoslavia. It is undeniable that the fact
that the Tribunal has been able to refer 13 accused to
domestic courts in the region is a clear sign of the
progress achieved Since 1993. Currently, 10 accused
have been transferred to Bosnia and Herzegovina, two
accused have been transferred to the authorities of
Croatia, and one accused has been transferred to
Serbia. The War Crimes Section of the Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has completed two cases, one is at the
appeals stage and three trials are ongoing. At this point,
we are still assessing the quality and effectiveness of
those proceedings. We have also adopted amendments
to our Rules of Procedure and Evidence in order to
reinforce our partnership with domestic courts, in
particular the courts in the former Yugoslavia. Rule
75(H) of the Rules now allows judges and parties in
other jurisdictions to directly petition the International
Tribunal for access to confidential material. That is
another demonstration of our commitment to ensuring
that those courts have adequate tools at their disposal
to pursue justice for the Victims of serious international
crimes.

I must point out, however, that such progress
remains extremely fragile. Cooperation between States
of the region in the investigation and prosecution of
alleged war criminals, such as the extradition of
nationals who are alleged war criminals to another
jurisdiction, is still problematic. On my visit to Bosnia
and Herzegovina a few weeks ago, I saw for myself the
extent of what remains to be done. There are still
extreme needs with respect to detention facilities and
the training of prison and police officers, for instance. I
do not have to highlight the importance of enforcing
sentences in a criminal justice system. Yet, less than
two months after being convicted of the systematic
rape, torture and enslavement of women and underage
girls and sentenced to 20 years imprisonment, Radovan
Stankovic, whose case was referred by the Tribunal to
Bosnia and Herzegovina pursuant to Rule ll bis, was
able to escape from the Foca prison. A year later, he
has not yet been apprehended. That is not only a stain
on the reputation of the authorities of the Republika
Srpska responsible; it also shows the scale of the
problems we are facing. I continue to be gravely
concerned about the lack of progress made by the
relevant authorities in apprehending Stankovic and in
prosecuting those who assisted in his escape at all
levels. I also must convey to the Council that there is a
real urgency in the need to improve the security of
prison facilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
throughout the region.

Finally, I take this opportunity to raise with the
Council the issue of the presence of international staff
in the State Court and Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. According to current arrangements,
the mandate of that international staff will terminate at
the end of 2009. During my visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, various actors voiced concern about their
impending departure, including victims' groups, which
indicated that it would have a detrimental impact on
the willingness of witnesses to testify. I therefore urge
the international community to support an extension of
the mandates of the international members of the State
Court and of the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

As I have often recalled, the Tribunal was never
expected to try all persons responsible for the atrocities
committed during the conflict, and there are in fact
thousands of war crimes cases pending before and
08-36538
being processed by the courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina alone. In that perspective, one should in
fact View the so-called completion strategy as a
strategy devised to allow the continuation by domestic
actors of those activities that were initiated by the
ICTY, as mandated by the Security Council.

In other words, the international community's
failure to support the institutions that are key to the
development of the rule of law in the region will
seriously undermine the Tribunal's legacy. It will also
in effect diminish the impact of Member States'
significant financial investment in international justice
made through their contributions to the budget of the
Tribunal. I therefore urge the international community
to bolster its support for criminal justice institutions in
the region.

Such efforts remain crucial to the development of
a society based on the rule of law in the former
Yugoslavia and to ensuring a return on the significant
investment that the international community has made
thus far.

One of the fundamental values reflected in the
international community's decision to create the
International Tribunal was the quest for justice and the
fight against impunity. In that respect, I must once
again reiterate that we will not have fully achieved
our goal of rendering justice if the four remaining
fugitives - Karadzic, Mladic, Zupljanin and Hadzic -
are not arrested. The International Tribunal shall not
close its doors before all of those fugitives are tried,
and the Security Council should make clear that the
trial of those fugitives by the international community
does not hinge upon the International Tribunal's
proposed completion strategy dates.

I therefore urge the international community to
honour its responsibility to cooperate with the Tribunal
and find those fugitives so that they will face justice.
That is a legal obligation under the Tribunal's statute,
which binds all States Members of the United Nations.
It reflects the principle embraced by the Security
Council 15 years ago that the impunity of those
responsible for the most serious international crimes
cannot be tolerated. I must also emphasize that the duty
to cooperate goes well beyond the arrest of the
remaining fugitives. It also entails the provision of
assistance in all aspects of ongoing proceedings before
the Tribunal, and there have been recent cases in which
States have failed to fulfil that obligation. I must, in
08-36538
that respect, express my disappointment at the failure
of Serbia to provide adequate and diligent assistance in
serving a summons for a key witness in one of our
ongoing trials.

Allow me finally to turn to the initiatives that we
are taking with respect to our legacy and to ongoing
discussions on residual mechanisms. As regards the
latter, we submitted our final report on residual
mechanisms in September 2007. Since then, we have
met with the Security Council working group and have
provided several clarifications in response to questions
from working group members. We are very much
looking forward to further discussions with a view to
ensuring the adoption of the most effective and
appropriate residual mechanisms.

Since my last presentation before the Council, we
have also initiated a number of projects in
collaboration with like-minded institutions. The
objective pursued is to ensure that our methods, our
practices and our case law will be fully accessible to
future international courts and for the transfer of war
crimes cases to domestic jurisdictions. With the
assistance of the United Nations Interregional Crime
and Justice Research Institute, we are putting together
a compilation of our best practices that will cover all
stages of the criminal process from investigations to
the enforcement of sentences. We are also, in
conjunction with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, assessing the impact of our
outreach activities and training programmes with a
View to identifying best practices and what remains to
be achieved to guarantee the Tribunal's lasting impact
on the work of domestic courts in the region of the
former Yugoslavia. Our goal is to ensure that the
legacy of the International Tribunal will be secured not
only through proceedings carried out by domestic
courts in the region, but worldwide by the courts and in
the jurisprudence of all Member States. That is an
integral part of the idea that, while the institution of the
ICTY in its narrow understanding is completing its
work, our mandate will in fact be continued by
domestic actors, in particular in the former Yugoslavia.

In 1993, the proposal to establish an international
criminal jurisdiction to enforce international criminal
law would have remained mere wishful legal thinking
without the decisiveness of the Council. By the same
token, we will not be able to fully accomplish our
mission without the Council's continued support. The
success of the Tribunal's work is not only crucial for
peace and security in the former Yugoslavia; it will
also set the stage for all present and future international
criminal justice endeavours. I ask members to help
ensure that the Tribunal will be provided with all
support necessary to successfully fulfil its mandate and
that they intensify their support to the region of the
former Yugoslavia so that the justice systems of the
countries concerned can continue the work started by
the Tribunal. The Council's continued support to the
domestic judiciaries is crucial to ensuring that the rule
oflaw is embedded in those societies.

