Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2374 (2017), mindful of the importance of
maintaining the Council's consensus support for the
peace settlement in Mali. We take note of the fact
that the Malian Government, seeking to accelerate
the stabilization of the northern territories, appealed
to the Security Council, and we are concerned about
the security situation and the resumption of clashes
between the parties signatory to the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

At the same time, we note that the excessive use of
restrictive measures may lead the Security Council to
drift away from its direct obligations in the maintenance
of international peace and security, ending armed
conflicts and promoting the reconciliation of parties,
and to deteriorate into a mere sanctions truncheon.
Whether sanctions are effective in other contexts is
already the subject of serious doubt. Of the examples
provided by the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and Yemen, none points to the usefulness of sanctions in
the process ofa settlement. Indeed, the opposite is true.
Sanctions antagonize, make it more difficult for the
parties to negotiate and complicate the political process.

In our view, if we are to make progress in the matter,
we need to undertake a comprehensive analysis of the
Malian crisis. We must find out exactly what its sources
and underlying causes are, and determine the sources
of instability. We must not forget that the security
situation in the Sahel degenerated after the foreign
intervention in Libya in 2011 and the destruction of the
Libyan State.

A few years ago, we proposed that a full-fledged plan
of action be drafted for the Sahel region. We believe that
the time has now come to seriously consider that option
and to move away from the specific situation, basing
our action on the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel. We are ready for active cooperation with
all interested parties on both the Mali and the Sahel
issues.

I take this opportunity to inform the members of
the Council of the following.

As we all know, today at the Brazil, Russian
Federation, India, China and South Africa Summit,
the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir
Vladimirovich Putin, declared that the Russian
Federation would submit to the Security Council
a draft resolution on the establishment of a United
Nations mission to to strengthen the protection of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine.
The presence there of United Nations peacekeepers,
which would provide security for the OSCE Mission,
is something that we deem to be appropriate. That
would advance a solution to the problem in south-
eastern Ukraine.

Of course, however, one can only refer to the task
of providing security to OSCE staff. Now, those forces
must remain along the separating lines and not in any
other territories. The issue can be resolved only after
the two sides have been separated and heavy equipment
has been removed. We have sent a draft resolution to
the President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General, and we cherish the hope that in the near future
it will be circulated to the members of the Council. We
intend to convene relevant consultations at the expert
level. Then, after the Security Council mission has
returned from Ethiopia, we shall hold consultations at
the Permanent Representative level.

