Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): Nearly four years
ago the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador
(ONUSAL) started as a human- rights-monitoring mission
in El Salvador. After the establishment of a formal
cease-fire it became a multifunctional peace-keeping
operation which did not limit itself to the observation of the
cease-fire but included other military aspects, a police
reform, land-transfer and reintegration programmes, and
human rights and institution-building elements.

ONUSAL has thus been innovative and successful,
successful to the extent that it can now cease to exist and
can put matters in Salvadoran hands. Let us not forget that,
as with all peace-keeping operations, it is primarily thanks
to all Salvadorans and especially the conflicting parties that
ONUSAL has been so effective. Without their firm
determination to build a lasting peace, ONUSAL would not
have been one of the success stories of the United Nations.

We should, however, also bear in mind that the
continuous determination of all parties is essential to
maintaining a firm and lasting peace and to strengthening
democratic institutions. A peace-keeping operation has to
come to an end at some point, and it is inevitable that the
political will of the conflicting parties be put to a test, as
will now be the case in El Salvador. We call upon all
Salvadorans to maintain their determination to attain
peace and democracy, to give the democratic institutions
the chance they deserve, and to cooperate in order to
fulfil the remaining commitments of the peace process.
We believe that El Salvador's recent accession to
international human rights instruments and the
acceleration of the land-transfer programme are very
encouraging signs.

We are pleased that a small team under the direction
of the Secretary-General will remain in El Salvador for a
limited period of time to conduct remaining verification
tasks and to continue to provide good offices. Its presence
is an important contribution by the United Nations to
post-conflict peace-building aimed at fostering the results
already obtained and assisting in further developing the
peace process.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution now before the Council.

Let me conclude by expressing the hope that
ONUSAL's success will provide inspiration for many
other peace-keeping operations.
