Mr. Do Hung Viet (Viet Nam): I join previous
speakers in thanking the Malaysian presidency for
convening this important meeting to discuss the
challenges that Member States face in addressing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I thank
the Secretary-General for his valuable insights, as
well as Mr. Kim Won-Soo, Mr. Emanuel Roux and
Mr. George Koblentz for their informative briefings.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Today's debate is being held as the world continues
to face the dire threats posed by terrorism related
to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and their
proliferation. Their very existence, especially nuclear
weapons, remains a danger for international peace,
security and stability. This debate is also opportune
as the demand for chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear technologies, materials and equipment for
peaceful purposes continues to grow as countries strive
for sustainable development.

Viet Nam believes that addressing WMD
proliferation must be coupled with substantive progress
in WMD disarmament, particularly towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. We underline the
importance of regional nuclear-weapon-free zones,
including the Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, and the need for nuclear-weapon States to
accede to their respective protocols. At the same
time, non-proliferation efforts should not hinder the
legitimate rights of States to acquire, produce and use
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN)-
related materials, equipment and technology for
peaceful purposes.

Viet Nam has consistently been committed to
WMD disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, and
strongly advocated for the peaceful use of CBRN-
related materials and technologies. Viet Nam is party
to, and complies fully with its obligations under, all
key WMD disarmament and non-proliferation treaties,
including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, as well as the International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards agreement and its
additional protocol. Viet Nam seriously implements the
relevant Security Council resolutions and participates
in related initiatives, including the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation
Security Initiative. As a concrete example of its efforts,
Viet Nam completed the conversion of fuel at its only
research reactor, from highly enriched to low-enriched
uranium. That was done in close collaboration with the
Russian Federation, the United States and the IAEA.

For the past 12 years, resolution 1540 (2004)
has played an important role in the international
community's efforts to prevent WMDs, their means
of delivery and related materials from falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Viet Nam welcomes the
upcoming review of the resolution. As a member of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (1040), we look
forward to engaging in the deliberations.

As the President suggested, it is essential that we
identify and address the challenges that States face
in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and other
non-proliferation commitments. Viet Nam's experience
has revealed many challenges. In our view, there is a
need for increased international cooperation to raise
the awareness and understanding of the threats posed
by WMD proliferation and to strengthen the capacity
of States, in particular of developing countries,
in implementing their respective obligations and
commitments. That may include building the necessary
national databases, enhancing capacity to tackle
transnational and new types of crimes, providing
technical assistance for stronger import- export control
and supporting the application of security and safety
standards in the use of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear materials and technologies. Care must also
be taken to avoid placing undue burden on States in
those efforts.

International efforts to address the proliferation of
WMDs and related materials require renewed political
commitment, as well as enhanced partnerships and
cooperation, including with the United Nations and the
relevant international organizations, such as the IAEA
and OPCW. Viet Nam remains strongly committed and
will fully cooperate with the international community
towards a world free from all weapons of mass
destruction.

