Mrs. Nl'ifiez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba fully supports the statement made by
the representative of Malaysia on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

At this difficult time Cuba reaffirms its full
solidarity with the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples,
who are suffering again today the ruthless and cynical
aggression of the Tel Aviv regime.

Once more, we are gathered in this room to
discuss issues related to the continued and flagrant
violations of international peace and security, in the
face of which this Council - the United Nations organ
that supposedly should confront acts of aggression,
according to the mandate conferred on it by the United
Nations Charter - sits with hands folded, as further
evidence of the double standard to which we are
becoming accustomed.

Israel's escalation of military attacks on the
Palestinian people continues and increases despite
strong international condemnation. Every day the
number of innocent victims grows; every day the
situation worsens for more than a million defenceless
civilians, because practically all the infrastructure
necessary to their survival is being destroyed. The
already critical humanitarian situation is further
deteriorating in the illegally occupied territories.

Cuba condemns this inhumane and criminal
aggression that deliberately seeks to put an economic
and military stranglehold upon the resistance of the
Palestinian people. The Security Council keeps silence
and does not seem to be in a position to take strong
action against the aggressor. With that inaction the
Council is ensuring the impunity of this barbarism.

This unpunished and continued aggression has
undermined the spirit of the agreement reached
between Palestinian political forces, which would
allow for the resumption of peace negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis, as provided in relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

Israel continues to act with impunity under the
cover of the United States permanent veto in the
Security Council. Just few days ago, that country
wielded its veto power for the thirtieth time in
connection with Council draft resolutions related to
occupied Palestinian territories. Once again, the
hegemonic Power is utterly paralyzing the Council and
disregards the will of the overwhelming majority of the
international community.
One front of aggression is apparently not
sufficient for the Zionist State. On 12 July Israel
launched a new large-scale military operation, this time
against the Lebanese Republic. The number of civilian
deaths is increasing with every passing day. The
destruction of the country's infrastructure - including
the runways of the Beirut international airport - is
ongoing, and the water and power supplies for the
civilian population have been seriously affected. As
part of its aggression, the Israeli Government has
imposed a tight naval and air blockade on the entire
country and has openly and directly threatened to
proceed with its aggression and to raze the southern
suburbs of the capital of Lebanon as further proof of its
known genocidal policy against the Arab peoples.

Cuba has on countless occasions denounced
Israeli violations of all the norms of international law
by its military attack on a sovereign country under the
spurious pretext of protecting its security, with the
economic and military support and blatant and
perfidious complicity of the United States Government,
which through its veto power guarantees impunity for
the aggressor regime and acts as a wall in the Security
Council to prevent any form of condemnation.

Once again, the Security Council's passivity
regarding any issue that perturbs Washington and its
allies could lead to a new humanitarian crisis with
grave consequences for the entire region.

On 16 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Cuba issued a statement strongly
condemning the savage military aggression by Israel
against the Lebanese Republic and urging the
international community and peace-loving forces to
mobilize and demand that Israel immediately put an
end to such barbaric acts, return to Lebanon the
territories that it has occupied and respect the most
basic norms of international law.

This meeting has been convened to debate the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We ask what issue relating to the region
could be brought before the Security Council under the
present circumstances other than the barbaric Israeli
acts against the Palestinian people and the direct
attacks against a sovereign State - the Lebanese
Republic. The only valid outcome of this meeting
would be the adoption of measures to put a stop to the
genocide and aggression and to condemn the
perpetrator of the genocide and aggression.

We therefore reiterate once again that the
Security Council must act without delay and assume
the responsibilities conferred on it by the Charter. This
body cannot continue to remain silent and complicit in
the face of these grave developments that are
endangering international peace and security.

