Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency, and to thank the delegation of Mexico for
its excellent work in the previous month. I welcome
President Boris Tadic' of Serbia and to thank him for
his statement. I also wish to welcome Foreign Minister
Hyseni of Kosovo and to thank Special Representative
Zannier and Mr. De Kermabon for their briefings.

First of all, I would like to express my
condolences over the loss of life and to convey my
sympathy to the injured in the violence in North
Mitrovica. Japan condemns that violent act. Such
cowardly action hampers the ongoing effort to improve
security and strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo with
the support of the international community. Every
effort must be made to prevent the recurrence of such
attacks. It is important that the due process of law be
brought to bear against those responsible for this
criminal attack.

At the same time, we are pleased to note that the
overall security situation is calm. We hope that the
Government of Kosovo will continue to stabilize
security and improve the rule of law in the territory, in
cooperation with United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force.
Enhancing security and the rule of law is important to
the stabilization and development of both Kosovo and
the entire region. It is essential for all parties to tackle
those challenges through dialogue and cooperation. We
urge both Pristina and Belgrade to engage in
constructive dialogue and address the challenges so as
to enhance the lives of all of Kosovo's residents.

In my view, the human security approach is the
most pertinent thing when we talk and think about the
people of Kosovo, because it aims at creating
conditions in which every individual, irrespective of
ethnic group, is entitled and given an opportunity to
live a peaceful, secure and dignified life. With that
approach in mind, Japan will continue to cooperate to
achieve sustainable economic development and
peaceful coexistence among the diverse ethnicities in
Kosovo, including in the northern provinces.

