Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): The
Security Council is meeting today to consider the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, following a request by
the Russian Federation. My delegation is grateful to
you, Mr. President, for finding the ideal format for this
important meeting. I would also like to extend my
delegation's thanks to the Office of the Iraq
Programme, which, with dedication, is doing the bulk
of the work on implementing this humanitarian
programme. Mali is deeply concerned with the
humanitarian situation in Iraq, which deserves careful
consideration, as it is receiving today.

Information provided by the Secretary-General
through his regular reports to the Council show that
over the last four years the oil-for-food programme has
helped to halt further deterioration in the living
conditions of average Iraqis and has improved living
conditions in some cases, and that the programme's
humanitarian nature should be preserved. We concur
with the Secretary-General on these conclusions. That
is why we believe everything possible should be done
to attain all the humanitarian goals of the programme.

Here, we would join the Secretary-General in
calling on the Iraqi Government to give priority to
meeting the essential needs of its people by increasing
imports of food and of health and medical supplies. My
delegation regrets that no request for the purchase of
such products has been submitted to the sanctions
Committee during phase IX of the programme, despite
the accumulation of a substantial amount in the escrow
account.

The food and health situation in Iraq is
particularly unacceptable. The caloric intake among
children is very low, and the nutritional goal set in the
distribution plans is far from being met.

Given that situation, the Council must take steps
to ease the devastating impact of the sanctions on the
civilian population. In that connection, my delegation
reiterates its great concern at the excessively high
number of contracts kept on hold by the Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990). We agree with
the Secretary-General that this is one of the main
obstacles to proper implementation of the humanitarian
programme. That is why my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General's recommendation to broaden the
green lists in various sectors to include all items except
those covered in resolution 1051 (1996). For its part,
the sanctions Committee should step up its efforts
diligently and speedily to consider applications for
contracts so as to reduce significantly the number of
holds.

Mali welcomes the new sanctions regime that the
Council is discussing because it aims to ease the
harmful effects of 11 years of sanctions on the civilian
population. It would remove constraints on the import
of goods for civilian consumption and basic
necessities, on the principle that everything that is not
explicitly forbidden would be authorized. The reverse
principle now in use is the reason for the excessively
high number of contracts kept on hold by the
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990).

But in our View there are several shortcomings in
the new regime. The first relates to United Nations
control of Iraq's resources through the maintenance of
the escrow account and to the need for the
rehabilitation of the country. Thus, we support
injecting cash from oil sales into the local economy -
the "cash component".

Here, we support the arrangement proposed by
the team of experts established pursuant to paragraph
15 of resolution 1330 (2000). The Iraqi oil industry
still faces considerable constraints of all kinds which,
if nothing is done, could result in a drop or even a
collapse in crude oil production.

Beyond the oil sector, the cash component ought
to be extended to other sectors in Iraq, because, as the
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2001/186), in
some sectors of the population, because of the
sanctions, poverty is widespread; some Iraqis are often
forced to barter what they receive through the food
basket in order to procure other basic necessities.

To ensure the economic reconstruction of the
country, the draft resolution should cover services and
investments, which are essential to economic recovery
and to rebuilding the country's entire infrastructure.
My delegation fully supports the provisions relating to
the humanitarian situation, and considers that the text's
new provisions, if fully implemented, will help ease the
suffering of the Iraqi people. In that connection, we
hope that the Iraqi Government will react positively,
will cooperate with the United Nations, and will seize
the opportunity being provided.
Let me assure the delegation of the Russian
Federation that my delegation is willing to study
carefully the text of the draft resolution it submitted
this afternoon just before this meeting.

I cannot fail to mention another aspect of the
humanitarian situation. It is not directly related to
today's debate, but it is of importance: it concerns part
B of resolution 1284 (1999), which obliges Iraq to
facilitate the repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third
country nationals or the return of their remains if they
are deceased. For the past 11 years, more than 600
families have been living in torment, and they continue
to suffer. Moreover, Iraq has failed to account for
property seized in Kuwait, including the national
archives, which represent the memory of the country.
Kuwait thus remains traumatized by the 1990 invasion.

Mali calls on Iraq to cooperate with Mr. Yuli
Vorontsov, the High-level Coordinator for Iraq, whose
work we support, so that he can carry out his task and
so that this sad situation can come to an end. This is a
major humanitarian issue on which true consensus
exists in the Council. We therefore call on Iraq to meet
its international obligations, to continue to participate
in the work of the Tripartite Commission and the
Technical Subcommittee, and to cooperate fully in
order to resolve these problems once and for all.

