Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First of all,
let me thank Nickolay Mladenov for his frank and
sobering briefing on the developments of the past
months, including on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). In that regard, let me refer to the letter
(S/2018/454) that was sent to the Secretary-General in
May, signed by 10 Security Council members, in which
we requested written reports on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016). We welcomed the written
report (S/2018/6l4) that we received in June and would
have appreciated a continuation of that practice in
September and this month. Written reports provide the
factual basis that is needed to fruitfully discuss the
implementation of the resolution in the Council.

Today marks two years since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016). And today, we sadly have to
conclude, as others have done, that most parts of the
resolution have not been implemented. Unfortunately,
the situation on the ground is worse than it was two
years ago. Positive steps are urgently needed. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands recalls that each side can
and must take positive steps to bring peace closer, as
the Middle East Quartet recommended in 2016 (see S/2016/595, annex).

In that context, I will focus on three issues: first,
the undermining of the prospects of peace; secondly,
settlement activities; and thirdly, Gaza.

On my first point, prospects for peace continue to
be undermined through terror attacks, violent incidents
and incitement. We condemn the recent terrorist attacks
by Palestinians against Israelis in the West Bank that
has led to the loss of lives. There is no excuse for
terrorism. Those recent attacks have further increased
tensions in the West Bank. We condemn the statements
by Hamas and other terrorist groups welcoming those
cowardly attacks. Those statements serve only to
increase tensions. We regret that General Assembly
draft resolution A/73/L.42, condemning Hamas, was
not adopted, as we need to speak out as one United
Nations against terrorism in all cases.

At the same time, the attacks in the West Bank
are no justification for the ensuing violent response of
some settlers against Palestinian civilians. We call upon
the Palestinian and Israeli leadership to observe calm
and restraint and to refrain from provocative actions
and rhetoric that could further increase tensions. We
call upon the parties to make every effort to find the
perpetrators of those acts and bring them to justice.

That brings me to my second point, on settlements.
Calls for the annexation, expansion or legalization of
settlements and all actions in that regard serve only
the purposes of the extremists and will create only
more tensions between both sides. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands strongly opposes Israel's settlement policy,
which we consider to be illegal under international
law. It is a policy that includes actions such as forced
transfers, evictions and demolitions. Settlement
activities have increased since the adoption of the
resolution. If we look at the past two years, we see that
in 2017 construction was started on almost 1,700 units
and that in the first six months ofthis year, construction
was started on more than 1,000 units. In addition, the
number of planned and tendered units are a multiple of
that. That shows a substantial increase as compared to
the numbers of 2015 and 2016.

It is not only about the numbers. A new expansion
of settlements has been announced for sensitive areas,
such as Hebron and East Jerusalem. Those are areas
that are of crucial importance to the viability of a
future Palestinian State. In addition, over the past
two years, Israel has continued with the demolition
of Palestinian houses and structures and with the
eviction of Palestinian families from their homes. We
are deeply concerned by the developments in East
Jerusalem, where an unprecedented number of families
face eviction. Although we welcome the fact that the
planned demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar has not taken
place, we reiterate our call upon Israel to withdraw
those plans all together.

Thirdly, the situation in Gaza remains extremely
fragile. We have seen the tragic results ofresorting to the
use of violence in Gaza over the past year all too often.
We condemn the indiscriminate firing of rockets. We
express grave concern about the use of force by Israel
that has led to the loss of life of over 200 Palestinian
civilians. We have called for a thorough investigation
into all cases where lives have been lost and we have
concluded several times that a sustainable solution for
the situation in Gaza is needed. That solution would
include the urgent improvement of the humanitarian
and economic situation.

Thanks to regional and international efforts, the
situation in Gaza has marginally improved. We thank
Nikolay Mladenov and his team for their unabated
efforts in finding solutions to alleviate the humanitarian
and economic crisis, including through the projects of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians.

Another positive development that I want to
highlight is that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) was able, with the combined efforts of the
Agency itself and many donors, to continue to provide
basic services and to close the financing gap. Continued
support to UNRWA, including next year, is needed. We
will continue to work together with the United Nations
and the international community, as well as Israel and

the Palestinian Authority, to find solutions that bring
tangible relief. Those solutions must also include the
return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza as the
legitimate Government. Moreover, they must include
the full opening of the crossings, taking into account
Israel's security needs.

My last point is on the need to restart a genuine
peace process. We thank Nikki Haley for the first
glimpse of the United States plan for peace in the
Middle East. We look forward to further information
and consultations in that regard. As was just said in
a press statement of the former, current and incoming
members of the European Union to the Council, "We
see an urgent need for a political horizon to be restored".

It is unfortunate to have to sum up the many
developments since the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) that have undermined the prospects for
peace and of a two-State solution. In addition to the
developments mentioned so far, I also want to express
our concern about the shrinking space for civil society
in both Israel and the Palestinian territories. We are, for
example, concerned by the threats and hostile reaction
to the Israeli non-governmental organization B'Tselem,
which is an organization that rightly won international
praise for its work. The findings by Human Rights
Watch about suppression of dissenting opinions by
both the Palestinian Authority and Hamas, including
by the use torture, are deeply concerning. A vibrant
civil society is essential to long-term sustainable peace
and stability.

In conclusion, two years after the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), we have to recognize that
we continue to reaffirm our collective commitment
to a two-State solution, while the situation on the
ground is developing towards a one-State reality.
That development must be reversed. Positive steps are
urgently needed to restart a genuine peace process,
leading to a two-State solution based on internationally
agreed parameters. We should all remain united in our
efforts towards that goal.

