Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin, Mr. President, by cordially
commending you on organizing this debate and on the
excellent chairmanship of Luxembourg of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. I also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

I align myself fully with the statement of the
European Union.

We also have circulated the written text of the
statement by the delegation of Spain, so I will try to
extract the three or four most basic ideas. The first
has to do with the use of schools in armed conflicts;
the second with the need to adopt a completely cross-
cutting focus on fighting this scourge, which is the use
of children in armed conflicts; the third is the need to
reinforce and redouble efforts at prevention; and I will
conclude with the views of Spain on this issue.

First, with regard to schools, although progress
has been made, it is still true that recent events have
demonstrated that schools continue to be used in armed
conflicts as real powder kegs. Proof of this is that more
than 500 attacks on schools have taken place over the
past year. The use of schools for military ends is clearly
documented in current conflicts, as was just mentioned
by the Ambassador of Brazil. It should be recognized
that the fundamental right of a child to education and
the use of a child as a weapon of war are at opposite
ends ofthe spectrum. We must not allow this to happen.
It is perhaps worthwhile exploring the idea of having
markings for schools so that they would not be subject
to attack in armed conflicts.

The second idea I wanted to bring up was the cross-
cutting issue. The use of children in armed conflicts
is so serious that we need a cross-cutting focus in the
entire United Nations system. It is not an action that
falls solely to the Security Council and its Sanctions
Committees. Quite the opposite, thas perspective must
be incorporated into the funds and programmes of
the United Nations. It is also the responsibility of the
General Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Only through the general involvement of all the funds
and programmes in all of the main and subsidiary
bodies of the United Nations will we be able to achieve
our goals effectively.

The third idea is prevention. In that regard, I share
the idea brought up by the Ambassador of Brazil that the
best way to prevent the use ofchildren in armed conflicts
is by preventing the conflicts themselves. But for lack
of this, an absolutely essential element is awareness.
Let me recall the event organized by the Mission of
Luxembourg yesterday when its wonderful campaign
to fight against the use of children under the motto
"Children, not soldiers" was launched. I am proud to
repeat once again that Spain has enthusiasticallyjoined
the campaign and we have announced a contribution of
€30,000 to that end.

Also when it comes to prevention, a few days ago
I had the honour to present at the United Nations an
outstanding short film, which was coincidentally a
Spanish one, entitled That Wasn't Me. The film tells the
story ofthe tragedy that is the use ofa child in an armed
conflict. As someone said, the film has the great merit
oftelling a story that could in fact be true, earning it an
Oscar nomination at the Hollywood Academy Awards.

Turning to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/245), my delegation notes with some concern
that only four of the 11 groups listed in the reports in the
past 10 years have signed action plans to put an end to
violations. It goes without saying that the delegation of
Spain firmly supports the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General's report as to the measures to
be taken in the Security Council.
In conclusion, Spain places great importance on
the efforts of the international community and of the
United Nations to put an end to this scourge, which is
a violation of the rights of children in armed conflicts.

