Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea would like to welcome to the Security Council
the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy, Mr. Angelino Alfano. We also
thank him for his comprehensive and substantive
briefing on the programme and activities planned under
the OSCE Italian chairpersonship this year.

The global context in which we must maintain
peace and security and find lasting solutions to ongoing
conflicts is both increasingly complex and diverse. The
levels of complexity go beyond conflict between two
States. Terrorist groups and armed groups, organized
crime, commercial interests and other elements of
globalization, such as the movement of people, hinder
the ability of States, regional groups and the United
Nations to find sustainable solutions and guarantee
peace and security for all the men and women of the
world. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore
commends the programme of the OSCE Italian
chairpersonship and the motto it has chosen, "Dialogue,
Ownership, Responsibility".

The need to strengthen multilateralism is critical to
the Security Council and its allies, such as the OSCE,
in fulfilling their commitments. We all have something
to contribute and we all have a role to play. With 57
participating States and in its capacity as one of the
largest regional security organizations, the OSCE was
created to complement and assist, within the framework
of its mandate, the mechanisms of the United Nations
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We therefore believe that it is very important for the two
organizations - the OSCE and the United Nations - to
maintain close cooperation in order to strengthen the
role of the OSCE in implementing United Nations
decisions concerning European conflicts and for the
benefit of international peace and security. We also
encourage greater collaboration among the OSCE and
African regional and subregional organizations, within
the framework of expanding Euro-Mediterranean and
Euro-Atlantic multilateral relations.

In that context, I take this opportunity to endorse
the priority issues on the agenda of the OSCE Italian
chairpersonship, which focus on achieving a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Ukraine. We also stand by its
priority to address protracted conflicts through existing
formats. Protracted conflicts often generate social and
economic instability, nurturing terrorist groups and
their supporters, organized crime and a lack of social
cohesion, which in turn nourishes radicalization,
violent extremism, racism, xenophobia and intolerance.
It is encouraging that the efforts of the OSCE are geared
towards finding peaceful and sustainable solutions to
the conflicts in its territory.

Moreover, the major efforts of the OSCE, its
independent institutions and its missions on the
ground have so far prevented the situations in the
so-called protracted conflicts in Georgia, Nagorno
Karabakh and Transnistria from intensifying. For
that reason, we would be pleased if the OSCE Italian
chairpersonship were to work with the same focus that
has been maintained to date, in collaboration with the
United Nations wherever possible, towards the long-
awaited solutions to all of those equally important
issues, which paralyse the continuity and daily life of
the affected communities in the same way. We believe
that a new approach and greater resolve are necessary
to put an end to those crises, while respecting the
principles of sovereignty and independence of States,
in accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

One of the strategic objectives of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea's membership of the Security
Council, as a representative of the African continent, is
to ensure the fair and humane treatment of immigrants
and refugees. We would therefore highlight and endorse
the Italian chairpersonship's objective of addressing
the challenges and opportunities arising from the
Mediterranean, such as migration. In so doing, we
welcome the chairpersonship's intention to address the
migratory situation, not only in terms of security, but
also with respect to economic potential and the fight
against intolerance and discrimination. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea applauds Italy's determination
to promote pluralism, inclusion and intercultural and
interreligious dialogue as the bedrocks of international
peace and security.

Today, on International Women's Day, we also
highlight the focus of the OSCE chairpersonship
on ensuring a gender perspective in its work and in
implementing its gender action plan. If we may, we
would also like to encourage the chairpersonship, in line
with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and subsequent resolutions on this important
issue, to incorporate into its gender actions plan the
relevant recommendations of the Secretary-General's
report of 14 August 2017 (A/72/323), on the programme
of activities for the implementation of the International
Decade for People of African Descent, focusing on
women and girls of African descent, and other similar
reports that promote the inclusion and better treatment
of women and girls of other European minority groups
in peace and security processes.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the excellent
mediation efforts of the OSCE to achieve peaceful
solutions to conflicts, in line with the implementation
and full respect of agreements. We again emphasize the
importance of closer cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE, which is the only mechanism
for peaceful solutions and greater stability in the OSCE
regions. Allow me to wish every success to Italy's
Chairperson-in-Office in fulfilling his priorities.

