Mr. de Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would sincerely like to thank the
presidency of Indonesia for this new opportunity given
to my country to address the United Nations Security
Council. Spain is the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2007. I would also like to associate myself
with the statement made this morning by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the presidency
of the European Union.

As Council members may recall, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain,
Mr. Moratinos Cuyaube, had the opportunity of
speaking before the Security Council in his capacity as
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE on 28 September
2007, to inform the Council about the activities of the
Organization during 2007.

The OSCE, recognized as a regional organization
under Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter, is
the most inclusive security organization in Europe and
the largest regional security organization anywhere in
the world. It plays a significant role in support of the
Security Council, which retains the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The OSCE is well suited to play
this role.

Based on its ample membership, its concept of
multidimensional and cooperative security, its well
developed toolbox and its comprehensive body of
norms and commitments, the OSCE is an indispensable
forum for political and security dialogue. On a weekly
basis, through meetings in Vienna of the Permanent
Council and the Forum for Security Cooperation, 56
participating States from North America, Europe and
Eurasia come together to discuss issues of mutual
interest in the politico-military, economic and human
dimensions of security.

Thanks to its network of 19 missions in the field
in 17 countries and the professional work of its
secretariat and institutions, the OSCE provides
assistance to its participating States on a broad range of
issues, such as border management and security,
policing, combating terrorism, fighting trafficking in
human beings, protecting national minorities,
advancing democratization and human rights, elections
monitoring, ensuring media freedom, and promoting
economic development and environmental protection.

Over the years, the OSCE has contributed greatly
to the efforts of the United Nations in conflict
prevention and resolution, and peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations, as well as the settlement of
unresolved conflicts within its geographical area of
responsibility. In Georgia, the OSCE mission works to
defuse tension, promote negotiations, build confidence
and sustain reconstruction efforts in the zone of the
Georgia-Ossetia conflict. The mission also works to
support the United Nations-led peace process in the
Georgia-Abkhaz conflict, striving to foster a climate of
understanding and promote dialogue when incidents do
occur, as in the case of the missile incident of
6 August, and to find ways of avoiding future crises.

The Personal Representative of the OSCE
Chairman-in-Office and the Co-Chairs of the OSCE
Minsk Group remain committed to a peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, although
their efforts have not yet resulted in the desired
breakthrough. The OSCE mission to Moldova
continues to facilitate consultations aimed at a
sustainable political settlement of the Transdnistrian
conflict. In parallel, it works to support the
advancement of human rights and democratic
institutions. A recent visit to Moldova by Foreign
Minister Moratinos in his capacity as OSCE Chairman-
in-Office has triggered positive developments on both
sides of the Dniestr River. During follow-up
consultations to be held in Madrid on 13 November,
Mr. Moratinos will seek to build upon this progress.

In Kosovo, the OSCE mission works as an
integral part of the United Nations mission in the
framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
taking the lead in the areas of human rights and of
capacity- and institution-building. While we support
the efforts of the Security Council and the European
Union-United States-Russia troika to help facilitate a
just and lasting solution that advances the stability of
the region, our own mission is neutral, aimed at
improving the implementation of standards without
regard to the eventual shape of a political settlement.
This work remains vital to all of Kosovo's citizens and
will, we hope, not be lost in the current politically
charged climate. Furthermore, the OSCE actively
supports the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, in particular in the areas of combating
terrorism and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Our organization also facilitates the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.

The OSCE remains strongly committed to
continue providing assistance to the activities of the
Security Council and to strengthening cooperation with
the United Nations. In March 2006, OSCE member
States reiterated this readiness by adopting a
Declaration on Cooperation with the United Nations,
responding to the call by the United Nations for
strengthened cooperation with regional organizations,
as expressed in Security Council resolution 1631
(2005).

In this spirit, the OSCE acknowledges the great
value of the annual thematic debates between the
Security Council and regional organizations. These
debates offer a unique venue for the exchange of
views, information and experience-sharing, as well as
for exploring possibilities for enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
In the same vein, the OSCE very much welcomes
regular high-level meetings between the United
Nations Secretary-General and regional organizations.

We particularly appreciate the good practice of
inviting the OSCE Chairman-in-Offlce to deliver an
annual address to the Security Council. We hope this
will become a well established tradition to help the
Security Council to familiarize itself with the priorities
and activities of the OSCE. Annual United Nations-
OSCE staff-level meetings, as well as regular
participation of the United Nations representatives at
the OSCE regional heads of mission meetings, are also
very useful additional tools for turning political
commitment into practical cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations, in seeking to reach our
common goal of strengthened international peace and
security.

Each regional organization possesses its own
unique expertise, based on the mandates and tools at its
disposal. As such, each regional organization acts as an
invaluable partner to the United Nations and this
Security Council. Taking advantage of this opportunity,
with several other regional organizations gathered
around this table, I would also like to reaffirm the
OSCE's commitment to continue enhancing dialogue
with our 11 Mediterranean and Asian Partners for
Cooperation. In addition, acknowledging the potential
spill-over of security threats between adjacent regions,
our organization stands ready further to exchange
experiences and expertise with other regional
organizations, such as the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

Indeed, by strengthening dialogue and seeking
greater synergy, the United Nations and regional
organizations can widen the range of instruments to be
utilized in the common effort of strengthening
international peace and security.

