Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking our briefers. This is a very positive
moment, and therefore, I hope, a very positive meeting
of the Security Council. The people of the Sudan have
brought about unprecedented change through their
demands for a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
future. I congratulate not only the people of the Sudan
but also the African Union (AU) and the Government
of Ethiopia for their mediation efforts. The Council
welcomed those recent events in a press statement
on 21 August (SC/13927). I would reiterate today the
United Kingdom's support for the Sovereign Council
and its appointment of Mr. Abdalla Hamdok as
Prime Minister.

The 17 August agreement contains a number of
important commitments, such as a pledge to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms and a
commitment to accountability and justice, including
a commitment to establish a national independent
committee to investigate the violent acts committed on
3 June and other incidents of human rights violations
and abuses. We very much welcome those commitments
made by the Sudan and encourage all those with a
stake in the Sudan's future to ensure the timely and
full implementation of the agreement in order to make
the demands of the Sudanese people a reality. The
United Kingdom will, of course, support the new Prime
Minister and the new Government as best we can.

For decades, the Sudan has been plagued by internal
conflict. But, with the beginning of a new chapter in
the Sudan's history, we - and, more important, the
people of Darfur - can begin to feel a sense of hope
and optimism. The new Government has committed to
achieving a fair comprehensive and sustainable peace in
the Sudan and to prioritize the peace process, which we
very much welcome. We call on all sides, in particular
the armed movements, to engage constructively,
immediately and without preconditions in negotiations
to finally deliver a peaceful solution to the conflict
in Darfur.

Remaining on Darfur for a moment, I would note
that the United Kingdom remains one of the largest
humanitarian donors: over $100 million was given by the
United Kingdom last year for humanitarian assistance.
And there have been many humanitarian implications
of the conflict in Darfur. As the new Government works
to deliver peace, may I also request it to take immediate
steps to help address the humanitarian situation. In
particular, one very concrete step that could be taken
would be to ensure full access for those seeking to
provide support, through the removal of bureaucratic
impediments imposed by the previous Government on
humanitarian actors. I hope that is something that the
Sudan will be able to move quickly on.

The uncertainty in the Sudan during the mandate
renewal led, as we all know, to a pause in the transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding. When the Council
adopted resolution 2479 (2019), I said that there needed
to be meaningful progress on a number of fronts
before the transition could resume (see S/PV.8566).
The transition to a civilian-led Government has clearly
been agreed. We believe that it is extremely welcome
that there is now a legitimate partner for the United
Nations and the African Union to engage with on the
drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the transition
to peacebuilding. I would like to thank Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for some of his updates on some of the wider
issues. However, he talked of some reassurances given.
I would just like to ask Mr. Lacroix whether, at this
stage, the Rapid Support Forces have withdrawn from
the former UNAMID team sites so that they can be
used for civilian purposes or whether this is instead
something that is under discussion. It would be helpful
to know what the status of those former team sites is.

In addition to the genuine sustained commitment
of the new Government and the armed movements,
continued international efforts will clearly be required
in support of the new Government in tackling the
underlying causes of the conflict. May I say here that it
is good to hear about the joint visit proposed by Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui
and indeed the suggestion that there may be a further
spotlight on the issue during the high-level week.
We will therefore need to see, for example, political
support to the peace process, including implementation
and monitoring of future peace agreements. Continued
human rights monitoring and capacity-building
will clearly be required. There will also be a need
for humanitarian development support, particularly
for Darfur's almost 2 million internally displaced
persons. Such support may be best provided through a
continued United Nations-AU presence in Darfur after
UNAMID's closure. In that regard, we look forward to
the AU and the United Nations providing the Council
with options for a follow-on mechanism to UNAMID
in the upcoming special report at the end of September.
These options should be comprehensive and build
on the opportunity that this moment in the Sudan's
history represents.

Let me conclude by again welcoming the
positive developments under way in the Sudan, again
commending the people of the country for the incredible
transformation that they have undertaken and to say
that, after decades of conflict, poor governance, human
rights abuses and economic mismanagement, the new
Government has not only a momentous opportunity
but also a momentous task ahead of them. The United
Kingdom stands ready to work with the new Government
and the people of the Sudan as they seek that transition
to a peaceful, democratic and prosperous future.

