Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011) of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
11 December 2015 to 2 March 2016.

On 11 December, the Committee wrote to the
Permanent Representative of Libya, bringing to his
attention a recommendation, contained in the interim
report of the Panel of Experts, regarding the unity of
the National Oil Corporation and the neutrality of the
Central Bank of Libya.

On 21 December, the Committee responded to
a request for guidance from a Member State on the
implementation of the arms embargo as it relates to the
disposal of seized military materiel.

On 7 January 2016, the Committee issued its fourth
Implementation Assistance Notice to assist Member
States in their implementation of the travel ban in
relation to the Libya sanctions regime. As with the other
such notices that relate to the arms embargo and the
assets freeze, this notice can be found on the website of
the Committee in all official languages.

On 15 January, the Committee informed the
Permanent Representative of Libya about a forged
document, purporting to come from the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, and claiming the authorization of the
unfreezing of frozen assets owned by the Central Bank
of Libya. In this context, it is worth noting that the
Central Bank of Libya has not been subject to United
Nations sanctions since December 2011.

On 22 January, the Committee received a
notification under paragraph 19 (b) of resolution
1970 (2011) in relation to the assets freeze measure,
which was subsequently put on hold by a member of
the Committee.

On 22 February, the Committee approved a request
for extension of a travel ban exemption for an additional
six months. Let me note in this connection that more
information on granted travel ban exemptions can be
found on the website of the Committee.

Lastly, on 29 January the Committee received the
final report of the Panel of Experts, in accordance with
resolution 2213 (2015). The Committee will discuss
it and its recommendations in informal consultations
tomorrow, 3 March. Via a letter dated 9 February,
the Committee has also invited the Permanent
Representative of Libya, or members of his delegation,
to read the report in the offices of the Secretariat after
the discussion in the Committee.

