I would like to thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines echoes the appeal for a complete, immediate and nationwide ceasefire in Syria. The agreement of 5 March to address hostilities in the north-west was a welcome development, and we are pleased that it broadly continues to hold. However, we recognize that it is fragile and that a nationwide ceasefire is critical now more than ever. Indeed, a total cessation of hostilities is vital for the creation a safe and stable environment, which will help to further the political process. That is also the only way to truly enable Syria to effectively fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We are pleased to hear that, thus far, the number of COVID-19 infections across the regions is low. The political process is a complex one that requires dedication, mutual respect and compromise from all parties. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its support for the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy in the wider political process. Continued engagement with the parties will only serve to advance that process. We particularly appreciate the steps taken to consult with women's civil society organizations to ensure their meaningful participation. It is well known that women's participation in conflict prevention and resolution can improve outcomes before, during and after conflict. The inclusion of women will undoubtedly lead to more constructive and equitable outcomes for all. We look forward to the convening of the third round of talks of the Constitutional Committee. It is commendable that the parties have reached an agreement on the agenda, and we urge all to continue to cooperate for the benefit of the Syrian people. Confidence-building measures are necessary to restore trust, promote active participation and contribute to the viability of the wider political process, as emphasized in resolution 2254 (2015). In that vein, we reiterate that the question of arbitrarily detained and missing persons ought to be addressed. It is essential that the Council support efforts aimed at realizing the goals of the resolution. We must also remain mindful that our actions must respect Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Syria will not know peace through military action. Only through a credible, balanced and inclusive political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people can lasting peace and stability be achieved.
