Mr. O'Toole (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's important debate. At the outset,
I would like to thank Mr. Graeme Simpson and the
Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, as well as the representatives of the
FRIDA Young Feminist Fund and the Organisation
URU for their valuable briefings.

Ireland also aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.

In 2015, Jordan took the far-sighted step of putting
the issue ofyouth on the agenda ofthe Security Council.
The adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) was a landmark
moment for the inclusion of youth and the recognition
of their capacity to be change-makers and to contribute
positively to sustaining peace.

Ireland was proud to provide funding to the
progress study on resolution 2250 (2015), presented to
the Council today by Mr. Simpson (see S/2018/86). We
are particularly impressed by the thorough consultative
process undertaken in conducting the study. In line with
the recommendations made in the progress study, Ireland
calls for the Secretary-General to report annually to the
Security Council on the implementation of resolution
2250 (2015). Ireland also thinks that it would be useful
for a Council focal point on youth, peace and security
to be appointed in order to mainstream the issue across
the Council's agenda.

Ireland urges States not to treat the youth, peace
and security agenda as a new silo. This agenda has
obvious synergies with the women, peace and security
agenda and resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
Sustainable Development Goals and the human rights
agenda. As Chair of the Commission on the Status of
Women at its sixty-second session, Ireland was pleased
to see the agreed conclusions outline the role of youth-
led organizations in strengthening the collective voice
of women and girls. That is important as we work to
challenge the perception of young women as passive
victims of conflict.

The youth, peace and security agenda is also
an important component of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. The progress study makes
important recommendations about the role of youth in
conflict prevention and in sustaining peace. While it is
true that young men can be vulnerable to radicalization,
young people can also play a positive role in preventing
conflict and countering terrorism. Ireland urges States
to really consider the recommendations made in the
progress study in order to move beyond mere lip service
about youth. We do not need to give young people a
voice - they already have one. It is up to States to
empower their inclusion in peacebuilding processes.

Recently, Ireland marked the twentieth anniversary
of the Good Friday Agreement, the touchstone of the
peace process in Northern Ireland. We know all too
well how the trauma of conflict can pass down through
generations. The youth, peace and security agenda
is therefore a core issue for Ireland. In 2015, Ireland
established a United Nations youth delegate programme,
whereby two youth delegates are appointed annually
to participate in the General Assembly session. Our
youth delegates have carried out a survey of young
people in Ireland, which found that while young people
recognized the value of fostering peace worldwide, they
continued to feel marginalized from discussions around
such processes. Our youth delegates noted that there
were many conversations about young people, rather
than with young people. That echoes the comments
made in the progress study that young people should
not be on the table, but around the table. Ireland's youth
delegates encourage Member States to adopt similar
youth delegate programmes and to include young
people in their delegations to the General Assembly.

When we discuss the women, peace and security
agenda here at the United Nations, we often say
that sustainable peace is not possible when half
the population of a society - that is, women - are
excluded. That is also true of youth. Sustainable peace
simply cannot exist without the meaningful inclusion of
young people. They are not the future or the leaders of
tomorrow. Young people are the present and the leaders
of today.
