Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to do
the pleasant part of my job, namely, to thank you on
behalf of my delegation, Mr. President, for your
excellent initiative to convene this public meeting of
the Security Council to debate the matter of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
violation of its national sovereignty.

Before I continue, I would also like to pay solemn
and well-deserved tribute to the outgoing members of
the Security Council. I extend to them the gratitude of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the tireless
effort they have always exerted in pursuit of peace in
my country. I would like to ask those friendly countries
leaving the Council at the end of this year to continue
to work to promote peace and international security
through other United Nations bodies and through other
forums, not only throughout the world but, in
particular, on behalf of the countries and peoples of the
Great Lakes region that have been victims of the
murderous folly of some States.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Spain, Germany, Chile, Pakistan and, last
but not least, Angola, a neighbouring fraternal and
friendly country with which we have a long and rich
history. I commend those countries on their election to
the Security Council.

The Security Council has before it the final report
of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in violation of its
national sovereignty. The Council also has before it
two documents submitted by my country, namely, the
addendum to the Government's memorandum on this
question and a summary of that addendum. Those last
two documents are clear and specific, and therefore
require no comment on our part. I would, however, like
to invite all members of the Council and Member
States of the United Nations to read those documents,
so that they may become more familiar with the reality
of the pillage of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, taking place in violation of its
national sovereignty, as well as to be able to assess the
gravity and scope of that sad phenomenon.

I would also like to thank the President for
agreeing to our request to distribute those two national
reports as official documents of the Security Council in
order that all Member States of the Organization may
be informed. These national reports, in addition to
being more thorough and specific, also complement
both the content of, and the recommendations made
through, the outstanding work of the Panel of Experts.

Our consideration of the final report of the Panel
of Experts is taking place at a time in the armed
aggression when real prospects for peace are
foreseeable, in particular in light of the signing of the
Pretoria and Luanda peace agreements pertaining to my
country and the initiatives to conclude a separate
agreement with Burundi. Those prospects, which
represent a turning point, have established a new
dynamic that makes it possible to look to the future and
serves to encourage the hope of the people of the Great
Lakes region for a peace dividend. That is the merit of
the policy of peace and openness followed by Major-
General Joseph Kabila, President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who has declared 2002 the year
of peace and reconciliation, a year whose major goal is
to achieve national harmony and reunification in the
country.

Having made this brief introduction, I shall now
focus on the following issues: the principal conclusion
of the Panel of Experts at all three phases of their
work, the need to defend the rights connected with the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the recommendations made by the Panel of
Experts.

Concerning the principal conclusion of the Panel
of Experts, I would note that at all three stages of its
work it highlighted the direct causal link between the
illegal exploitation of natural resources of my country
and the pursuit of armed aggression.

We commend the Panel of Experts for the
relevant observations on this subject and are grateful to
them for having the courage, in paragraphs 65 and 66
of the final report, to at least break the myth of
fallacious security preoccupations advanced by
Rwanda and to show that the presence of the Rwandan
occupier is dictated instead by a desire to pursue
criminal activities in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which they are carrying out in close connection
with their compatriots, that is, the authors of the
genocide, the ex-FAR and Interahamwe, though they
have been demonized and are supposed to be tracked
down by Kigali.

I draw the Council's attention to the testimony of
the Panel of Experts where, contrary to the information
received as to the ostentatious departure of the last
Rwandan soldiers from the Congolese territory, only
part of the regular army troops have in fact withdrawn,
upon pressure from the international community. There
are still large numbers of troops on the Congolese
national soil, for example, in Kisangani, Goma and
other cities in the provinces of Kivu, where they have
traded the Rwandan military uniform for that of
Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD-Goma).

We therefore thank the Panel of Experts, but also
the Security Council for exposing the trickery in its
latest statement on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These are the same tricks that
are at the origin of tragedy we are seeing now in Ituri
and which are the pretext for occupying the city of
Kisangani, which still has not been demilitarized by the
occupying forces, in violation of Council resolution
1304 (2000).

My delegation highlights these two examples,
Ituri and Kisangani, to illustrate the fact that these are
two extremely revealing cases of unbridled,
unpunished, systematic pillaging of natural resources
and other forms of wealth from the soil and sub-soil of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At Kisangani
this pillaging has remained the same, while in Ituri it
has taken on other aspects but maintains the basic
operating premise.

I welcome the final report now under
consideration because it describes the massive training
by the Ugandan armed forces in that region of young
people for the purpose of perpetuating the disorder
once their troops have left, in order to justify keeping
them in Congolese territory and perpetuating the
pillaging.

At the beginning of this month, the Tanzanian
authorities intercepted a cargo of 36 tons of coltan,
which Rwanda intended to ship through the port of Dar
es Salaam. This is tangible evidence that some Mafia
networks have not been dismantled, on the contrary.
The final report of the Panel of Experts is very
eloquent on the subtle change of tactics on the part of
the aggressors, who are maintaining in place criminal
networks that are fully devoted to them.

The report shows once again that this pillaging of
the soil and sub-soil of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a major element of the conflict: it is a large-
scale, illegal exploitation, systematic and systemic,
which accounts for, feeds and perpetuates the armed
aggression and occupation of the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for purely
mercantile reasons.
The final report itself is very eloquent in terms of
the criminalization of the economies in the Great Lakes
region and on the emergence of important parallel
economies. Large sectors of the economies are outside
the control of the State. The different conflicts that
have developed have given rise to criminal alliances
between weapon merchants, private companies and
some representatives of the public authorities of the
aggressor countries. It is obvious that these groups, for
different reasons, have one common interest in
maintaining the dynamics of war. This interest takes
the form of the quest for riches, both for individuals
and for the State oligarchies. Current events in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
show more and more clearly that the economic
dimension of the war of aggression remains the
determining factor.

So it is this frantic search for profit in the
systematic exploitation of the wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo which must be the starting point
of the Council's reflection if it wishes to take effective
action.

Concerning the rights connected with the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
my delegation believes that the natural resources and
other forms of wealth of the country must first and
foremost benefit its people. The Congolese people are
the main victim of these criminal activities. Justice
must be done. Thus, to put an end to this shameful
pillaging, it is important for the Council to follow up
on the whole set of recommendations made by the
Panel of Experts, from its first report, in document
S/2001/357, to the final one being considered today,
which are inextricably linked.

Thus, my Government first reiterates its request
for the implementation of all the recommendations by
the Panel of Experts, including those contained in the
first report, in particular the following.

First, the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) must be accelerated, because
only a full and final withdrawal of the aggressors will
be such as to guarantee the cessation of the pillaging of
the natural resources of the country. Secondly, there
must be an effective demilitarization of Kisangani,
reparations for property damage in the city and
compensation for its population, in accordance with
Council resolution 1304 (2000). Thirdly, with regard to
the party which refuses to demilitarize Kisangani, as
well as the country supporting that party, all measures
which could be imposed on them must be applied, in
conformity with the responsibilities and obligations,
that the United Nations Charter confers on the Security
Council.

Fourthly, there must be recognition of the serious
moral, material and physical harm that the Congolese
people are suffering as a result of this war and the
criminal activities it has engendered. Fifthly, the
reparation and compensation consistent with this harm
must be set up in order to restore the rights of the
Congolese people. Finally, judicial proceedings against
the authors of these events and their co-authors and
accomplices must be ordered. These demands are fully
legitimate and topical.

Before even planning to study the
recommendations in the final report, the Council
should examine its own conscience and tell us what has
been accomplished regarding the recommendations of
the first report. My delegation is deeply concerned
here. We remain convinced that any action which might
have been taken by the Council to implement one or a
number of recommendations in the first report of the
Panel of Experts would have had a deterrent effect.
Unfortunately, one must note that that was not the case.

As the Panel of Experts has rightly pointed out, in
paragraph 96 of its report, this war has caused the
death of more than 3.5 million Congolese since it was
triggered in September 1998, and it goes on to say that
these deaths are a direct result of the occupation of the
country by Rwanda and Uganda. In addition to human
loss of life, criminal pillaging activities, which have
gone on thanks to the war, have brought social
economic losses which will have incalculable
consequences for present and future Congolese
generations.

The final report by the Panel of Experts contains
a certain number of recommendations. My delegation
agrees with most of them. The recommendation having
to do with an international conference on peace,
security, democracy and development in the Great
Lakes region under the auspices of the United Nations
and the African Union merits the Council's urgent
attention.

We agree with the Panel of Experts that we must
take advantage of the peace prospects which offer us
the opportunity to organize this conference in the next
few months. This is an opportunity that we must not
miss, for the conference without doubt is the
appropriate regional framework for seeking
comprehensive solutions to the conflicts and the
endemic instability that are tearing up the countries in
the region. Organizing this conference should be a
priority of priorities for the Security Council and the
Secretary-General.

We also agree with the Panel of Experts that it is
necessary to increase the United Nations monitoring
capacity. The Council should pursue its consideration
of such a mechanism. My Government is open to any
suggestion, but we insist that the terms of reference for
a monitoring body to be created by the Security
Council be established with the Congolese
Government's approval and in respect of the
prerogatives of its national sovereignty, as guaranteed
by the United Nations Charter and the Constitutive Act
of the African Union.

If necessary, the Council might consider
establishing a national monitoring commission that
would enjoy adequate assistance from the United
Nations and the international community through the
national expertise of Congolese working in the United
Nations system and the international expertise of
foreign advisers or international civil servants.

As regards the recommendations concerning
peace dividends, my Government shares the Security
Council's view that the peace processes in the Great
Lakes region must yield peace dividends for our
peoples, particularly those of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi, who have suffered the worst
of the region's turbulence. However, making it a
prerequisite in favour of the aggressor countries would
be asking the international community to bow to the
diktat of State terrorism and to reward aggression. It
would be an unfortunate precedent. We must rather
exert pressure, including through the suspension of all
forms of economic assistance, until the effective and
certified withdrawal of the troops of aggression from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We must also place an embargo on them with respect to
transit and the sale of my country's natural resources.

As to environmental destruction, my Government
is requesting the assistance of the United Nations
system in order to rehabilitate our ecosystem and to
protect vanishing species, such as the okapi, the gorilla
and the white rhinoceros that are symbols of pride in
my country.

My Government recalls the relevant provisions of
article 91 of Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions,
which directs that

"A Party to the conflict which violates the
provisions of the Conventions or of this Protocol
shall, if the case demands, be liable to pay
compensation. It shall be responsible for all acts
committed by persons forming part of its armed
forces."

The Geneva Conventions also hold that the occupying
party shall be held responsible for all damage in the
area under occupation. My Government would recall
that, in similar situations, the international community,
through the Security Council or other United Nations
organs, has taken steps to redress the harm suffered by
the peoples of such States under foreign occupation.

The question of impunity and of reparations due
to the Congolese people is of the highest importance.
To that end, my Government would request the
Security Council to begin considering the
establishment of an ad hoc international criminal court
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo to judge and
convict those who are guilty of crimes against
humanity in our country and to punish them and obtain
compensation for all the harm done to the Congolese
people.

My delegation is grateful to the Panel of Experts
and to the Security Council for recalling, in all of its
relevant resolutions on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the need to preserve the
national sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of my country. In this respect, my
Government believes that it was within its legitimate
rights to take all necessary measures to meet the armed
aggression in accordance with Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, including seeking assistance from the
States members of the Southern Africa Development
Community by invoking their natural right to collective
and individual self-defence. I need hardly recall that
the aggression was ruled illegal by the international
community.

Indeed, had Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe not
come to our salvation, and had all the ethnic groups of
the Congolese people not clearly expressed their will to
remain united and to exercise their self-determination
as citizens of one and the same country, our country
would at this moment be under the Rwandese yoke,
with all its unpleasant consequences. Those friendly
countries and the Congolese people have paid the price
of blood for the survival of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and we are grateful to them.

My Government notes, however, that since the
issuance of the addendum and the final report, there
seems to be a desire to attack Zimbabwe for reasons
that are well known. In this respect, it would be unwise
to equate my country with the political-military entities
created in the wake of the aggressor army. That would
represent a misunderstanding of the reality of the
situation, which is that of a sovereign country
aggressed by its neighbours. In other words, the victim,
bowed under the yoke of the oppressors, cannot be
placed on an equal footing with them and their
proteges.

My Government believes that condemning the
initiatives that allowed us to defend our national
sovereignty would be tantamount to forcing us to
renounce the fundamental rights and duties of every
Government to defend the sovereignty and integrity of
its country by all means possible.

With a View to transparency, and out of respect
for the will of the Congolese people expressed at the
national dialogue in Sun City, South Africa, we have
adopted a resolution on the creation of an ad hoc
commission to consider the validity of agreements that
could serve as the framework for the reconsideration of
certain contracts and concessions signed during the
war.

My delegation further notes a contradiction
between the excellent analysis of the Panel of Experts
and some of its recommendations, particularly those
banning travel for certain individuals or freezing their
assets. We note that a list of those persons or of the
names of the major culprits, whose actions were set out
in the first and the final reports, is strangely missing, in
particular those of the two major Rwandese and
Ugandan sponsors, identified as such by the Panel of
Experts.

More specifically, with respect to the accusations
made against certain members of the Congolese
executive, my Government would make the following
observations. The incrimination of officials acting in
their official capacity arises from the public mandate
they assume on behalf and to the benefit of the
Congolese people. Thus, it must be recalled that, with
respect to the legal system of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which is a State of law, any abuse or
misuse of power, by whomsoever committed, is
punishable by the courts and tribunals. Moreover, a
national anti-fraud and anti-corruption commission has
been established in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by presidential decree.

By way of example, I would point out that the
Government has launched a clean-up of the economic
environment, including through an official complaint
lodged by the Ministry of Mines against the Minerals
Business Company for non-conformity with the laws of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This company
is identified by the Panel of Experts, in paragraph 57 of
document S/2002/ll46, as having evaded the law in
order to despoil the Congo of its resources in areas
under Government control. The activities of that
company have been suspended by the Government.

The Congolese State remains sovereign and
therefore enjoys all the prerogatives of effective
governance. Thus, all the resolutions of the Security
Council on the war in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, beginning with resolution 1234 (1999) of 9
April 1999, have reaffirmed the territorial integrity,
political independence and sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including over its
natural resources.

Under the provisions of conventions, custom and
even jurisprudence, international law recognizes that
every Government, including that of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, has the right to use its own
discretion in exercise of the full prerogatives of the
State over its territory, its natural resources and its
economic activities. Given all this, the actions of
members of the Government are valid under
international law and cannot, without prejudice to the
principle of sovereignty, be equated with those of the
aggressors and insurgents.

I cannot conclude without conveying my deep
thanks to the international community as a whole,
which, convinced that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been a victim of aggression, is now fully
committed to seeking a lasting solution. The
international community should now make manifest its
deepest and most concrete commitment to the
settlement of this war of aggression, particularly
through the renewal of MONUC's mandate and its
swift deployment in the areas of ongoing tension.

We appreciate the praiseworthy efforts of the
Secretary-General; the Security Council;
Mr. Moustapha Niasse, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General; and of MONUC, under the
leadership of Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi. We
commend the devotion of the civilian and military
staff, who are all committed to the return of normalcy
and lasting peace in my country and the Great Lakes
region.

Finally, I commend the Panel of Experts headed
by Ambassador Kassem on its report, which establishes
objectively, on one hand, the link that exists between
the armed aggression that has victimized the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the illegal
exploitation of its resources and, on the other hand, the
parallel between this conflict and the pursuit of an
occupation in whose shadow one of the greatest
economic plunderings the African continent has ever
seen is being carried out.

