Mr. Pascoe: We are in the midst of a delicate
period that will determine whether a resumption of
Israeli-Palestinian peace talks is possible. The
continued diplomatic impasse since the moratorium on
settlement construction ended on 26 September is
worrying. We believe that a return to talks is crucially
important. Efforts are continuing to bring the parties
back to the negotiating table. Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu met with United States Secretary of State
Clinton on 11 November. Discussions between the
United States and the parties are ongoing.

There have also been consultations in the region
to support those efforts. The League of Arab States
Follow-up Committee of the Arab Peace Initiative
deferred its meeting agreed upon in Sirte to allow more
time for diplomatic efforts. Senior Egyptian
interlocutors met with President Abbas in Ramallah on
29 October, and subsequently with Prime Minister
Netanyahu on 5 November. On 20 November,
President Abbas met with President Mubarak in Cairo
and with League of Arab States Secretary-General Amr
Moussa for discussions. United States efforts to re-start
negotiations have reached a critical phase. It is
essential that the parties engage seriously and make
substantive progress quickly once the talks resume,
with a view to resolving all permanent status issues.
2

Quartet envoys have been in regular contact. We
support a Quartet meeting soon to help move the
process forward.

There has been significant construction in a
number of settlements since the expiry of the partial
settlement moratorium. There have also been
announcements of plans to construct 1,300 settlement
units in the Har Homa settlement in East Jerusalem,
32 units in the East Jerusalem settlement of Pisgat
Ze'ev, as part of a plan to expand it by a further
220 units, and a further 800 units in the Ariel
settlement, deep inside the West Bank. In his letter
(S/2010/578) of 10 November to the President of the
Security Council, the Permanent Observer of Palestine
raised concerns about the impact of this renewed
settlement activity on the prospects for talks.

The Secretary-General expressed his concern
about these developments to Prime Minister Netanyahu
when they met in New York on 8 November. We call
on Israel to fulfil its Road Map obligation to freeze
illegal settlement construction and not to implement
plans for additional settlement units. In its
21 September statement, the Quartet recalled that
unilateral actions taken by either party cannot prejudge
the outcome of negotiations and will not be recognized
by the international community. Previously, the Quartet
had also reiterated that the annexation of East
Jerusalem is not recognized by the international
community and that the status of Jerusalem is a
permanent status issue that must be resolved through
negotiations between the parties.

The Palestinian Authority's State-building agenda
continues to advance steadily, in accordance with
Prime Minister Fayyad's strategy. However, the
strategy requires adequate and sustainable financial
backing. The recent and welcome support from donors
has improved the Palestinian Authority's liquidity
situation over the past month. However, the United
Nations urges Member States to find additional
resources to address outstanding shortfalls.

During the reporting period there was a decline in
the number of violent incidents recorded in the West
Bank. Palestinian security forces continued to maintain
law and order and to fight extremism in accordance
with Palestinian Road Map obligations. Security forces
uncovered a significant arms cache in Ramallah on
22 October. A number of militants were also arrested
during the reporting period, including a leader of
10-64824
Islamic Jihad. A cell of Hamas militants was arrested
by Palestinian security forces in Ramallah on
17 November.

International efforts to improve the capacity and
strength of Palestinian security forces continue. A sixth
battalion of Palestinian national security forces
completed its training in Jordan on 10 November and
will soon be deployed in the West Bank.

During the reporting period, Israeli security
forces conducted 371 operations in the West Bank, in
which 87 Palestinians were injured and 211 arrested,
While four Israeli security personnel were injured.
Those detained by Israel included Palestinians in
possession of arms and members of the Hamas political
wing, including the Secretary of the Palestinian
Legislative Council.

There were 15 attacks by Palestinians on Israeli
settlers, which resulted in injuries to four Israelis. On
30 October, shots were fired at an Israeli vehicle
travelling near the village of Al-Walaja, north-west of
Bethlehem.

The olive harvesting season took place during the
reporting period. Attacks by Israeli settlers, including
arson, the uprooting of thousands of olive trees
belonging to Palestinians, vandalism and theft of
agricultural equipment and crops, were reported on an
almost daily basis, and in greater numbers than in the
two previous olive harvests. On 22 October, Israeli
settlers desecrated a Palestinian cemetery on the
outskirts of the West Bank village of Kfar Kadum.
There were 29 attacks by Israeli settlers against
Palestinians or their property, in which 14 Palestinians
were injured.

The construction on the barrier continues, with
deviations from the Green Line in contravention of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
The number of obstacles to movement in the West
Bank has remained constant in recent months, at
approximately 508.

While recognizing the Israeli Government's
legitimate security concerns, it is important that
international organizations and their staff are given
greater access to the West Bank, East Jerusalem and
Gaza to implement effectively their assistance projects.
In that regard, we are concerned that there may be
deterioration in access between East Jerusalem and the
rest of the West Bank as a result of the proposed
changes to the administration of the crossings.

In East Jerusalem, the situation in the Silwan
neighbourhood, adjacent to the Old City, is tense.
There have been continued confrontations between
settlers and Palestinian residents. On 25 October,
eviction orders were handed out to eight families living
in Silwan. That led to violent clashes in which a
Palestinian child was seriously injured by a rubber
bullet.

The humanitarian community finalized its
consolidated appeal for 2011, in full consultation with
the Palestinian Authority. The appeal, which will be
presented in Brussels on 30 November, articulates
specific humanitarian strategies to address critical
needs in Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. We urge generous donors to support the
consolidated appeal fully in order to prevent further
deterioration in living conditions, especially in areas
beyond Palestinian Authority control. Residents in
Gaza and Area C of the West Bank remain among the
most vulnerable.

I shall now turn to the situation in Gaza. During
the reporting period, Palestinian militant groups fired
eight rockets, including two Grad rockets, and
41 mortars from Gaza into Israel. Israeli security forces
conducted 10 air strikes and 23 incursions into the
Strip. Four Palestinian militants were killed, including
three who died in targeted killings carried out by
Israeli security forces. Without prejudice to Israel's
right to legitimate and proportionate self-defence, we
reiterate our consistent opposition to extra-judicial
killing. Twenty civilians were injured during the
reporting period, 12 of whom were injured collecting
rubble in the restricted area along the perimeter fence.
Three Palestinians died in accidents while working in
smuggling tunnels. In a worrying escalation,
Palestinian militant groups fired four phosphorus
mortar shells into Israel on 19 November. Israel
subsequently conducted three air strikes against tunnels
along the Rafah crossing and a militant training facility.
We continue to condemn rocket fire, which
indiscriminately endangers civilians, and which must
cease. We urge all parties to show calm and restraint
and respect international humanitarian law.

On 21 October, a large explosion near Rafah
resulted in more than 12 injured Palestinian civilians
and extensive material damage. Hamas subsequently
admitted that the explosion was an accident that took
place inside a training facility for its militants. On
10 November, a land-to-sea missile was test-fired by
Palestinian militants over a densely populated
Palestinian neighbourhood of Gaza. I reiterate my deep
concern about all armed activity that puts civilians in
danger or is aimed at civilian populations.

The priority of the United Nations remains the
rebuilding of a viable Gazan economy in the
framework of the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). That will take time,
but there are a range of important steps that can begin
the process, namely, the resumption of exports, the free
movement of people into and out of Gaza and the
return of the Palestinian Authority to the crossings. All
of these represent achievable steps that are
fundamental to Gaza's long-term recovery. Access to
agricultural land along the Gaza border and to fishing
areas, which are currently prohibited, are important
elements for economic recovery, together with revival
of the construction industry, with multiplier effects
across all sectors.

The Israeli Government's 20 June decision on
Gaza was a welcome and positive step, but it has not
yet been fully translated into practice. The United
Nations continues to work both to expand the flow of
its reconstruction work in the Gaza Strip and to
increase that work's pace of implementation. Both the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) have now received
written Israeli approval for the implementation of
programmes of work worth approximately $80 million.
However, approval and implementation procedures
remain slow and bureaucratic. Capacity at the
crossings is critical. As noted in the last Security
Council briefing (see S/PV.6404), the United Nations
remains concerned about capacity at the Karni crossing
for the entry of aggregate and essential wheat grain.
We call on Israel to facilitate the timely entry of
construction materials for the implementation of
approved United Nations work and to allow the
Organization's agencies to continue to expand the flow
of reconstruction in the Gaza Strip.

During this reporting period there was an increase
in the weekly number of truckloads entering the Gaza
Strip, to 1,026, up from 940 in the previous reporting
period, and from 566 in June, before the announcement
of the new Israeli measures. However, the total number
is still short of the 2,800 that were entering Gaza
weekly in June 2007.

The water and sanitation situation in Gaza
remains dire. Funding amounting to $15 million has
been secured for the UNDP Khan Younis wastewater
project, which was approved in March. I appeal to
donors to assist in funding the outstanding $40 million
needed for the project to be implemented.

The Rafah crossing continues to remain open for
humanitarian passage to Egypt. I note that there was
good cooperation between all of the relevant bodies in
enabling the departure of pilgrims from Gaza for the
annual hajj to Mecca.

Representatives of Fatah and Hamas met in
Damascus on 9 November for further discussions on
Palestinian reconciliation. Reports indicate that the
meeting was inconclusive. We continue to support
efforts to advance Palestinian reconciliation Within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority and
the commitments of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

The date of 11 November marked 1,600 days
since the capture of Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit.
We reiterate our call for his immediate release.
Humanitarian access to him should be granted without
conditions. There has been no apparent progress on the
efforts to complete a prisoner exchange for some of the
9,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails.

The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan has
remained stable, although settlement activity continues.
On 2 November, the Israeli Government encouraged
further settlement activity through the announcement
of an initiative to give 140 one-dunum plots of land
free to Israeli settlers in order to build further units.
Also, legislation was passed yesterday in the Knesset
requiring a two-thirds majority or, failing that, a
national referendum to approve the return of any
occupied territory in East Jerusalem or the Syrian
Golan in the context of any political settlement.

I will not cover the situation in Lebanon in this
briefing, as it was addressed in the Council in detail
last week by the Special Coordinator for Lebanon,
Mr. Michael Williams, and Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations Atul Khare, when they
presented the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2010/565) on the state of implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
10-64824

In the period ahead, we must work to bring about
a return to direct talks between the parties and to
support an atmosphere on the ground conducive to
quick and concrete progress in those talks, including a
freeze on settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas must show vision and leadership, rise
above their domestic constraints and seize this
opportunity to secure a historic and lasting peace. The
Secretary-General remains committed to working with
the parties and his international partners for an end to
the occupation that began in 1967, for the
10-64824
establishment of a Palestinian State living side by side
in peace and security with Israel and for a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

