Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation to the United
Kingdom for organizing today's open debate on
conflict prevention. I also join those who spoke before
me in thanking the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
comprehensive briefings on today's important topic.

In line with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council has the mandate to anticipate
and prevent conflicts pursuant to Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. However, much of the
Council's efforts over the past decades have been
reactive - addressing crisis situations after they
escalate into full-blown conflicts.

Obviously, a failure to act early enough to respond
to conflict situations not only costs the lives of innocent
civilians and results in forced displacement of people
but also wreaks enormous havoc and destruction. That
is clearly demonstrated in, for example, the recent
conflicts in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, to name just two. Over and above that,
however, conflict management and resolution has been
a very expensive undertaking, consuming an enormous
amount of time, energy and resources.

As has been repeatedly mentioned, prevention is
not only better than cure, but it is also less expensive
and averts suffering and destruction. In the light of that
fact, it is critical that more attention be given to the
anticipation and prevention of conflicts. Accordingly,
the Security Council should be much more proactive in
the area of conflict prevention through the utilization of
all the preventive diplomacy tools at its disposal. That
includes, inter alia, the timely and effective utilization
of early warning signals to provide a rapid response to
crises and conflict situations. In that regard, ensuring
synergy and complementarity among the different
prevention and early-warning mechanisms within
the United Nations system is critical to providing the
Council with thorough analysis of conflict trends in a
coherent manner.

In order to enhance its role in the area of conflict
prevention, the Council should act with flexibility in
providing an early and effective response based on
early warning signals in potential crisis and conflict
situations. As clearly indicated in the concept note
(S/2014/572, annex), that has indeed been a challenge
for the Council, which makes obvious the need for
Council to reflect on and draw valuable lessons from
its past experiences with a view to improving its
performance in the future. Moreover, the Council
needs to have closer coordination and complementarity
of efforts with regional organizations and mechanisms
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Since regional organizations and
mechanisms are closer to potential crisis and conflict
situations, they could be instrumental in providing an
early and effective response.

Finally, we believe that today's open debate
builds upon the series of previous meetings that have
taken place on this important topic and contributes to
enhancing the role of the Security Council in the area
of conflict prevention. In the light of changing conflict
dynamics, we believe that is not a matter of choice but
one of necessity.

