Mr. Wolff (United States of America): At the
outset, I would like to thank Iraqi Vice-President Abdal
Mahdi for attending this meeting. His presence in this
Chamber underscores the Iraqi Government's clear
international engagement on behalf of its people.
Likewise, I would like to welcome back Special
Representative Qazi.

As requested by the Security Council in its
resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637 (2005) and 1723 (2006),
I am pleased to report on behalf of the Multinational
Force in Iraq (MNF-I) regarding the Force's progress
towards fulfilling its mandate.

Despite the sobering scale of the violent attacks,
the Iraqi Government and people continue to pursue
their political and economic development and security
goals. Towards that end, some important steps have
been taken since the start of the year.

On 23 January, the Council of Representatives
passed a law that established the Independent Higher
Election Commission. The establishment of the
Commission is a key step in preparing for Iraqi
provincial elections. On 26 February, the Council of
Ministers approved the draft hydrocarbon law; its
passage by the Council of Representatives, together
with complementary legislation, will ensure the
national control and equitable distribution of Iraq's oil
wealth.

During the United Nations-hosted International
Compact meeting tomorrow, the final Compact
document will be shared with members of the
international community. The Compact is a key
component of Iraq's efforts to complete its transition to
financial self-sufficiency and integration into the
regional and global economy. Active participation by
regional and global partners in the International
Compact with Iraq will be critical to assisting Iraq's
development efforts.

Although progress has been made on the electoral
and economic fronts, overall violence and the resulting
instability continue. In response to the ongoing attacks
in Baghdad, Prime Minister Maliki announced in
January - and the Council of Representatives
approved - the Baghdad security plan to renew the
efforts of the Iraqi security forces to lead operations
and secure Baghdad from insurgents and militias. The
plan includes a commitment of elements of nine
additional Iraqi army battalions to the operation.
Announcing a new way forward on 10 January, United
States President Bush committed an additional 21,500
United States troops to the Iraqi-led effort, with 4,400
committed in early March. While we must be cautious
about drawing conclusions regarding results of the new
Baghdad security plan, there has been a decrease in
violence in the Iraqi capital since the number of Iraqi
security forces there was increased.

Lasting stability in Iraq requires more than a
security element, and the Baghdad security plan
includes increased economic, political and
reconstruction efforts to improve the Government's
ability to meet the needs of its people and assist with
security. The Iraqi Government will spend $10 billion
on infrastructure and reconstruction projects, creating
jobs for the Iraqi people. The United States and other
Governments have announced assistance plans to
support Iraq's reform and development.

Assistance is also needed to address Iraq's grave
humanitarian situation. In addition to the daily
suffering of Iraq's population owing to the ongoing
violence, approximately 2 million Iraqis have fled the
country and another 1.7 million persons have been
internally displaced. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees launched a $60 million
appeal to fund its work over the next year to assist that
vulnerable population.

The insurgents, extremists and terrorists remain
capable of and intent on carrying out attacks against
Iraqi civilians, officials and security forces. The three-
month period marks a continuation of violence in the
country, although there has been a downturn recently in
Baghdad violence, as I noted earlier.

Al-Qaida continues to focus its attacks in order to
destabilize the Iraqi Government and force the
withdrawal of the MNF-I. As was the case during the
previous reporting period, much of the violence is
attributable to sectarian motives, including hostility
among factions within sects. More than 80 per cent of
the violence observed by MNF-I troops is limited to
four provinces - Baghdad, Anbar, Salah ad-Din and
Diyala - and to within 30 miles of the Iraqi capital
itself. However, such violence also occurs in other
population centres, such as Kirkuk, Mosul and Basra.
07-27094

Iraqi civilians and the Iraqi security forces suffer
the majority of the casualties. Attacks - such as the
3 February truck bomb in the centre of Baghdad that
killed 105 civilians and wounded 251 and the 6 March
attacks in Hillah that killed over 100 people and
injured more than 150 - continue in an effort to
intimidate and demoralize the Iraqi people and
destabilize the country.

Infrastructure attacks have decreased, going down
from over four per week in 2005 and early 2006 to an
average of one per week more recently. Yet weak
ministerial oversight and ineffectual rapid-repair teams
have proved major impediments to improving the
supply of essential services. In announcing the
Baghdad security plan in January, the Prime Minister
and his Government committed to the following
actions by the Iraqi security forces: holding
accountable all those who break the law, without
regard to sect or political affiliation; denying sanctuary
for criminals or murderers; not allowing militias to
serve as a replacement for the State control of local
security; and providing military commanders with
freedom of action and the ability to do what is needed
without political interference or micromanagement.

Although it is too early to point to a firm trend,
the initial security effort under the new plan has
recently reduced violence in Baghdad. The effort has
been assisted by citizen-provided tips to find several
insurgent bomb-making sites and weapons caches in
the Baghdad area. As part of the measures to address
the source of the violence, the Iraqi Government has
allocated about $150 million of its 2007 budget for a
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration process
for militias. Putting that process into action, together
with continued political progress on national
reconciliation and the passage of a de-Ba'athification
law, are important components in ensuring long-term
stability in the country.

The Iraqi security forces are increasingly taking
the operational lead and demonstrating an increased
capacity to plan and execute counter-insurgency
operations. On 20 December 2006, the MNF-I
transferred security responsibility for An-Najaf
province, which has a population of nearly 1 million
residents, to provincial Iraqi control. In February, the
British Government announced that it would withdraw
1,600 of its 7,100 troops from southern Iraq by the end
of the year as it transitions increased security
responsibility to the Iraqi security forces.

As of 5 March 2007, eight division headquarters,

31 brigade headquarters and 93 Iraqi army battalions

had assumed the lead for counter-insurgency operations

within their assigned areas of operations. Iraq and the

MNF-I continue to work to address the logistical and

sustainment-capability needs of the Iraqi security
forces.

Coordination between Iraqi and MNF-I forces in
security operations has been good. On 27 February,
special Iraqi army forces detained 16 suspected
militiamen during operations with Coalition advisers in
Sadr City, targeting the leadership of several rogue
Jaysh al-Mahdi cells, who allegedly direct and
perpetrate sectarian murder, torture and kidnapping.
Iraqi cooperation with the MNF-I is also evident in
other areas of Iraq. Last month, approximately 500
Iraqi police led a large-scale operation in Anbar
province that resulted in the capture of 13 known
terrorists and one large weapons cache. A combined
force of 1,000 soldiers from both the Iraqi and the
United States armies cordoned off the area to assist the
police during the operation. Continued coordination is
critical in order to combat the ongoing threat to peace
and stability in the country and to prepare Iraqis for
assuming full responsibility for the country's security.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI), under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ashraf Qazi, is
playing an important role in support of Iraq. United
Nations leadership and expertise will continue to be
needed as Iraq moves forward to prepare for provincial
elections, conduct possible referendums, continue work
on national reconciliation and the constitutional review
and implement the International Compact. The efforts
of the United Nations to protect and promote the rights
of Iraqis and to assist the vulnerable are also critical
elements for Iraqi stability. A robust UNAMI presence
remains essential to those efforts.

In addition to Baghdad, the United Nations has
representatives in Irbil and Basra. The Multinational
Force in Iraq continues to assist UNAMI and to help
UNAMI achieve its goal of a full, robust and secure
presence in Iraq. Multinational forces - notably, the
Georgian, Romanian and South Korean contingents -
continue to provide security for the United Nations in
Baghdad, Basra and Irbil, respectively. Those troops
provide static site security, reconnaissance, security
patrols, convoy escorts, checkpoints and, when
necessary, medical and emergency evacuation. Under a

separate United Nations agreement, Fijian troops also
provide static and close-in protection for United
Nations personnel and facilities in Baghdad.

The United Nations Trust Fund to Support the
Distinct Entity Created to Provide Security for the
United Nations Presence in Iraq, which covers "middle
ring" security expenses, is facing dwindling resources.
Contributions to the Fund are necessary to ensure the
continued critical support provided by the middle ring
security forces for the United Nations Mission in Iraq.
We call on Member States to consider contributing.

The Iraqi Government remains engaged in efforts
to build positive relations with its neighbours. Over the
last three months, Syria and Iraq have reopened their
embassies in each other's capitals, and Iraq has re-
established its embassy in Saudi Arabia. The Iraqi
Government also invited its neighbours Turkey, Syria,

Jordan, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait - as well as
Bahrain, Egypt, the five permanent members of the
Security Council and the United Nations - to a

meeting in Baghdad on 10 March. At that meeting all
attendees announced their support for Iraqi security
and stability.

The Iraqi Government is continuing its efforts to
secure a stable future for Iraq's citizens. Further
progress in the political, economic and security arenas
is essential to helping Iraq achieve its goals. The
continued support of the international community
remains important to Iraq's efforts, rooted in respect
for Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

