Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend the French presidency for convening
today's important open debate and for submitting a
concept note (S/2017/892, annex) on the topic. We also
take note of the latest report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821), which
covers the period from January to December 2016. We
also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Virginia Gamba
and other briefers for their insightful statements.

Azerbaijan is a party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the Involvement
of Children in Armed Conflict. My Government has
strongly and consistently supported international
efforts aimed at ensuring more effective protection for
the rights of children and improving the situation of
children affected by armed conflict. We welcome the
progress made in preventing and responding to grave
violations committed against children.

However, serious challenges remain and children
continue to suffer in situations of armed conflict. The
increasing brutality and changing nature of warfare
give rise to a need for greater measures of protection.
Although most of the violations and abuses against
children in situations of armed conflict are committed
by non-State armed groups, the wrongs of the recent
past and the targeting of civilians in ongoing inter-State
conflicts must not be neglected.

Over the course of the continued aggression by
the Republic of Armenia against my country, serious
violations of international humanitarian law have been
committed, amounting to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and acts of genocide. A scorched-earth policy
implemented by the Armenian side involved the ethnic
cleansing of the seized territories of all Azerbaijanis
and the brutal killing or wounding of thousands of
civilians, including children. Azerbaijan continues
to suffer from one of the highest number of refugees
and displaced persons in the world, many of whom are
children. As the Secretary-General rightly observes in
his report,

"The unprecedented number of refugee children
and internally displaced children is not the result
of conflict alone but of the brutality with which
parties conduct hostilities, including by directly
targeting children" (S/2017/821, para. 15).

As of 1 October, 3,874 citizens of Azerbaijan were
registered as missing as a result of the conflict. Among
them are 744 civilians, including 66 children - 22 girls
and 44 boys. Of them, 29 children, 7 girls and 22 boys
were taken hostage before they went missing. The
Republic of Armenia refuses to cooperate in order
to determine the fate of those missing persons. The
impunity still enjoyed by the perpetrators of the crimes
committed in the course of the Armenian aggression
not only impedes progress in achieving the long-
awaited peace and reconciliation, but also aggravates
the situation on the ground.

Despite the formal ceasefire, direct and deliberate
attacks by the Armenian armed forces against civilians
and civilian objects in Azerbaijan, situated along or
further behind the front lines, continue to date and
have become even more frequent and more violent in
recent times. Therefore, the assessment report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees that was released following its mission to
the affected areas of Azerbaijan in May 2016 made it
abundantly clear, inter alia, that due to the use of new
and heavier types of military hardware and the intense
fighting during the escalation earlier in April 2016,
many schools were damaged and closed in the areas
near the frontline in the Goranboy, Tartar, Aghdam and
Aghjebedi districts of Azerbaijan.

Under international law, intentionally directing
attacks on buildings dedicated to education is a war
crime. It should also be noted that attacks on schools
and hospitals constitute one of the grave violations
that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict is mandated
to monitor and report on. Among the victims of the
recent ceasefire violations committed by the armed
forces of Armenia are a two-year-old resident of the
Fuzuli district of Azerbaijan, Ms. Zahra Guliyeva, who
was killed alongside her grandmother on 4 July, while
another woman was seriously wounded as a result of
intensive fire with 82- and 120-millimetre mortars and
heavy grenade launchers. A 13-year-old resident of the
Tovuz district of Azerbaijan, Ramin Yusifov, received
multiple shrapnel wounds as a result of a heavy shelling
of his village on 7 August.

The vulnerability of children in wartime requires
more targeted and comprehensive protection efforts
worldwide, which must be free of selectivity and address
all situations of armed conflict without distinction,
including those of a protracted nature and prolonged
impact on children in particular. We concur with the
Secretary-General that, in order to break the cycles
of violence and aid prevention efforts, the enhanced
protection of civilians and respect for international
humanitarian law are needed, and impunity must end.

