Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
we wish you every success in carrying out the Council's
work. We also thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Bolivia and the Bolivian delegation
for wisely conducting the work of the Council last
month. I want as well to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her valuable briefing on the sixteenth report of the
ICC submitted to the Security Council in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011).

Once again, the State of Kuwait welcomes the efforts
ofthe ICC to administerjustice and combat impunity in
line with international law. We commend the progress
achieved by the Prosecutor's Office, in spite of the
tremendous challenges it is facing in shouldering its
responsibility, namely, pursuing and bringing to justice
the perpetrators of crimes and violations, especially in
the light of the current sensitive and difficult security
situation in Libya, including the proliferation of arms
and armed militias and the increasing presence of
terrorist groups.

We share Ms. Bensouda's concern about the recent
escalation of armed clashes in the Libyan capital Tripoli,
which have claimed the lives of many victims. In that
regard, we cannot but to commend the significant
role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) represented by Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNSMIL, in reaching a ceasefire agreement. That had
a tangible impact on preventing a further deterioration
of the security situation.
We also express our concern about the reported
serious violations against migrants and detention
centres, including killing and torture. That is a blatant
violation of international humanitarian law. Once again,
we condemn those practices in the strongest terms.

There is no doubt that Libyan authorities have
the primary responsibility for administering justice
throughout Libyan territories by exercising their
jurisdiction and sovereignty. According to article
1 of the Rome Statute, the ICC is complementary to
national criminaljurisdictions in cases being addressed
in Libyan courts. The ICC will complement the Libyan
national criminal jurisdiction.

The State of Kuwait is aware that Libya is facing
tremendous security challenges that affect the ability of
court experts to conduct the necessary investigations.
However, we commend the significant cooperation by
Libyan authorities with the ICC and the Prosecutor in
line with resolution 2174 (2014).

We welcome the cooperation by a great number
of States and international, regional and civil society
organizations, as well as the support provided by
UNSMIL to the Prosecutor's Office. That will
improve the effectiveness of the Office in carrying out
investigations, and thereby help it fulfil its mandate.

We call upon the international community to
continue supporting the Libyan Government in its
efforts to establish a comprehensive strategy to
combat crimes and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law. The international community must
provide it with the necessary help so that the Libyan
Government can administer justice and promote the rule
of law, and thereby contribute to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, we reiterate our appreciation for the
important work of Prosecutor Bensouda and her team
in implementing her mandate, namely, investigating
serious crimes committed in Libya.

