Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (Spoke in Spanish): I would
like at the outset to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chad, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for the
invitation to participate in this debate. I would also
like to thank, through him, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and the Permanent
Observer of the African Union, Ambassador Tete
Antonio, for the information that they have provided us.
I wish also to welcome here the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria and Luxembourg, as well as the
other representatives of the countries that make up the
Security Council.

Argentina condemns in the strongest terms
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
believes that such acts represent a threat not only to
international peace and security but also to human
dignity; peaceful, civilized coexistence; and stability
and the consolidation of democracy, as well as a
disincentive to the economic and social development of
nations.

States must carry out a thorough analysis of the
conditions that foster the spread of terrorism, which
include, inter alia, prolonged, unresolved conflicts;
absence of the rule of law; human rights violations;
discrimination for ethnic, national or religious reasons;
political exclusion; economic or social marginalization;
and lack of good governance, while acknowledging that
none of those conditions can excuse or justify terrorist
acts.

The globalization of horror through the media fuels
the spread of fear. However, the military response can
never be the preferred option for combating terrorism,

as it has already shown its limitations and failures. In
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, we require a comprehensive approach aimed at
strengthening our collective work relating to, inter alia,
the conditions that foster the spread of terrorism and its
financing. We must therefore work together for the full
validity of the rule of law in every one of our countries,
given the urgent need to build a balanced andjust global
order that is based on effective multilateralism and
cooperation, and promoting policies of social inclusion.

Argentina notes with concern the attempts made
to confuse terrorism with transnational organized
crime, as if both had the same nature, methodology and
purposes, or as if there were a necessary relationship
between them. That is why it is very important to clarify
that terrorism is something very specific to which a
regime of international law applies, and that it calls
for distinctive remedies that cannot be extrapolated to
other crimes, which are subject to other legal regimes.

Just as the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime - the Palermo
Convention - and its Protocols constitute the legal
framework to combat transnational organized crime,
United Nations international conventions to combat
terrorism specify the acts categorized as terrorist. Even
though the international community has not been able
to reach a universally agreed definition of terrorism, it
is nonetheless possible to determine which are the acts
condemned by the international community.

Argentina has twice experienced international
terrorism, driven by fanaticism and destruction. There
was an attack against the embassy of Israel in 1992,
and against the Asociacion Mutual Israelita Argentina
in 1994. As the Security Council heard last September
from the President of Argentina:

"My country, the Argentine Republic, and the
United States of America are the only two countries
on the American continent to have been the object
of savage terrorist attacks." (S/PV. 7272, p. 8)

We are convinced that terrorism must be fought
within the framework of the rule of law and of
respect for fundamental guarantees. We abhor the
idea that human rights violations are acceptable in
certain circumstances. We also call for the measures
adopted by States to combat terrorism to fully respect
international law, including in particular international
human rights law, international humanitarian law
and refugee law. Such measures must also respect the
purposes and principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, such as sovereignty, territorial integrity, the
political independence of States and the principle of
non-intervention in internal affairs.

I wish to express our concern at the threats posed
to religious and ethnic minorities with the advance
of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
with the consequent harmful effects for regional
and international peace, security and stability. The
expansion and consolidation of the Islamic State and
the spread of sectarian violence are the result of the
militarization of the prolonged and uncontrolled
conflict in Syria, which has its roots in the inability
and unwillingness of local, regional and international
players to reconcile their differences through peaceful
means, as well as in the massive flow of arms to the
parties. Argentina has always called in the strongest
terms to the international community to refrain from
fuelling the conflict in Syria by providing military
equipment.

Argentina has also denounced again and again
the double standard of those countries that tailor their
actions and statements to their own interests and
geopolitical considerations. We will always warn about
the risks that such actions pose for peaceful coexistence
among nations by subordinating the accepted rules
of international law, which thus are held hostage to
specific objectives according to circumstances.

We are also deeply concerned by the advance of
terrorist groups in Africa, which hampers the efforts
of the States of the continent to promote the economic
and social development of their peoples. We firmly
condemn each and every one of the repeated attacks
in African countries, including those targeting United
Nations offices. In Africa, as elsewhere, cooperation
and coordination on the part of the international
community are required in order to address the terrorist
threat.

The fight against terrorism requires, first of
all, the firm commitment of every State to combat
terrorist acts at the national level and not to deliver
assistance to the perpetrators of or participants in
terrorist-related activities, and to strengthen national
legislation, focusing on the prosecution or extradition of
perpetrators. Secondly, we must tackle the phenomenon
at its roots, especially the conditions of marginalization
and political exclusion, and promote the economic and
social development of peoples.

Argentina is convinced that the United Nations, as
the cornerstone of the multilateral system, must be the
Organization that leads the actions of States to fight
against terrorism. While we value the contribution that
can be made by various other forums and initiatives,
it is this Organization that ensures the legitimacy of
decisions reflected in standards, guidelines or good
practices. We are convinced that multilateral action
through the United Nations pursuant to the principles
of the Organization will allow us to tackle the threat
of terrorism with full respect for international law,
international human rights humanitarian law and
international humanitarian law, and thus achieve a
safer world for all.

In less than two weeks, Argentina will end its
current term as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. Over the past two years, our delegation, headed
by Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval, has worked
to contribute to the realization of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations, which also inform my
country's foreign policy. They are also those established
by the President of Argentina, Ms. Cristina Fernandez
de Kirchner, in her speech to the General Assembly
at its sixty-seventh session in September 2012 (see A/67/PV.7), in which she emphasized that what we are
striving for is a genuine peace, which is built on truth,
justice and equality. She went on to assert that peace is
impossible where countries are not treated equally and
also that we have a clear mission to defend peace and
human rights, whatever the country in which they are
threatened.

In that context, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation, as well as the
members of the Security Council for the years 2013 and
2014, for the opportunity to work on our agreements
and differences in order to shoulder our shared
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

