Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): Only four months ago
representatives of Member States gathered in this Chamber
to acknowledge a breakthrough in the Angolan peace
process. The formation of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation carried the promise that the
remaining elements of the Lusaka Protocol might soon be
fulfilled and that a war of three decades' duration might
at last be near an end. That hope is now receding.

I wish to convey Canada's deep concern at the very
tense situation in Angola. The increased fragility of the
peace process is disturbing, and the continued suffering of
the Angolan people is deplorable. They need, and deserve,
to live in a stable and secure environment.

We welcome the progress report of the Secretary-
General, and we agree fully with his observation that

"The progress achieved during the previous two and
a half years is being severely undermined by
persisting tensions throughout the country"
(S/l997/640, para. 38)

and also with his acknowledgement that the deterioration
of the peace process is primarily the result of UNITA's
delay in implementing its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. Both parties have a responsibility to exercise
maximum restraint. As a matter of urgency, Canada
strongly urges the two parties, but especially UNITA, to
desist from confrontation, to engage in constructive
dialogue and to act expeditiously to implement the
remaining provisions of the Lusaka Protocol.

The agreement on 18 August, by the Central Inter-
Sectoral Group, on plans for the normalization of State
administration is welcome evidence that progress is still
possible. So, too, is the report of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola of a reduction in hate
broadcasts by UNITA's radio. But further measures to
implement the letter and the spirit of the Lusaka Protocol
are required on the part of UNITA, including measures
regarding the declaration, disarmament and demobilization
of its fighters.

We endorse the Security Council's insistence that
UNITA immediately implement the obligations outlined
in the draft resolution before the Council and would
support a decision by the Security Council to impose the
sanctions specified in the draft resolution were UN ITA to
fail to take the concrete and irreversible steps called for
in the draft text.

Canada values its relationship with Angola. We
have, in particular, been pleased to work with Angolans
to address one of the worst anti-personnel-mine situations

 

in the world by providing financial support for mine
awareness and mine clearance. We are deeply concerned at
reports of the planting of new mines in certain parts of the
country. If these reports are confirmed, this would represent
a setback for Angola, which, we believe, already has the
highest number of amputees as a result of mine-related
incidents of any country in the world, both in absolute and
in relative terms. It would also represent a setback for
global efforts to reverse the scourge of anti-personnel
mines.

Canada has been both impressed and heartened by the
advancement of peace and stability in Africa in recent
years; this has sown the seeds for the greater prosperity of
the continent. African nations and institutions, in particular
the Organization of African Unity, have taken the lead in
this process. We join African leaders in calling for peace
and reconciliation in Angola and invite all Angolans to
share in the prosperity which a climate of peace is sure to
bring to their richly endowed country.

We also join with others in thanking the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye,
and the representatives of the three observer States -
Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States -
for their ongoing efforts to assist the Angolan people in
achieving peace.

