Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let mejoin other speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. In one sense, the rule of law at the national and
international levels provides an essential framework
to protect and consolidate the rights and freedoms
of individuals in societies, including developing
and maintaining peace, stability and good order and
dispensing justice.

The concept of right and just goes back to very
early organized societies. The concept ofthe rule of law
evolved over the centuries. It is ingrained in the culture
of all nations and is the topic we are discussing today.
What initially evolved within domestic society, at some
point began to influence international society as well.

Since 2003, the Security Council's thematic debates
on the rule of law have focused on egregious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
and have helped to reinforce the global community's
disapprobation of such violations.

I would like to recall a landmark meeting (see A/66/PV.128) that was convened by the President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session,
on 13 September. The event marked the adoption of
resolution 66/291, entitled "Strengthening the role
of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution", and was followed
by the screening of the documentary Beyond Right and
Wrong.

The presentations on that day offered creative ways
to make mediation more effective. One of the speakers
emphasized that justice should not always be reduced
to retribution - an all too easy solution. Besides, that
approach is derived from a certain specific cultural
background. Other approaches to dispute resolution
and addressing wrongs should be explored as we give
greater meaning to the concept of rule of law. There are
other mechanisms used by different societies.

The rule of law at the international level helps
to maintain peace, good order and respect for the
law. It also sustains economic progress, including
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
While it has long been used in the context of individual
rights, the rule of law must also be understood in the
context of ensuring economic progress of individuals
and societies, particularly with regard to the right to
development. We should also not forget the need for a
rule-based approach to environmental protection.
Grievances based on violations of economic and
social rights, defined by law, have the capacity to spark
violent conflict that could even spill over borders. The
rule oflaw is therefore best understood in such a holistic
manner. The flash points of future conflicts may very
well lie in access to critical resources such as water and
energy.

In maintaining a balance between economic
progress, development, environmental sustainability
and the utilization of natural resources, the rule of law
can be broadened both at the national and international
levels.

The codification of international law and legal
obligations is an important aspect of the rule of law
at the international level. The Office of Legal Affairs
plays a central role in that regard. Today, there is hardly
an area of human activity that is not regulated by treaty
law. Over 550 multilateral treaties are deposited with
the Secretary-General. Domestic compliance with
treaty obligations is an area where the United Nations
can play a crucial and helpful role, particularly in
assisting States with capacity-building.

Close cooperation in the application of laws at
the national, regional and international levels is vital
in addressing the growing problems of transnational
organized crime and terrorism, which threaten
international peace and good order. Drug trafficking
has become associated with high levels of violent crime
that contribute to cross-border instability.

International organized crime is now a funding
source for terrorism that is becoming a destabilizing
factor both economically and socially. Piracy is a major
challenge to the established global order. Confronting
that challenge involves close cooperation and capacity-
building at both national and regional levels, including
in enforcement of the law.

However, long-term solutions to transnational
organized crime, terrorism and piracy will need to
focus on the delivery of basic services by justice and
security institutions, without forgetting the complex
root causes that have generated those challenges.

The principle of sovereign equality enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations, which is intrinsic
to international rule of law, must be maintained, as
international rules are made and implemented. It is a
principle that protects all States, especially the small
and the weak.

Equally important is the maintenance of the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
Member States, especially in situations that do not pose
a threat to international peace and security. Specific
circumstances may call for international involvement,
which should be based on broad consensus within the
international community and among concerned States.
Unilateral and selective applications of international
law rules must be avoided, as it undermines the very
principles that we seek to promote.

Sri Lanka has always advocated the settlement of
internal and international disputes by peaceful means.
Negotiations, mediation and other peaceful means must
be the first essential resort.

Mindful that conflict and post-conflict settings are
complex environments,we mustrecognize the challenges
of trying to balance national security interests and the
maintenance of rights. Countries with strong legal
foundations have the resilience to restore democratic
institutions to their inherent strengths. Countries must
be allowed to create their own local mechanisms to
consolidate peace, encourage reconciliation and, most
important, to strengthen democratic institutions. There
is therefore a need to give them the much needed space
to begin that restorative process. In such situations, the
United Nations can provide assistance to address the
gaps, while factoring in local sensitivities.

