Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the members of the
Human Security Network, namely, Austria, Costa
Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand, my own country,
Chile, and on behalf of South Africa, as an observer.

First, I would like to thank the Argentine
presidency for having convened this meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, with a focus
on humanitarian issues. The Human Security Network
was created in the context of the Ottawa Convention
prohibiting landmines, and the protection of civilians
in conflict has always been central to our concerns. We
cannot overemphasize the importance of discussions
such as today's, on how best to ensure the security and
dignity of civilians affected by armed conflict.

In that respect, I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presentation, as well as the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Pillay,
for her contribution to the debate on this challenging
issue. We also believe that the statement made by the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross is of particular relevance, as it highlighted,
inter alia, one of the key elements of the issue, namely,
the implementation of international humanitarian law.

Despite the unrelenting efforts of the international
community, civilians continue to account for the
majority of casualties in armed conflicts. Their
situation becomes even more precarious when they are
deliberately targeted or indiscriminately attacked or
when they are viewed as a strategic asset in a conflict.

The Human Security Network remains concerned
by the difficulties faced in taking action to ensure the
protection of civilians in Syria. The current debate
provides an opportunity to consider the most pressing
aspects of the issue. These include, first, compliance
by the parties to the conflict with international
humanitarian and human rights law, in order to
guarantee the protection of civilians and, among them,
the most vulnerable groups, including women and
children; secondly, to ensure the full implementation
of protection mandates by peacekeeping and other
relevant missions; and, thirdly, to explore ways to
bolster accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In that regard, the
Human Security Network welcomes the briefing by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry to
the General Assembly given last July.

It is true that a lack of accountability and justice
incites perpetrators to continue their heinous acts.
As the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/376) underscored, the role of the Security
Council is crucial in encouraging and assisting States
in their efforts to combat impunity and reinforce
accountability; however, it is States themselves that
bear the primary responsibility to ensure and respect
the human rights of individuals within their territory
and to protect their populations from mass atrocities.

Against that backdrop, we stress the importance
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions,
which can substantiate alleged violations, thus opening
the way for a possible referral to the International
Criminal Court.

Although instances of failure to protect civilians
rightfully receive widespread publicity, it is important
to recognize that tens of thousands of United Nations
peacekeepers risk their lives every day in order to
protect civilians. In that respect, the mandates of
peacekeeping and other relevant missions are an
element that is pivotal to the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and therefore need to be
strengthened and effectively implemented.

The addition of broader objectives to missions'
mandates must be accompanied by a proportionate
increase in resources. The strengthening of mandates
will improve monitoring and prevention as well as
the capacity for a targeted and coordinated response
when incidents do occur. We also recognize the
protection role of other humanitarian actors, including
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations.

The full and unimpeded access of humanitarian
assistance continues to be a sine qua non for the relief
of affected populations, including in particular the most
vulnerable groups, such as women and children. In that
regard, we unequivocally condemn sexual and gender-
based violence, including the use of sexual violence as
a military tactic. Moreover, the effective protection of
civilians requires that health-care facilities, schools,
teaching staff, transport, humanitarian personnel and
people seeking medical treatment be unconditionally
spared from attacks and acts of displacement. We should
always keep in mind that one of the most disastrous
impacts of conflict is on refugees and internally
displaced persons; we therefore need to tackle that
challenge by taking measures that facilitate voluntary
return, repatriation and reintegration.

Let me also stress Network members' strong concern
over the use, in populated areas, of explosive weapons
that cause severe harm to individuals and communities.
Such weapons are indiscriminate within their zones
of detonation and therefore pose unacceptable risks to
civilians. We call on all relevant actors to refrain from
using such weapons in densely populated areas. We
believe that more systematic data collection would be
important in that respect.

Last but not least, we would like to reiterate our
concern about the safety of journalists in conflict
situations. Unfortunately, and despite a clear
normative framework and repeated calls on the part
of the international community to put an end to such
attacks, media professionals, too, continue to become
civilian casualties while attempting to report and
brief us on the realities on the ground. According to
the International News Safety Institute, no less than
43 journalists and news workers have died this year
trying to cover situations of armed conflict and civil
unrest. We welcome the open debate on the protection
of civilians and the protection of journalists held under
the American presidency of the Council on 17 July
(see S/PV.7003), and we urge the Security Council to
consider the situation of journalists in armed conflict in
a more proactive and systematic way in the context of
country-specific discussions and to further promote the
implementation of resolution 1738 (2006).

We support the continued consideration ofthe issue
of the protection of civilians on a biannual basis, with
the appropriate inputs, including from the Secretary-
General, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Emergency Relief Coordinator.

