Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): We very
much welcome the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), contained in document
S/2009/72, and the presence of the Secretary-General
himself this morning.

It is a particular honour to have President Ramos-
Horta here with us today. It is a great credit to the
Government of Timor-Leste, to UNMIT and to the
international security forces that Timor-Leste has
enjoyed a stable security situation since the terrible
attacks of February 2008.

Significant progress has been made over the past
year, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General
and the statement of President Ramos-Horta, but, as
the Secretary-General also notes, many challenges
remain. It is clear that the long-term security and
stability of Timor-Leste will depend in particular on
building national police and security forces that can
take over responsibility from the international force.
The challenge over the next few months will be to
define a timescale and benchmarks for the resumption
of policing responsibilities by the national police and
then to move forward with the transfer of those
responsibilities.

We welcome the medium-term strategy set out in
the Secretary-General's report, which focuses on the
four priority areas of the UNMIT mandate. We also
welcome the acceptance of these benchmarks by the
Government of Timor-Leste. They are consistent with
one of the key principles underpinning the international
effort in Timor-Leste: that the international community
should help the people of the country stand on their
own feet. We look forward to reviewing progress
against the benchmarks, which will allow UNMIT to
begin to scale down its presence in stages as its tasks
are completed.

We look to the people and Government of Timor-
Leste, supported by the international community, to do
everything in their power to continue the positive
trends in terms of politics, security and sustainable
economic and social development. In particular, the
Timorese Government and opposition must develop
and implement a shared vision of what kind of country
Timor-Leste should be and the way its democratic
institutions should function. Secondly, a determined
effort must be made by Timorese State institutions,
with international support, to build capacity and deliver
reform, in particular in the security and justice sectors.
We support the Secretary-General's call for the
Government of Timor-Leste to commission a
comprehensive needs assessment for the judicial sector.
We would welcome a firm commitment from the
Government of Timor-Leste to taking this forward with
the aim of helping to ensure accountability and justice
for all. Thirdly, we look forward with great interest to
the local elections in Timor-Leste, which will mark
another important democratic milestone for the
country.

The United Kingdom remains steadfast in its
support for the Government and people of Timor-Leste.
We have heard a consistent message from the
representatives of Timor-Leste in this Chamber over
the past year, and again today from President Ramos-
Horta. They want UNMIT to stay and to support their
progress towards self-sustaining independence and
economic development. We are sympathetic to that
message.

The United Kingdom supports the extension of
the UNMIT mandate by a further 12 months, in
recognition of the challenges that East Timor continues
to face. We are confident that this will continue to be a
partnership, in which UNMIT plays a supporting role
to the efforts of the Government.

We thank Special Representative Khare and his
team for the excellent work they continue to carry out.
We must also look forward to the day when their work
will be done.

