Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I would like to congratulate
you for chairing this important meeting and for
Equatorial Guinea's successful and commendable
presidency of the Council for the month of February.

I thank Ambassador Christine Schraner Burgener
for the objective and comprehensive briefing this
afternoon and I would also like to acknowledge and
welcome the presence among us of Mr. Shahidul Haque,
Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh.

In the spirit of cooperation with the United Nations

and as a demonstration of our desire to addressing the
issue of Rakhine, we agreed to the appointment of the
Special Envoy. We have provided her with all necessary
support in discharging her mandate. We appreciate
her tireless efforts and dedication in undertaking her
mandate with objectivity and impartiality. The Special
Envoy has made five official visits to Myanmar in
the nine months since her appointment. Her office in
Naypyidaw is now fully functioning. We will continue
to work closely with her in our effort to resolve the
issues relating to the situation in Rakhine state.

Soon after assuming its state responsibilities,
the National League for Democracy Government has
placed a high priority on bringing sustainable peace,
stability and development to Rakhine. We have been
implementing most of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, formerly led
by the late Mr. Kofi Annan, which was set up by the
Government voluntarily even before the humanitarian
crisis took place as a result of Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorist attacks. In the
process of implementation, we identified five priority
areas: citizenship, freedom of movement, closure of
displaced persons camps, education and health. We are
also finalizing a strategy for closure of the remaining
displaced persons camps.

Some delegations previously alluded to the question
of freedom of movement. The national verification
card is the necessary step in the citizenship application
process and also provides proof of residency in Rakhine
state and facilitates freedom ofmovement. This requires
the cooperation ofpeople to apply for such cards, which
is a totally voluntary process. Concerning humanitarian
access, due to the present security situation in northern
Rakhine state, access has been limited to certain
areas, however humanitarian supplies can be delivered
through the International Red Cross or through the
Rakhine state Government.

The most urgent task of the Government at hand
is to commence the repatriation process as soon as
possible to resolve the humanitarian situation. We are
ready to receive verified returnees in a voluntary, safe
and dignified manner, in accordance with the bilateral
agreements and arrangements with Bangladesh. We
have proposed recently to Bangladesh that the joint
working group resume its meetings in April. We are
confident that we can make the repatriation plan a
success if we both act strictly in compliance with
the agreements.

On the other hand, we have been working with the

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) to create conducive conditions
in accordance with the trilateral memorandum
of understanding. We have agreed to implement
35 quick impact projects as soon as the security
conditions permit. Another 36 quick-impact projects
are under consideration. The project assessments
will also be extended to other designated villages in
northern Rakhine.

Moreover, we are also working with the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to facilitate
the repatriation process. We have invited ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on
Disaster Management to dispatch a needs assessment
team to identify possible areas ofcooperation in Rakhine
state to assist with repatriation. The terms of reference
of the needs assessment team were agreed during the
visit of the ASEAN Secretary-General to Myanmar in
December last year. The ASEAN Emergency Response
and Assessment Team will be sent to Rakhine as soon
as possible. The presence of the ASEAN assessment
team in the repatriation process will enhance trust and
confidence of the returnees.

While we are engaging constructively with the
United Nations in our efforts to resolve the multitude of
challenges we are facing as a nascent democracy, some
groups and countries in the United Nations system
continue to exploit various United Nations mechanisms
to exert discriminatory and illegitimate political
pressures on Myanmar with malicious intent.

One vivid example, among many others, is
the establishment of the Independent Investigative
Mechanism on Myanmar by the Human Rights
Council. That action is yet another step in a series
of unprecedented discriminatory examinations
of a member State. We strongly objected to the
establishment of the Mechanism. The reasons are
simple. The Mechanism was set up beyond the Council's
mandate. It represents selectivity and a discriminatory
and double-standard practice on the part of the United
Nations human rights body. In addition, its terms of
reference are very intrusive to a sovereign country's
domestic jurisdiction. The Mechanism will only serve
the political purposes of those who wish to exploit
the Human Rights Council for their political agenda.
Such intrusive measures, without the consent of the
country concerned, will only further polarize different
communities and exacerbate tensions.

Some members of the Council in this Chamber
have just made reference to the report of the Human
Rights Council fact-finding mission in connection
with accountability issues. In that respect, I would
like to reiterate our firm position, as I did before in
this Chamber on 24 October last year, that Myanmar
has categorically objected to the fact-finding
mission since its establishment. We also reject its
narrative-based report.

The report of the fact-finding mission was totally
biased and one-sided. Its investigation targeted only
Myanmar security forces and excluded the violations
committed by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
(ARSA). The report was prepared mainly on the
basis of interviews and information gathered from
non-governmental organizations and human rights
groups. Moreover, the report fully authenticates the
stories of Muslim displaced persons while rejecting
any contradictory evidence. The fact-finding mission
has ignored reports revealing massacres by the ARSA
and has discounted its atrocities. Most importantly,
the conclusions of the report are politically motivated
and aim to inflict maximum damage on the image of
Myanmar and its leadership.

The ARSA is alive and active. On 25 February,
news media reported the death of one of the top ARSA
military commanders, Nurul Alam, in a gunfight with
Bangladesh Rapid Action Battalion at Muchuni camp
in Cox's Bazar. Bangladesh local media also reported
recently on abductions, murders, disappearances and
rape committed by members of ARSA in 30 camps of
Ukhia and Teknaf, in the district of Cox's Bazar. They
are also threatening people who wanted to go back
to Rakhine.

The Government of Myanmar has repeatedly stated
that it will not condone human rights violations and will
take action against perpetrators according to the law
if the allegations are supported by sufficient evidence.
Therefore, the Government of Myanmar has established
an Independent Commission of Enquiry to investigate
all allegations of human rights violations following
ARSA terrorists attacks in August 2017 in northern
Rakhine. The mandate of the Commission is to seek
accountability and reconciliation. The Commission
is carrying out its mandate with independence,
impartiality and objectivity.

The Commission is also requesting access to the
refugees camps in Cox's Bazar, in Bangladesh. We
urge the Government of Bangladesh to facilitate the
Commission's visit to the camps and to meet with
the alleged victims of abuse. The Commission's work
will be evidence based. Therefore, the international
community should support the work of the Commission.

The Government of Myanmar is willing and able
to address the issue of accountability. Therefore,
we strongly reject any move to bring the issue to
the international judicial system. With this firm
commitment and in the spirit of cooperation with the
United Nations, the Government of Myanmar has signed
a joint communique with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
The Government of Myanmar has recently facilitated
the visit of Special Representative Patten.
We have also been working very closely with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba.
The Government is now in the process of forming a
ministerial committee on the prevention of the six
grave violations affecting children. We conducted
training on the six grave violations in December
2018. We have been cooperating closely with Special
Representative Gamba.

The issue of Rakhine is not one of religious
persecution, as wrongfully portrayed in the massive
media campaign against Myanmar. Myanmar is
a multi-ethnic and multi-religious country where
different faiths, including the majority of the Muslim
population, have lived in harmony across the country
for centuries. The issue of Rakhine state is a political
and economic issue involving prolonged cross-border
illegal migration since colonial times, poverty, a lack
of rule of law and national security. The issue of
northern Rakhine state is not a threat to international
peace and security. The recent outbreak of fighting in
north Rakhine state, ignited by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army's attacks against three police outposts,
has further complicated the situation. It has also
highlighted the urgent need to achieve a nationwide
ceasefire agreement under the ongoing national
peace process.

We are fully aware of the urgent need to solve
the humanitarian problems, but we want to seek
the Council's understanding of the practicality and
possibilities on the ground. There are huge physical and
psychological barriers that hinder the implementation
of the repatriation, building peace and stability and
development efforts. It takes time and patience, as
well as courage, to build trust and confidence among
different communities in Rakhine. We want to resolve
the issue as quickly as anyone.

While the primary responsibility to address the
situation in Rakhine rests with the Government and
the people of Myanmar, the objective and constructive
contribution and support of the international community
will be crucial to the success of Myanmar's national
efforts. I wish to express our sincere appreciation to
all our friends who are helping and supporting us in
various ways to resolve the challenges in Rakhine at
this critical juncture. We shall continue to work in good
faith with the United Nations and with all our friends to
end the suffering of the people of Rakhine and rebuild
the state into a land of peace, harmony and prosperity
for all communities.
