Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I should
first thank you and all your team, Madam President, for
all the work you have done in October. In an extremely
busy period you have led our discussions with great
professionalism and energy, for which many thanks.

It is always a challenge to be the final speaker and to
produce a synthesis ofa meeting that is itselfa monthly
synthesis, and I am not going to attempt it. There is
a great deal that could be said, particularly about the
Middle East, which has been the subject of two major
public meetings, but today I am not going to revisit the
statements my delegation has made on the various crises
in the region - the peace process, the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Lebanon and
Libya 4 and will confine myself to five subjects: the
Ebola crisis, Mali, Ukraine, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Council's working methods.

In its 15 October press statement (SC/11602), the
Security Council noted that the Ebola epidemic is a
threat to international peace and security, as well as how
urgent it is that all international actors mobilize their
resources on the ground in order to contain the epidemic.
For its part, France is planning to build three centres,
with a capacity of 200 beds, to combat Ebola in Guinea,
the first of which will open in November in the eastern
part of the country, the heart of the outbreak. We also
plan to open a hospital for health professionals working
to combat Ebola in Guinea, and the French Ministry of
Defence will deploy 120 personnel in Guinea to train
caregivers dealing with Ebola in dedicated centres.
We are also participating in the European evacuation
mechanism for infected international humanitarian
workers, a key part of encouraging such workers to
travel to the affected countries.

Concerning Mali, the Security Council sent a
clear message in its consultations on 8 October and its
17 October press statement (SC/11604). On the political
front, the peace negotiations that are being relaunched
in Algiers at the end ofthis month, through international

mediation, represent a historic opportunity for peace
in Mali. We welcome Algeria's role as facilitator
and the key part being played by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), which will be responsible for
supporting the implementation of any future agreement.
The Malian parties, both Government and armed
groups, should engage in the negotiations in good faith
and a spirit of compromise. The goal is an inclusive and
comprehensive peace agreement that takes every aspect
of the crisis in Mali into account. On the ground, the
parties must fully respect the ceasefire and commit to
preventing attacks on MINUSMA.

On the security front, the proliferating deadly
attacks on MINUSMA require us to rethink how
to ensure MINUSMA'S safety and effectiveness on
the ground. We welcome the proposal of the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for
initiating a discussion in the Security Council on the
subject. We must collectively find ways to enable
MINUSMA to fulfil its robust mandate to stabilize
northern Mali. Operation Barkhane has conducted
counter-terrorism efforts in recent weeks, particularly
in the North of the Niger, that have led to the arrest
of those responsible for the attack that resulted in the
death of a Senegalese peacekeeper from MINUSMA
and destabilized the terrorists in their sanctuary by
neutralizing many of them. Unfortunately, a French
soldier was killed during the operation. The focus of
Operation Barkhane efforts in Mali will shortly be
shifted farther north, specifically to the region around
Tessalit and Kidal.

At the meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.7287), all the
members of the Security Council endorsed the Minsk
Agreement as the cornerstone of the way out of the
crisis and called on all parties to fully implement it. We
hope that that unanimous signal from the Council will
be paid heed, in particular by Russia.

We welcome the calm conduct of the voting on
26 October despite the difficult conditions under which
it was held. We also stress the importance of resuming
national dialogue and implementing the reforms
expected by the Ukrainian population and to which
these elections should lead.

We recall, as many other members of the Council
have already done, our commitment to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. In that regard,
we condemn the organization by the armed rebel
groups in eastern Ukraine of their own elections on
2 November, in violation of the national Constitution.
Such illegal elections would seriously go against the
Minsk Agreement, and we call on Russia to use all its
influence to discourage the separatists from moving
forward with that effort.

During our consultations on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, shared concern was expressed
regarding the slow progress on all topics at the centre
of the Council's attention. On the security front, the
impasse in the process of voluntary disarmament of the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda is now
obvious. The Council had the opportunity to firmly
express its position in that regard in a press statement
on 3 October. We are counting on the commitment of
the countries of the region to find a definitive solution
to this problem, which has haunted the relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbours for more than 20 years. The date
2 January cannot be pushed back. Plans must now be
made for joint military action by the Armed Forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The
Council recalled that neutralizing this group is a top
priority for the international community. With regard to
other groups, the Council welcomed the progress made
but which too often remains too slow and too fragile.

During those consultations, it was also recalled
that neutralizing such groups was necessary but not
sufficient for re-establishing lasting stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Compliance with commitments under the Addis Ababa
framework agreement is more crucial than ever, and the
Council is counting on all signatory States to comply
fully in good faith with the obligations undertaken at the
regional level. The Council also expects the Congolese
Government to step up its efforts in implementing the
necessary reforms. MONUSCO, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kobler and Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Djinnit have the full support of the
Council in supporting the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the States of the region in the right direction.

We regretted the recent decision by the Congolese
authorities to expel the head of the United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We recall the great importance the Council
attaches to the promotion and protection of human
rights and the fight against impunity, and our full
support for MONUSCO and the work of United Nations
staff in that regard.

Finally, the annual public debate on the working
methods ofthe Security Council, held on 23 October (see S/PV.7285), was an opportunity to consider ambitious
ideas. The outcomes of the Argentine chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions have been universally
welcomed. They were indeed substantive, under
your leadership, Madam President, including a first
presidential note clarifying the role of the drafter of
resolutions.

Another central topic of discussion was that of
prevention, the broad support for which was clear from
Arria Formula meetings, statements to the Council
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide. This consensus is going in the
right direction and we hope that, in practice, members
of the Council will not block rapid response actions to
prevent the exacerbation of crises.

The importance of regular contacts between the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council
received broad support. These contacts with the Council
are maintained on a daily basis and enhanced follow-up
would, of course, further aid in preventing violence.
The debate also welcomed the work of Ms. Prost,
Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.

In conclusion, a great number ofdelegations - some
40 - either directly or through the group statements,
expressed their support for the application in 2015
of the French initiative seeking to limit the use of
the veto. I thank them warmly. Naturally, neither the
French initiative nor the very useful measures we are
implementing in favour of transparency in working
methods are a substitute for comprehensive reform of
the Security Council.

I conclude by thanking once again my dear
colleagues Marita and Mario for their presidency. We
also wish the greatest of success to Australia, who will
carry the torch from tomorrow night. I assure them of
our full support.

