Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation thanks the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2002/1126) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
presentation and for his detailed briefing on the
outcome of the municipal elections that were held on
26 October in Kosovo.

The assessments and analysis provide a good
opportunity for a comprehensive consideration of the
situation in and around the province so that we can
determine future steps to fully implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). According to
assessments by representatives of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Council of Europe, the elections were held in
accordance with international standards, without any
particular violations - although, of course, it should
be noted that the turnout among the Serb electorate was
very low.

In northern Mitrovica, the Serbs did not simply
go to the polling stations. To a significant extend, this
was a demonstration of the Serb population's
unfavourable view of what is being done in Kosovo by
the international presence. This refers primarily to the
pending problems of ensuring equal security for the
entire population of the province, the establishment of
conditions for the return of non-Albanian refugees and
displaced persons, and the implementation of other
very important aspects of the settlement on which the
normalization of life in the region will depend.

We expect a further increase in UNMIK's efforts
to establish conditions essential for the return of
national minorities to Kosovo. In that connection, we
note the establishment of the Task Force on Returns,
which has began its work. The international presence
has a responsibility to ensure ethnic equality, but
special responsibility lies with the leaders of the ethnic
majority and those of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of Kosovo.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General that
statements by Kosovo leaders that support a policy of
tolerance, reconciliation and integration need to be
followed with concrete action. Unfortunately, too often
we see the opposite happening. One rather blatant
example of action taken in disregard of the interest of
the minority and contrary to the task of ensuring ethnic
equality was the consideration in the provincial
Assembly of the draft law on higher education. All
references to the university in northern Mitrovica were
deleted from the text owing to the position taken by the
Albanian majority.

We believe that in order to build a truly multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo, the Albanian parties must
show greater respect for the rights of other
communities. The international community must
continue to strive to ensure that account is taken of the
legitimate interests and concerns of the various
communities on the basis of agreed action by UNMIK,
the Yugoslav authorities and the representatives of
provincial and local institutions of authority in Kosovo.
Firmer control is needed over the activities of the
provincial institutions; UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner,
personally should monitor them.

We support efforts to improve law and order in
Kosovo but we cannot fail to note the existence of
serious problems facing UNMIK in this area.

The main problem is deliberate opposition to
UNMIK's efforts on the part of criminal elements
consisting, basically, of former Kosovo Liberation
Army fighters and other radical nationalistic groupings,
some of which are represented in the main governing
bodies of the province.

Particularly serious attention must be given to
incidents of ethnically motivated violence. The large-
scale disturbances in Pec', which were provoked by
supporters of the main Kosovar Albanian parties
exploiting feelings of intolerance at the national level,
are a confirmation of the fact that extremist elements in
Kosovo want to destabilize the situation there. We
cannot allow such actions to cast a pall over the already
complicated settlement process in the province. Every
single incident of that nature deserves international
condemnation and requires an appropriate response
from the Security Council.

The United Nations mission must continue to
work actively to establish law and order and ensure
respect for the law, as required by the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999). The attempts by the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo
to question the lawfulness of action by UNMIK in
Kosovo as it seeks to combat crime and extremism is
intolerable. The international community, acting
through the Security Council, must halt any attacks on
international personnel.

The decentralization of the work of the
institutions in the province could be one of the most
important elements in the establishment of a truly
equal, multi-ethnic society there. The seven-point plan
for northern Mitrovica proposed by Mr. Steiner, and the
subsequent additions to it, are steps in the right
direction. We believe that, in order to find a real
solution to decentralization, UNMIK - and Mr.
Steiner himself - must work actively with all
communities in the province, primarily the Kosovo
Serbs, as well as with Belgrade.

We note the efforts by the Yugoslav authorities to
find a constructive solution to this problem. The
concept of decentralizing power, proposed by the
Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covie, is
evidence of such efforts.

We note Mr. Guehenno's explanations with regard
to the opening of two border crossing points in the
Kosovo sector of the Yugoslav-Albanian border. We
believe it is necessary to stress once again that any
foreign ties with Kosovo must be strictly in accordance
with the principle of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

In general, we believe that it is important to
strengthen constructive cooperation between the
UNMIK leadership and Belgrade on the basis of the
provisions in the Common Document of 5 November
2001. That, indeed, is the key to resolving many
ongoing problems in implementing the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999).

