Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank the President for
organizing this briefing. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun,and Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for their updates. I also
thank Ms. Askira for her testimony.

Italy has been following very closely the situation
in north-eastern Nigeria, the Lake Chad basin and
the region as a whole, where, as we have heard,
there is an ongoing complex crisis encompassing
security, development and humanitarian factors. In a
demonstration of its concern, Italy recently decided to
open a new Embassy in Niamey, the Niger, which will
provide an addition to our already extensive network in
that part of the world.

First, with regard to the security dimension,
although some progress has been achieved against
Boko Haram, it continues to represent a serious threat
to peace and security. We therefore fully support the
ongoing efforts by the Governments of the region,
regional organizations and the Multinational Joint Task
Force to curb the activities of Boko Haram. We support
their efforts, both bilaterally and through the European
Union - which, by the way, is providing substantial
funding for the mission. Moreover, we are concerned
by the numerous trafficking networks that are operating
in the region. We cannot underestimate their ties with
Boko Haram and transnational criminal activities. We
believe that we must show resolve in combating all
instances of smuggling, especially human trafficking,
which is connected to that phenomenon.

In that regard, I would like to mention resolution
2195 (2014), which calls for international action to secure
borders and prosecute illicit networks so as to prevent
terrorists from benefiting from transnational organized
crime, and urges Member States to enhance regional
coordination on cross-border counter-measures to fight
terrorist- and other related crimes. We believe that the
role played by regional and subregional organizations
is essential in countering those threats, and the Council
must encourage them to play an even more proactive
role by also developing a comprehensive regional
strategy. In that respect, this very debate could perhaps
give new momentum to the proposal for a joint summit
between the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Economic Community of West African
States to discuss the threat posed by Boko Haram
from a regional perspective. That is why we also fully
support the idea of a Security Council mission to the
region, as it would provide an opportunity to deliver a
strong unified message of support and commitment, as
well as an opportunity to examine the effects of climate
change on security and the displacement of people in
the region.

Turning briefly to the humanitarian aspect, we
have heard about the terrible situation that millions of
people in the region are facing. Boko Haram, which
compounds that difficulty, continues to use sexual and
gender-based violence and rape as weapons of war, as
well as to exploit women and minors as suicide bombers.
We therefore believe that efforts to prevent and address
sexual violence should also be strategically aligned
with efforts to prevent violent extremism and terrorism
in the region. We are particularly concerned by the
increasing number of internally displaced persons.
Although we have heard the sheer numbers of people
involved, we also wish to draw attention to the fact that
the current instability, the effects of climate change
in the region and the movement of populations create
an environment that is conducive to illicit activities,
such as smuggling and human trafficking. In that
respect, we believe that it is important to increase the
involvement of economic and development actors, such
as the World Bank, and to direct our efforts towards
institution-building, which other colleagues have
mentioned, and towards strengthening infrastructure
in the region. Accordingly, it is key to extend to the
countries of the region initiatives developed by the
Peacebuilding Commission based on the concept of
sustaining peace and preventive diplomacy, so as
to ensure the implementation of early development
programmes as a potential means to reduce the risks of
radicalization.

In conclusion, Italy stands ready to support
the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other international agencies
to bring relief to the people affected by the massive
humanitarian crisis in the Lake Chad basin region,
as well as the Government of Nigeria, which must be
supported in its tireless efforts. We must also strengthen
cooperation with the agencies and non-governmental
agencies on the ground. Italy also contributes bilaterally
and through United Nations agencies, in particular by
funding projects aimed at strengthening the resiliency
of the local population and mitigating the risks of
internal displacement and migration.

