The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Ochoa Nifio for her testimony and the information
she has given us.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia thanks Mr. Alexander Zuev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Operations, for his briefing, and Ms. Nathalie Ochoa
Nifio for her briefing and for the work she is doing. We
are also grateful to Mr. Vincenzo Amendola, Under-
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy, and we would like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge and commend Italy and its
leadership for their mine action efforts.

"I was walking normally and I stood on a rock that
began to wobble. Just as I was about to jump off
it so as not to fall over, the mine that was there
exploded. It hurled me a distance of about 20 metres
and I hit a post as I fell. I fell into that hole, looked
down and realized that I had lost a leg and that the
other one was hanging by a single tendon. At that
moment I felt no pain. I now feel as ifthat pain will
never go away."

That is the testimony ofa 12-year-old boy who was
blown up by a landmine on 7 August 2010.

"Suddenly something exploded. I felt nothing,
but I fell to the ground and saw that my brother
had too. There was dust everywhere. I could not
walk, and I saw that my right foot was bleeding.
It has now been amputated because of a landmine.
Like everyone else, I was told later that this was a
residential neighbourhood that had been abandoned
because it was contaminated with landmines."

That is the testimony of a 27-year-old university

student named Raed.
Civilians are the chief victims of contamination
by explosive hazards, particularly in post-conflict
situations. Landmines, explosive remnants of war
and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) continue
to take the lives of thousands of people and to leave
many others mutilated and disabled. Contamination by
such weapons continues to have severe humanitarian
consequences in many countries throughout the world.
For example, according to data from the Monitor
organization, the number of victims of landmines and
explosive remnants of war went from 9,220 in 1999
to 3,678 in 2014, that is, from an average of almost
25 victims per day, or more than a victim an hour, to
10 a day in 2014.

Despite that decrease, however, the number of
victims remains extremely high. The most concerning
issue relating to these more than 3,600 Victims of
landmines and explosive remnants of war is that 79 per
cent of them are civilians. I repeat, 79 per cent are
civilian victims, innocent people who have nothing
to do with the conflict, and 39 per cent of those are
children, boys and girls; again, 39 per cent are children.

In 2014, in Somalia 81 per cent of the Victims of
mines were children, and in South Sudan the number
stood at 60 per cent. It is clear that the use of such
weapons is far from having been eliminated. In addition,
from 1999 to 2014, more than 1,600 humanitarian
deminers were killed or injured, 53 of them in 2014.

The number of victims is extremely worrying,
and so is the proliferation of such explosives. In 2014,
there were victims in 54 countries around the world:
18 in sub-Saharan Africa, two in the Americas, 11 in
the East and South Asia and the Pacific, two in Europe
and Central Asia, and 11 in North Africa and the
Middle East. Likewise, in 2014 there were 57 countries
with areas contaminated by landmines and explosive
remnants of war: 12 in sub-Saharan Africa, 6 in the
Americas, 12 in East and South Asia and the Pacific, 14
in Europe and Central Asia, and 13 in North Africa and
the Middle East.

Although it is very difficult to calculate exactly
the extent of the contamination, in 2014 alone more
than 200 square kilometres were cleared of mines and
explosive remnants of war.

Another consequence of this phenomenon
is the contamination of entire areas in which the
civilian population used to live and carry out their
daily activities. As a result, many populations find
their access to basic services such as water and land
restricted. Land becomes unusable and access to it, and
its use for agriculture, becomes impossible, including
after conflicts have ended, slowing peace processes and
paralysing development efforts. For this reason, people
often have no other option than to flee their homes
for long periods of time and to live in very precarious
circumstances as a direct result of the threat posed
by such explosives, swelling the number of internally
displaced persons and refugees and further complicating
their return once the conflict has ended. The harm and
destruction caused to civilian infrastructure such as
water-delivery and sanitation systems increases the
risk of the spread of disease.

Although the civilian population is the chief victim
of landmines, explosive remnants of war and IEDs,
humanitarian staff, both of the United Nations and of
other organizations, and peacekeepers are also victims
of these devices. In 2015 alone, we recorded 38 direct
attacks using IEDs against civilian humanitarian staff
and United Nations peacekeepers. This means that such
personnel are not only exposed to this threat but also
prevented from being deployed effectively so that they
can discharge their mandate.

Mine action does not, therefore, have just a
humanitarian aspect; it is also crucial for the forging
of a lasting and sustainable peace. It is not possible to
achieve effective piece without including mine action
in the mandates that require it. It is on the basis of this
understanding that we wish to underscore the work of
and the role played by the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS) in the coordination of demining
efforts in the 18 peacekeeping operations and special
political missions in which it is operating. The work it
carries out in terms of mine clearance, education and
victim assistance is key for the building of lasting and
sustainable peace processes. Here I would reiterate
that in any conflict in which landmines were used
and explosive remnants of war remain, it will not be
possible to achieve a sustainable and lasting peace
without mine action.

Bolivia is a pacifist State that does not manufacture,
stockpile or use landmines. We have signed and
ratified the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel

Mines and on Their Destruction and the Convention on
Cluster Munitions. We call upon all States that have not
yet signed these Conventions to accede to them, and
we appeal to all States parties to the Treaty fulfil their
commitments thereunder.
It is against this backdrop that two weeks ago
Bolivia submitted a draft resolution that is currently
being negotiated. We would like to thank all delegations
for their positive input to the draft, and we hope to
continue to work towards an eventual adoption thereof
in the coming days. Bolivia firmly believes that this
draft resolution, once adopted, will set a very positive
precedent recognizing the threat posed by landmines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices, as well as the importance of mine action for
peacekeeping and for international peace and security.

I would like to conclude my statement by quoting
the preamble to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,
popularly known as the Ottawa Convention. A total of
162 States are party to it; it is one of the cornerstones of
mine action around the world and of future treaties in
the same area. The preamble states:

"The States Parties,

"Determined to put an end to the suffering and
casualties caused by anti-personnel mines, that kill
or maim hundreds of people every week, mostly
innocent and defenceless civilians and especially
children, obstruct economic development and
reconstruction, inhibit the repatriation of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and have other
severe consequences for years after emplacement"
(General Assembly resolution 52/38).

This is one of the responsibilities of the
Security Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Italy.

