Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We would like to thank
the Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso, Mr. Bassole, for
his statement and to express our appreciation to
Burkina Faso, and in particular to President Compaore
for his facilitation of the peace process in C6te
d'Ivoire, which has been very instrumental in bringing
the peace process back on track.

We also thank acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his briefing
and the Secretary-General for his fourteenth progress
report on the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

Thirdly, we would like to commend the Ivorian
stakeholders for their efforts so far, which have
registered some progress after a long period of political
stalemate, accompanied by insecurity and the suffering
of the Ivorian people.

We welcome the fact that the implementation of
the Ouagadougou Agreement continues to enjoy broad
support in cote d'Ivoire, including on the part of the
opposition. It is important to maintain and promote that
wide support through concrete progress and tangible
results in implementing the Agreement in the run-up to
the elections. The credibility of the electoral process
will be absolutely crucial to the success of the elections
and the stability of post-electoral development in C6te
d'Ivoire. Yet, that credibility can he achieved only
through a truly inclusive process allowing for the
equal, free and fair participation of and competition
among all political forces.

Despite positive developments in Cote d'Ivoire
after the signing of the Ouagadougou Agreement, we
are concerned that the process has begun to lose
momentum. Significant delays in the implementation
of the Ouagadougou Agreement, as described in the
report of the Secretary-General, are truly worrying. In
that respect, we agree with the Facilitator's suggestion,
also endorsed by the Secretary-General, that
establishing certain realistic timelines and benchmarks
for the implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement
could serve as a useful and needed impetus for the
peace process.
We are particularly concerned about the limited
progress in the unification and restructuring of the
Ivorian armed forces. On numerous occasions, we have
witnessed how crucial the integration and reform of
security forces are to ensuring sustainable security in
post-conflict environments. Cote d'Ivoire is no
exception. On the contrary, the unification and
restructuring of the Ivorian security sector are also
important for national reconciliation, the reunification
of the country, and the effective exercise of State
authority throughout the country, in particular in the
volatile East and West.

Last but not least, we are disappointed that the
improved political climate has not been truly reflected
in the everyday life of the Ivorian people, in particular
in the field of human rights, which continue to be
violated in the country. The security situation also
continues to be extremely fragile, the attack on Prime
Minister Soro's plane being the most blatant but not the
only example. In addition, the continued presence of
militias poses a constant and very serious threat to the
prospects for peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire. We
have also noted some worrying information in that
regard in the recent report of the group of experts for
the sanctions regime in C6te d'Ivoire. We believe that
close cooperation between the Council and the Ivorian
authorities in that respect will continue in that field as
well and that the available measures will be fully
implemented in order to promote stability in the
country.

Taking into account the circumstances on the
ground, we would like to express our continued
support for the presence of impartial forces in C6te
d'Ivoire within their current mandate and troop levels.

C6te d'Ivoire faces a unique opportunity to
embark on a new era of regained stability, security and
prosperity. We would therefore like to join the call of
the Secretary-General, addressed to all the stakeholders
of the peace process and in particular to the
Government of C6te d'Ivoire, not to waste this unique
opportunity for the country and the Ivorian people.

Finally, we welcome the appointment of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
C6te d'Ivoire, Ambassador Choi, and wish him every
success.
Last but not least, we thank the French delegation
for presenting the draft press statement and we think it
is a very good outcome of today's discussion.

