Ms. Saiga (Japan): As all of us here will
acknowledge with regret, the majority of victims and
casualties in recent conflicts have been civilians, of
whom the most vulnerable are children. Children are
the most negatively affected by armed conflicts, as they
are the victims of attacks, landmines and violence on
the one hand, while being exploited as child soldiers on
the other. We all bear responsibility for safeguarding
the rights and welfare of children, who are the basis of
the future development of any society. It is therefore
commendable that the Security Council has regularly
been taking up this important subject since 1998.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, Yoriko
Kawaguchi, is advocating what is referred to as the
"consolidation of peace", which is a new pillar of our
foreign policy. This consolidation of peace includes a
feature under which Japan would provide early support
to local communities, before the achievement of any
formal peace agreement. This initiative not only
provides local people with assistance at a crucial time
of need, but also gives critical momentum to the peace
process by enabling them to enjoy the dividends of
peace. That approach is more proactive than our
conventional approach, which had focused on
rehabilitation and the reconstruction of a country after
the signing of a peace accord. Specifically, in order to
ensure that children enjoy those dividends of peace,
Japan has made a variety of concrete efforts to protect
and assist children in situations of armed conflict. One
example is the "Back to School" campaign in
Afghanistan, which the United Nations Children's
Fund has been advancing, with the financial support of
Japan. Other examples of Japan's efforts in this area
are school reconstruction and education reactivation in
Kosovo, Timor-Leste and Cote d'Ivoire; assistance to
internally displaced children in Somalia; and landmine
awareness education in Afghanistan, Angola and the
Sudan, to name just a few countries.

I should like, on behalf of the Japanese
Government, to make a number of comments regarding
the United Nations work on children and armed
conflict.

First, we would like to express our appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu,
for his activities, including field visits to countries
caught in or recovering from armed conflict, since such
visits can contribute to the promotion of awareness of
the importance of the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict, who need special attention
for their survival. The annex to the most recent report
of the Secretary-General includes a list of certain
parties to armed conflicts that recruit or use child
soldiers. It is not sufficient simply to denounce those
who are responsible, but every possible effort - for
example, awareness raising and eradicating the culture
of impunity - must be made to bring such practices to
an end.

Secondly, a number of United Nations agencies
have been actively involved in the issue of children and
armed conflict, including the Office of the Special
Representative, field-based implementing agencies and
various departments at Headquarters. In order for such
agencies to use the limited resources available in an
effective and efficient manner, inter-agency
coordination and periodic review and streamlining of
their activities are of great importance. Japan therefore
welcomes the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 57/ 190, entitled "Rights of the child", which
calls for a comprehensive assessment of the response
of the United Nations system to the issue of children
and armed conflict. It is hoped that concrete and bold
ideas for the reform of United Nations activities in this
area will be submitted, based upon achievements to
date and changing needs on the ground.

Thirdly, Japan is pleased that the Security
Council has been regularly addressing the subject of
children and armed conflict, as well as those of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and women,
peace and security, as the issue of the protection of
civilians, including women and children, is part and
parcel of the maintenance of international peace and
security. As my Government has frequently pointed
out, however, the three subjects are intricately
intertwined and thus should be addressed in an
integrated manner. For instance, those three issues
might well be addressed under a single agenda item.

In conclusion, I am convinced that under your
leadership, Mr. President, a resolution will be adopted
that contributes to the improvement of the situation of
children suffering as a result of conflict.

