Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate the Australian Mission on having steered
the Council through a busy but productive month.
Although one month remains of Australia's term on
the Council, that will not prevent me from describing
its presidency as a fitting culmination to the energy,
creativity and commitment that Australia has brought
to Council proceedings over the past two years.

I have often expressed frustration that the Security
Council has become too much a captive ofits agenda and
procedures. Too many meetings happen simply because
of the cyclical reporting cycle rather than with a clear
purpose in mind or as a response to developments on
the ground. That is not a criticism that can be levelled at
the November programme. We have, it is true, worked
our way productively through important regular items
of Council business: the International Court of Justice
elections; mandate renewals for the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/PV.7307), the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(see S/PV.7322) and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.7321);
and for the international effort to combat piracy off
Somalia (see S/PV.7309). But the Council has also
responded in an agile and speedy way to unforeseen
developments.

On Darfur, following very disturbing reports of
mass rape in Thabit, we were briefed at short notice by
the Department ofPeacekeeping Operations and Special
Representative Bangura. In the light of the obstacles
placed by the Sudanese authorities to follow-up by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the Council issued a statement
(SC/11658) calling for the Sudanese Government to
allow full and unrestricted freedom of movement to
UNAMID to enable it to conduct a full and transparent
investigation into those reports without interference.
That statement sent a strong message of the Council's
determination to uphold its commitments to tackling
sexual violence. It is deplorable that the Sudanese
Government is still denying access to UNAMID. Once
again, we urge the Sudanese Government to respond
to that clear and united message from the Security
Council.

On Ukraine, the Council met on 12 November
(see S/PV.7311) in response to continued breaches
of the Minsk agreements by Russian-backed armed
separatists. That also allowed us to reiterate concerns
over the deteriorating human rights situation in areas
under separatist control in eastern Ukraine and in the
illegally annexed Crimean peninsula. The Council must
be ready to continue to monitor and apply scrutiny to
the ongoing threat to international peace and security
posed by efforts to undermine Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity.

The Council also met on 21 November to consider
developments on the Ebola crisis (see S/PV.7318).
The crisis reminds us of the varied nature of threats
to international peace and security. The presidential
statement we adopted (S/PRST/2014/24) usefully
underlined our strong support for United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER),
as well as the need for continued strengthening of
UNMEER's coordination role and for accelerated
efforts to scale up its presence at the district level in
affected countries.

We have had short-notice briefings also on
the crises in South Sudan (see S/PV.7320) and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.7296). I
welcome the first listings under the sanctions regime
for Yemen established by resolution 2140 (2014) - an
important signal of our readiness to respond firmly to
those who are seeking to obstruct or undermine the
country's peaceful political transition. Those are all
examples of an agile Council responding quickly and
flexibly to fast-moving developments.

But I also welcome the way in which the Australian
presidency has allowed us to step back and take a more
strategic look at some important thematic and cross-
cutting issues. The Council's meeting with heads of
police components (see S/PV.7317) was an important
innovation, as was the accompanying adoption of
resolution 2185 (2014), the first-ever resolution on
United Nations policing. As peacekeeping becomes
ever more complex and challenging, there will be an
increasing role for United Nations police alongside
military components. We need to think carefully
about the role and methods of United Nations policing,
including as a bridging capability during periods of
mission drawdown. The Secretary-General's report,
commissioned pursuant to resolution 2185 (2014), will
be an important stimulus to this work.

The continuing atrocities committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), including the brutal
murder this month of a United States humanitarian aid
worker and Syrian captives underline the importance
of sustained Council focus on the threat posed by ISIL
and on counter-terrorism more generally. The debate
on 19 November (see S/PV.7316) and the adoption
of a presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23) builds
on the series of steps taken in recent months by the
Council, including the adoption of resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014), and emphasized the importance
of all United Nations Members complying with and
implementing their obligations under those resolutions.

During the meeting on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq held on 18 November (see S/PV.7314), we also heard a powerful briefing from
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights making the case for a new and sustained effort
to tackle extremism and the extremist narrative. That is
something we shall need to follow up.

In yesterday's meeting on cross-cutting issues
relating to United Nations sanctions, Council members
were able to reflect on how to make the best use of this
important tool for contributing to international peace
and security. I hope that we will be able to adopt a draft
resolution on this issue very shortly.

The theme underlying my statement today is the
value of the Council using its programme of work
flexibly and imaginatively so that we can respond
quickly to external developments and so that we can
step back from the cyclical regular business to consider
important strategic issues and draw conclusions about
how to integrate those into our regular work. Your
presidency, Sir, has shown that this can be done in a
productive way, and I hope that future presidencies
will follow the model that you have set this month for
judiciously blending regular Council business with
reactive Council meetings and discretionary meetings
focused on important thematic issues.

Looking ahead, I wish the Mission of Chad the
very best for the month of December and look forward
to the planned debate on terrorism and cross-border
crime, which will add another important dimension to
our consideration of the counter-terrorism challenge.

Finally, I note that next month will be the first
anniversary of the start of the internal conflict in South
Sudan. It is depressing that all our efforts over the last
year, including our visit to South Sudan in August, have
not yet had the desired impact. The fighting continues.
Efforts to secure political agreement have yet to bear
fruit. Huge numbers of people are displaced, many of
them still forced to seek protection in United Nations
bases. We must use the upcoming anniversary to
reflect on what more we can do to sharpen international
pressure on South Sudan's political and military leaders
and to address the important accountability issues
arising from this conflict.
