Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mariano
Fernandez Amunategui for his comprehensive briefing
on the recent developments in Haiti and for the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/540). Haiti has
been making steady, but slow progress towards
recovery since the devastating earthquake that struck
the country on 12 January last year.

Despite the death of an estimated 300,000 people,
including civil servants, and the destruction of the
capital, Port-au-Prince, the Haitians have shown
tremendous resolve and determination to rebuild their
country. The Haitians need the sustained support of the
international community in this critical phase of
recovery and reconstruction to improve governance,
create employment and undertake comprehensive
reforms, including in the police and judicial sectors.

The relatively peaceful conduct of the electoral
process and the transfer of power following the second
round of presidential elections demonstrate the
vibrancy of Haitian society. The role played by
regional organizations, particularly the Organization of
American States, in the later stages of the elections
also gave credibility to the entire process. We join
others in congratulating the new President, Michel
Joseph Martelly, on taking over from the outgoing
President, Rene Garcia Preval, and wish him success in
his endeavours to restore political stability and to
undertake economic and social reconstruction.

The delay in the formation of the new
Government has, however, slowed down the recovery
efforts, and could affect the fragile security situation as
well. Nearly 634,000 internally displaced persons are
living in temporary shelters and depend on assistance
for survival. The fact that only 47,000 have left those
camps since March underscores the importance of
effective administration and the need to accelerate
efforts so as to create an environment conducive to
facilitating their return.

Reduced donor funding is also affecting
reconstruction efforts. Clearly, the confidence of the
donor community has been eroded by the political
instability at the beginning of the year and the current
stalemate in Government formation. Together with
increasing food prices and unemployment, those
developments make the affected population vulnerable
to violence and exploitation.

If Haiti is to recover quickly from the effects of
last year's disasters, the political leadership must show
resilience in order to achieve much-needed reforms
required to improve the living conditions of the Haitian
population. It is therefore important that, as a first step,
political leaders set aside their differences to reach a
compromise on the formation of the Government.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has played a commendable role since
the beginning of its mandate in maintaining overall
security and stability. The earthquake and the resultant
large-scale humanitarian efforts, as well as the
presidential and legislative elections, created new
challenges. MINUSTAH made sterling efforts, along
with other United Nations agencies, in the immediate
aftermath of the disastrous earthquake and also ensured
peaceful elections this year.

I also recall the contribution made by the Indian
police officers deployed with MINUSTAH, presently
numbering 470 in three contingents, two of which were
deployed by India after the earthquake at the request of
the United Nations. While the role of MINUSTAH will
continue to be critical in the near future, it is a matter
of satisfaction that Haitian national institutions have
been gradually assuming larger roles, with the
objective of ultimately taking over MINUSTAH's
responsibilities.

Against this backdrop, MINUSTAH should focus
its efforts on supporting the political process, capacity-
building and the consolidation of Haitian national
institutions. We therefore agree with the Secretary-
General's recommendation for a partial withdrawal or
drawdown of the Mission's post-earthquake surge
capabilities. We also support the extension of
MINUSTAH's mandate for one more year, as
recommended by the Secretary-General.
The outbreak of the cholera epidemic affecting
the Haitian population also resulted in wild allegations
about its origin. We are happy to note that the
independent panel of experts appointed by the
Secretary-General to investigate the matter has not
found any substance to those allegations. While efforts
to fight cholera continue, there is a need to focus on
providing clean drinking water and better sanitation
conditions to the population so as to avoid regular
recurrences of the epidemic.

India made a modest contribution to the efforts of
the Haitian authorities to deal with the situation there.
In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, India
made a cash contribution of $5 million to the
Government of Haiti towards relief measures as a
token of its solidarity with the people of Haiti. India
also contributed $500,000 to the Central Emergency
Response Fund, which was put to good use in the
earliest stages of recovery work in Haiti.

We have also undertaken a waste management
project as part of a joint India-Brazil-South Africa
initiative. In addition, at the request of the President of
Haiti, the Government of India will support the
construction of 500 low-cost housing units.

In conclusion, the continuing support of the
international community, coupled with stable and
effective governance in Haiti, would help the Haitian
people to overcome the problems they are currently
facing. It is our hope that Haiti will soon do so and
move towards stability and development.

