Mr. Soler Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to join those who have already
spoken in thanking the following speakers for their
statements: Mr. Abou Moussa, the Principal Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI); Mr. Djibrill Bassole, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, who spoke on
behalf of President Blaise Compaore, Facilitator of the
dialogue; and Mr. Jean-Marie Bockel, Secretary of
State for Cooperation and Francophony, chairman of
the French delegation.

I would also like to congratulate Burkina Faso on
its election to the Security Council for 2008 and 2009.

Secondly, I would like point to the positive
developments that we can see in Cote d'Ivoire, where
the countries members of the African Union (AU), the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Security Council are showing a
great deal of coordination and cooperation in their
peacemaking and conflict prevention efforts.

After almost seven years, C6te d'Ivoire has
continued to deal with a political and military crisis
whose many causes are rooted in economic, political,
religious and ethnic considerations.

As we see it, the Ouagadougou Agreement, which
was the result of direct negotiations between the
parties, represents an important attempt at unifying
Cote d'Ivoire and ending the conflict. We are
encouraged by the knowledge that the determination of
the parties to implement the agreement continues at the
political level, but the various stages need urgently to
be put into practice. It is absolutely indispensable that
a solution be found to the issue of the ranks and quotas
for the Forces nouvelles elements that will be
integrating into the unified army. This problem is a
hurdle in the way of the removal of the zone of
confidence and the establishment of the green line, the
unification of the defence and security forces, the
disarmament and dismantling of the militias and their
reintegration. We support the Facilitator's efforts in
achieving these objectives.

The Ouagadougou Agreement introduces local
responses by the parties and has launched a new
impetus for national ownership of the solution. This
process needs continued support from regional
organizations, the United Nations and the international
community. It is necessary to provide technical
assistance to national institutions including the
integrated command centre. It is also indispensable to
speedily carry out tasks, especially the integral reform
of the security sector, the identification process, voter
registration, restoring the authority of the State
throughout the territory and respect for human rights.

In his most recent report on children and armed
conflict (S/2007/515), the Secretary-General stated that
there was an alarming level of violence against
children. He pointed to prevailing impunity. Although
the number of murders and kidnappings of children has
diminished, sexual abuse on both sides has continued
to grow. The intervention of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) could be an important way to fight
impunity in Cote d'Ivoire; however, the Ivorian
authorities have shown resistance to a possible mission
of the ICC, which makes this, practically speaking,
impossible.

The situation can and must get better.
International humanitarian and human rights law
require Ivorian authorities to put an end to impunity for
those who are guilty and pay appropriate attention to
the victims.

I would like to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Choi Young-jin, the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for C6te d'Ivoire.

