We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings. We are pleased that the Secretary-General's recent call for a global ceasefire has not fallen on deaf ears. The Dominican Republic welcomes the announcement by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen, of a temporary cessation of hostilities. We therefore urge all parties to the conflict to immediately halt fighting, to implement a ceasefire on the ground without delay, to release all detainees and forcibly disappeared persons, to activate the prisoner-exchange agreements and to work with the United Nations Special Envoy to urgently restart comprehensive and inclusive political negotiations. In that connection, we need to emphasize the importance of women's meaningful participation in all discussions regarding the current peace process. We are well aware that the situation on the ground is far from stable. We know that the coronavirus disease is present in Yemen and that the country is critically under-equipped, with only half of its health facilities still fully functional. Millions lack access to clean water and sanitation, and outbreaks of other diseases like cholera have demonstrated the country's vulnerability to infectious diseases. Due to the virus, we must also tackle the massive reduction in economic activity worldwide and its almost certain devastating effects on the Yemeni economy. As workforces worldwide are staying home, the same is likely to happen in Yemen, which would be economically disastrous. Moreover, we must consider the potential lack of future remittances from the Yemeni diaspora, which are vital to Yemen's economy. Nevertheless, we believe that early action can still prevent a full outbreak. In order for that action to be effective, all parties must lay down their arms at once and take up the fight against the coronavirus. Authorities must allow full access into the country and to communities in need so that health-care workers and the humanitarian community can slow the rate of infection, especially considering the high number of internally displaced persons. This extremely challenging time also demands that the parties abide by their obligations under international law, and we call on them to engage with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict in agreeing and implementing a time-bound action plan to end and prevent grave violations of children's rights. Finally, we urge the parties to take advantage of the observance of the holy month of Ramadan, which begins next week. There is still time; let us not waste this precious opportunity.
