Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this sixth open debate on
the Council's working methods. This is a persuasive
interest of all Member States, and our working methods
must enhance the Council's engagement with the broader
membership. Increased transparency and consultation
enhance the legitimacy and thus the effectiveness of the
Council, which is always necessary but doubly so when
reform of the Council's membership is at a standstill.
We have many of the necessary tools. The key, as usual,
is implementation, and that requires a genuine will to
change practices.

Opening up the working methods of the Council
has been a slow and, let us be frank, tortured process.
but we have made some real progress. Portugal did
a pioneering job during its Council membership
through its chairing the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Argentina - Ambassador Perceval and her team - has
continued this influential leadership through their
chairmanship. We also recognize and value the strong
voices outside the Council, pressing us to do better.
We welcome the establishment in May this year of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and the active role it is playing. Its contributions have
informed our recent work.

The adoption of the note by the President on
28 August (S/2013/515) was a significant advance. That
note focuses on enhancing the Council's transparency
and dialogue with non-Council members, and it
captures many of the themes identified in a concept note
circulated by Azerbaijan for today's debate (S/2013/6l3, annex). We must now ensure its actual implementation.

If the Council is to be effective, it must, by definition,
be informed. Regular open debates that enable the
Council to reflect on the membership's inputs are
critical. Informal and Arria Formula meetings, which
engage non-governmental organizations and other
actors - including, on a regular basis, special advisers
to the Secretray-General - are also important. The
Council should also keep itself informed through more
briefings by regional and subregional organizations.

An informed Council can also better anticipate
and respond quickly to threats to peace and security.
We see great benefit in the Council receiving regular
horizon-scanning briefings from the Department of
Political Affairs on situations of emerging concern.
As President of the Council in September, Australia
convened a horizon-scanning briefing - regrettably
only the second this year, although we thank the
Department of Political Affairs for its own initiatives in
bringing many issues to our attention. We also welcome
the Council's renewed commitment, through note 515,
to invite the chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configurations to brief the Council.
We believe this is intrinsic to our work.

The Council can discharge its responsibility
to the broader membership only if it is keeping the
whole membership informed of its deliberations. In
September, my own delegation conducted substantive
briefings at the beginning and end of our Council
presidency to ensure that non-members were informed
of important developments. We think this practice
should be institutionalized. Regular press stakeouts are
also important, particularly following closed meetings.

Much of the Council's work takes place in its
subsidiary bodies and therefore is seldom visible to
the membership. It is unfathomable, frankly, that the
Council has allowed a situation whereby only five of
its 21 subsidiary bodies are mandated to openly brief
the Council on their work. Transparency is particularly
important in those subsidiary bodies that administer
binding obligations on all States, including the sanctions
regimes. While that is captured in note 515, much more
needs to be done to make it a reality.

Australia, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) - the Iran sanctions
Committee - initiated in June an open briefing to all
Member States on that Committee's work. As Chair
of the 1737 (2006) Committee and of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, on 18 November Australia will provide a joint
briefing to the broader United Nations membership
with the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) Counter-Terrorism; the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on non-proliferation; the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, and the President of
the Financial Action Task Force. The effectiveness
of the work of those Committees depends on the
implementation efforts of all Member States, and it
seems obvious that all Member States should be more
engaged in that vital aspect of the Council's work on
peace and security.

Troop- and police-contributing countries are at the
forefrontofimplementingmanydecisionsbytheCouncil.
The security environments in which peacekeepers
operate, especially in an era when the Council has
mandated historically robust operations, require that
we ensure a level of information, communication and
consultation that enables us to put together sustainable
operations. The voices of contributing countries
need to be heard prior to key Council decisions. That
is why the Council's presidential note S/2013/630,
issued yesterday, is so important. The note goes
further than previous measures to enable troop- and
police-contributing countries to better engage with the
Council, including at their own request.

Even when the Council is informed, transparent
and accountable i even when it is * there are times
when it is unable to act. The Council has at times come
under widespread and, frankly, justified criticism for
its inability to discharge its responsibility to maintain
peace and security. Much of this revolves around the
use of, or the threat of, the veto. As a long-standing
proponent of limiting the use of the veto - Australia
has historically opposed it - we welcome France's
recent call for permanent members to renounce their
veto powers voluntarily in instances of mass-atrocity
crimes. The French Permanent Representative's
comments this morning are very encouraging. This is
an important discussion we need to have.

