Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Since
my delegation is taking the floor for the first time
under your presidency, Madam, I am pleased to offer
you our congratulations not only for the assumption
by your great country, the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
of the presidency of Security Council for the month of
April, but also for the skill and leadership you have
demonstrated in this important function.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2153 (2014) and takes this opportunity to thank the
members of the Security Council for their continued
commitment to helping Cote d'Ivoire to restore stability
and lasting peace. We note that the resolution just
adopted renews the sanctions regime regarding the Cote
d'lvoire for a period of one year, until 30 April 2015.
At the same time, however, we see that the relevant
provisions have been significantly lightened. Indeed,
it is especially important to note that the Security
Council expresses its satisfaction in the resolution over
the achievement by the Government of C6te d'Ivoire
of considerable progress at all levels, particularly in
terms of the stabilization of the security situation,
the political dialogue and national reconciliation, and
economic recovery.

More specifically, with regard to diamonds
produced in Cote d'Ivoire, the resolution recognizes that
Cote d'Ivoire has fully met the minimum requirements
of the Kimberley Process, to the point where it has been
possible to end the embargo. Moreover, the resolution
also reiterates the urgent need for the Government of
cote d'Ivoire to train and equip its security forces,
especially the police and gendarmerie, with arms
and ammunition adequate to the implementation of
their security and law enforcement missions. That is
why my delegation welcomes and offers the Security
Council the gratitude of the Government and people
of Cote d'Ivoire for the adoption of resolution 2153
(2014), which officially lifts the embargo on diamonds
produced in cote d'Ivoire, and lifts the embargo on
small arms and light weapons and their ammunition
with respect to cote d'Ivoire.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire fully understands that
the provisions of the sanctions regime are intended to
support efforts to strengthen stability and lasting peace.
The Government of Cote d'Ivoire remains committed
to cooperating fully with the United Nations and the
international community to achieve all the expected
reforms to that end, and we hope that at the next
consideration of this issue, the Security Council will
be able to put a complete end to the sanctions regime
concerning C6te d'Ivoire.

