Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador

Takasu for his leadership. I would also like to thank the
Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission's country-
specific configurations, which have facilitated the
Commission's work both in the field and in New York.
My delegation also warmly welcomes Assistant
Secretary-General Jane Holl Lute and looks forward to
working with her on this important issue.

The United States strongly supports the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission. No function can, or
should, be more central to the work of the United
Nations. Today, I would like to make three points.

First, the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, two years ago, was an important but
initial response to addressing what former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan called the missing middle between
peacekeeping and sustainable development. While
progress has been slower than we had hoped, the
Commission today is delivering on its commitment to
the countries on its agenda. It has facilitated the
emergence of new donor partners and has spurred
greater coordination and frank dialogue on the
underlying causes of instability that have so often
contributed to tragic relapses into conflict. We believe
that the Peacebuilding Commission can ultimately play
an important role in United Nations peacebuilding by
helping to marshal the necessary resources during the
golden hour immediately after the cessation of conflict
and, subsequently, by ensuring that peacebuilding is
sustainable. Therefore, the working methods of the
Peacebuilding Commission need to be strengthened to
make it as effective as possible. We look forward to
discussing the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
early recovery as mentioned by the Secretary-General
in his report.

My second point is that peacebuilding must be a
central pillar of United Nations reform and a priority
throughout the United Nations system. Every organ of
the United Nations and every major fund and
programme should take into account the crosscutting
nature of peacebuilding. Peacebuilding must begin
from the earliest days of humanitarian intervention,
with capacity-building efforts to restore the functions
of the State, the rule of law and respect for human
rights. It must also be accompanied by support for the
restoration of infrastructure and the rapid delivery of a
peace dividend that includes work for the young and
the demobilized. The Peacebuilding Commission
should harness the competencies of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and, through its
convening authority, seek to integrate the workings of
peacekeeping, development and humanitarian

intervention. It should also encourage United Nations
funds and programmes, traditional and non-traditional
donors, non-governmental organizations and academia
to better support efforts in the field through inclusive
dialogue, innovative best practices, improved
coordination and, of course, enhanced financing and
capacity-building.

As my final point, I should like to say that we
should also keep in mind the need to address other
early-recovery issues in parallel. Those include
bolstering the role of special representatives of the
Secretary-General with the needed authority and
resources to coordinate the response of United Nations
agencies and the broader international response. We
will also need to revamp the Peacebuilding Fund to
provide greater flexibility in selecting implementing
partners and faster disbursement to immediate post-
conflict situations.

The work we are all doing in the Peacebuilding
Commission is critical. Building lasting and
sustainable peace requires long-term focus. That is
exactly why we are all here, to ensure that we keep that
focus and improve our capabilities. With the right
mandate, the right leadership and the right resources,
the United Nations has a unique and indispensable role
in helping post-conflict societies to find their footing
on the path to peace and prosperity. We must resolve to
develop the kind of peacebuilding capacities required
to fulfil our mandate, to advance international peace
and security and to improve the prospects for success
in post-conflict situations.

