Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to express my
appreciation of your wise and outstanding guidance of
the Council's work.

I should also like to thank your predecessor, the
Ambassador of France, for his leadership as President
of the Council.

Israel is pursuing with impunity its policy of
killing and assassinating Palestinians, most recently
through the execution by the occupying forces of the
leader of Hamas on 17 April. That represents yet
another act of State terrorism carried out by Israel. We
firmly condemn that heinous Israeli crime and believe
that the Israeli authorities must be held legally and
politically accountable.

Israel is pursuing its policy of targeting
Palestinian leaders and of carrying out extrajudicial
executions. It is also continuing to build a separation
wall, including in East Jerusalem, a policy of fait
accompli that is threatening peace and security,
undermining the peace process, and leading us towards
a very dangerous crisis with extremely serious
consequences for the entire Middle East.

At the heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict is Israel's
ongoing occupation of Arab and Palestinian territories.
Its attempts to distract and convince us that the conflict
persists solely because of its efforts to combat
terrorism are naive and self-evident. The occupation, I
reiterate, is at the heart of the Arab-Israeli problem.

The use of force and the policy of fait accompli, a
policy carried out by the present Israeli Government,
are clearly, today, getting nowhere. They only worsen
the situation in the region. These policies are leading to
further damage, killings and deaths. The Security
Council today must force Israel to cease its settlements
and its policy of extrajudicial executions. Israel must
return to the negotiating table. That, and that alone,
will allow us to bring lasting peace and security to all
countries of the region, a peace that is in accordance
with the relevant international resolutions, as well as
with the Madrid agreements and the principle of land
for peace.

We stress here that we believe in the Arab Peace
Initiative consecrated during the Beirut summit, which
was an attempt to put an end to the occupation through
the withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab
Palestinian territories to the borders of 1967. This
requires a just solution to the problem of Palestinian
refugees in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) and the establishment of a
Palestinian State in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 4 June 1967 in the West Bank and Gaza, with
Jerusalem as its capital.

