Ms. Coninsx: I thank members for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the seventh report
(S/2018/770) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/ Da'esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat. I also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov for
providing an overview of the report, and his team for
its collaboration in preparing it, on the basis of input
from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team.

As we have already heard, there can be no doubt
that the threat from ISIL continues to evolve and
pose significant challenges to all actors involved in
countering it. Such challenges derive in particular
from, first, the ongoing transformation of ISIL into a
global covert network; secondly, the activities of its
regional affiliates throughout the world; and, thirdly,
the potential threat posed by returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters.

Approximately eight months have passed since
the Council's adoption of resolution 2396 (2017), on
the issue of returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters. In my briefing today I wish to highlight three
key challenges associated with that threat. Since the
adoption of the first resolution on the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters - resolution 2178 (2014), which
focused on preventing fighters from travelling to
conflict zones - the emphasis has shifted to fighters
who relocate or who return to their countries of origin,
nationality or to third countries. In CTED's engagement
with Member States, we have identified the following
trends in that regard.

First, although the number of returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters is thus far not
as high as some had feared, their unique situation
nonetheless poses a range of challenges to Member
States. States have experienced difficulties in
conducting comprehensive risk assessments of foreign
terrorist fighter returnees and their accompanying
family members, as requested by resolution 2396
(2017). The prosecution of returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters also faces various evidentiary
and jurisdictional challenges. In some cases, a
revision of the existing legal framework is required.
Prosecutors and investigators require specialized
knowledge, including in the use of special investigative
techniques that rely on modern technologies. They
must often rely on evidence gathered by the military,
or on digital evidence located on foreign servers.
Strengthening judicial cooperation and mutual legal
assistance therefore remains vital. States must also
develop tailored prosecution strategies for returning
and relocating men, women and children. Although
Member States have developed a range of rehabilitation
and reintegration strategies and programmes, there is
limited knowledge as to their effectiveness and impact.

Secondly, a significant number of foreign terrorist
fighters have already entered the criminal-justice
systems of some States, which places new demands
on prisons and raises increasing concerns about the
potential for in-prison radicalization. More work
is needed to address issues such as prison capacity
and security, the conditions of, and treatment in,
detention, the specific needs and risks associated with
violent extremist prisoners and the development of
non-custodial alternatives.

I would also like to draw the Council's attention
to a third trend identified by CTED in its engagement
with Member States. That new trend concerns the
potential risks posed by the forthcoming release
of imprisoned foreign terrorist fighters. States are
increasingly concerned about the potential for some
of those released fighters to re-engage in terrorist
activities and radicalization to violence. Many
States are uncertain about the effectiveness of risk-
assessment and monitoring tools developed for such
individuals, whether during their imprisonment or
following their release. A number of foreign terrorist
fighters have been given relatively short sentences,
for various reasons, including, in some cases, lack of
evidence of their involvement in terrorist activity in
conflict zones. In such cases, Member States may have
limited opportunities to engage at-risk individuals in
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes prior to
their release.

There is therefore the need to strengthen data-
collection and information-sharing in that area,
including on lessons learned, in order to ensure that
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes are based
on sound methodologies and implemented in full
compliance with domestic law and international human
rights law. CTED will continue to support Member
States in their efforts to identify relevant good practices
in that area.

Foreign terrorist fighters are only one threat
emanating from ISIL and its associates. The complex
and evolving threat posed by terrorism requires us
to remain ever-vigilant and alert. In our country
assessment visits on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, we continue to highlight the importance
of effective implementation by Member States of the
relevant Council resolutions, including resolutions
2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). Over the past six months,
Member States and United Nations entities have
continued to develop innovative ways to address the
threat. Allow me to highlight just a few.

We continue to support Member States in the use
of the most up-to-date technologies to secure their
borders. Resolution 2396 (2017) introduced several
new requirements in that regard, including the use of
advance passenger information and passenger name
record systems, as well as biometrics. We shall continue
to assist States to ensure that those technologies are used
effectively and responsively, in full compliance with
international law, including human rights law, and with
due regard to privacy and data-protection concerns.

One important milestone in that regard was the
recent publication of the United Nations Compendium
of Recommended Practices for the Responsible Use and
Sharing of Biometrics in Counter-Terrorism. Another
was the recent publication, pursuant to resolution
2396 (2017), of the Compendium of Good Practices
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure against
Terrorist Attacks.

We also continue to forge new and innovative
partnerships with the private sector, particularly in the
area of information and communications technologies.
We are cooperating with not only some of the big
names in the industry, but also small enterprises
and start-ups. That engagement is essential - for
example, with respect to gathering digital evidence in
terrorism cases. CTED, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the International Association of
Prosecutors are developing guidance for requesting and
gathering electronic evidence across borders, including
from private communications service providers,
and will publish a practical guide for Member States
in September.

The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force Working Group on Legal and Criminal Justice
Responses to Terrorism is also finalizing United
Nations guidelines to facilitate the use and admissibility
of information and evidence collected, preserved and
shared by the military.

I wish to stress that our continued engagement with
civil society, including women's groups, is essential
to ensuring a holistic, whole-of-society approach to
countering terrorism and violent extremism. Our
dialogue with the research community, particularly
through CTED's Global Counter-Terrorism Research
Network, continues to provide new insights and
contributes to our analysis of the latest trends
and developments.

The global fight against ISIL and its affiliates
continues. The United Nations system, including
CTED and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, continues
to strengthen its coordination and coherence in order to
assess implementation gaps, identify good practices and
deliver the necessary technical assistance to Member
States. Our unity and joint efforts are as vital now as
ever before.

