Mr. Prendergast: I should like to respond to the
direct questions and also to make a couple of points
that I think arise out ofthe discussion.

There was a question about the peace-building
office in Liberia and where we are. I would say, first of
all, that we are in discussions with the Liberian
authorities about amending the term of reference to
make them more apt to the current situation. We want
to see changes in three areas: first of all, to expand the
involvement of the office in national reconciliation in
Liberia; secondly, a higher profile in terms of a public
information effort, which we think would be useful;
and thirdly, even more emphasis on human rights. We
are waiting for the response ofthe Government on that.

In terms of who would be the next representative
of the Secretary-General, all I can really say is that our
discussions with the Liberians are at a delicate point,
and I do not think that it would be helpful to expand on
that.

More generally, I would say that we do need
coherent and well-thought-out country-specific policies
for Liberia. We have been hampered by the factors I
have just mentioned, but we have also been hampered
by a lack of funds.

Here, ifI may, I should like to take up a point
made by Ambassador Mahbubani and by others. I agree
rather passionately with what he said about the way
one goes from relative feast to relative famine when
one moves from peacekeeping to post-conflict peace-
building. He used the image ofa sprinkler system. The
image I have used in the Council, as Council members
know - and I hope that they will forgive me for
repeating it - is antibiotics. When one gets a
fortnight's dose of antibiotics from the doctor, the
doctors says, "If you start feeling better after a week,
do not stop taking the antibiotics. You have to complete
the course." But my feeling is that all too often the
Council does not prescribe a fortnight's antibiotics. It
can prescribe a week's antibiotics, occasionally five
days' worth. The risk is that the investment made is
allowed to slip away, because during the period of
peacekeeping, the root causes of the problem have not
been eliminated, and we do not give the follow-up
mission the resources to do so.

I agree very much with what Ambassador Kolby
said about staying the course. I think that is a very
good and accurate way of putting it.

Apart from country-specific policies in countries
such as Liberia and Sierra Leone, I think that we also
need policies and a strategy to deal with the linkages
between the individual component problems and
between the other countries of the region. That is why
the Secretary-General decided to propose a West
African office. Mr. Ould-Abdallah has not taken up his
duties yet. He is due to do so full-time on 1 September.
I know that he is available if the Secretary-General
wants to ask him to conduct particular missions.

Meanwhile, I think that we should let him get his
feet under the desk before we prescribe what is his
precise role in relation to Liberia. I think that more
generally his role is to focus on the cracks and gaps
between country-specific policies, and I would see his
role as lying somewhere between a catalyst, a lubricant
and a facilitator. I suspect that his role in relation to
Liberia as well as to the other countries of the region
will lie somewhere along that spectrum. He will not be
interfering with the work being done directly, either by
the Representative of the Secretary-General in Liberia
or by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Sierra Leone, but he will be looking at the
linkages.

Resources will undoubtedly be needed if we are
to be successful in pursuing the policies that have been
discussed today in the Mano River Union area. I think
that we need to be careful not to suffer from bipolar
disorder - that is to say, to prescribe a whole series of
rather grand-sounding policies and then to deny the
system the resources which will be necessary to carry
out that policy.

Just one last word, which is a comment on a point
made earlier on about moving from peacekeeping to
peace-building. I do not think that this is an entirely
linear or sequential process. I do not think that one has
to wait until one is completely into a post-conflict
phase before starting to try to do things about peace-
building. It is really more like a relay race, and the next
runner has to start running before the baton is handed
over, otherwise the process is all too likely to come to a
halt.

