Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this additional public meeting on the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence today, as well as for
his fourth progress report on the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, introduced by his Principal
Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Alan Doss, to
whom I also pay tribute.

I would also like, on behalf of Cote d'Ivoire, to
sincerely thank His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
President of the Republic of South Africa, for having
so fully and resolutely dedicated himself to the search
for peace in Cote d'Ivoire - efforts that have garnered
the wholehearted support of all the parties to the
conflict and of the entire international community.

Finally, I would like to express the gratitude of
Cote d'Ivoire to the members of the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries and all who have spoken
this afternoon on this issue.

My delegation has taken note, with great interest,
of the report contained in document S/2005/ 186. While
awaiting more complete observations on the part of my
Government, I would like to make several preliminary
comments, merely to ensure a balance of information.

The general tone of the report seems to show a
considerable degree of sympathy for the point of view
and attitude of the Forces nouvelles, the former rebels
and opposition parties, while the position of the
legitimate authorities is systematically called into
question - when it is mentioned at all. Such an
approach risks offering comfort to the former rebels in
their intention to change the institutions of the country
by violence and encouraging other rebellions in the
subregion to develop. I would like to provide a few
examples.

First, paragraph 7 states that

"the effective functioning of the Government has
continued to be affected by a lack of clarity
regarding the delegation of powers from the
President to the Prime Minister and the
ministers".

However, since the Accra III Agreement, the
President of the Republic has, in accordance with
article 53 of the Constitution and with the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement, signed a decree delegating
power to the Prime Minister of the Government of
National Reconciliation - and this was agreed to. To
characterize that delegation of powers as ambiguous is
surprising, at the very least, unless that delegation of
powers is understood as the outright renunciation by
the President of the Republic of his constitutional
prerogatives. Such an interpretation would be contrary
to the spirit and the letter of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, as well as of the Ivorian Constitution,
which remains the framework for interpreting the
Agreement. In any case, article 53, which deals with
the delegation of powers, is absolutely unambiguous.

Second, paragraph 8 of the report states,

"However, President Gbagbo has repeatedly
stated his intention to submit the proposed
constitutional amendment to a national
referendum. This position has been challenged by
the opposition parties, which have called upon
the President instead to use his discretionary
powers under the Constitution to amend article
35."

By asking the President of the Republic to "use
his discretionary powers under the Constitution to
amend article 35", the political opposition and the
former rebels of the armed Forces nouvelles are
moving away from the relevant provisions of the
Constitution - provisions that are recognized by the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. In fact, article 126 of the
Constitution clearly sets out the procedure for making
such an amendment. It states that

"Any draft or proposed amendment relating to the
election of the President of the Republic, the
exercise of the presidential mandate, the vacancy
of the Office of the President of the Republic or
the procedure for revising the current
Constitution must be subjected to a referendum."

I should also like to point out that the President
of the Republic has no choice but to respect the
Constitution to which he has sworn allegiance.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General has on several
occasions recognized the validity of the referendum
approach, stating in two reports on Cote d'Ivoire that
only the amendment of article 35 is required to be
submitted to a referendum under the terms of the
Constitution. Thus, the "intention" of the President of
the Republic to consult the general public is a
constitutional obligation, not a choice or politically
convenient arrangement.

Third, paragraph 9 states that

"The Monitoring Committee, established under
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, and the
tripartite Monitoring Group have reviewed the
legislation on the Independent Electoral
Commission and the nationality laws [and it is
their View that] both pieces of legislation do not
conform to the Agreement in all aspects."

The Linas-Marcoussis Agreement recognizes the
institutions of the Republic and the Constitution, with
which it is entirely consistent. The Constitution gives
members of the National Assembly the right to amend
texts submitted to them. Furthermore, also under the
terms of the Constitution, they cannot be given any
mandatory instructions. Having therefore amended
article 35 in good faith, they also, in good faith,
adopted those amendments said by some not to be in
conformity with the spirit and the letter of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement.

Fourth, paragraph 13 states that

"Furthermore, the issue of ensuring maintenance
of law and order and public security in the Forces
nouvelles-controlled areas during the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process has yet to be resolved."

Given that the regrouping - the initial phase of
disarmament - should allow for the reorganization of
the public administration and the redeployment of the
national security and defence forces, responsibility for
order and security in areas previously controlled by the
Forces nouvelles should fall under the competent
administrative national authorities, unless anything to
the contrary is contained in another agreement.
Fifth, paragraph 17 states that

"in addition to the legislative reforms envisaged
in the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement that still need
to be adopted, work on a significant number of
technical tasks, such as updating the electoral
lists, remain at the initial planning phase".

It is paradoxical that the report states in this
paragraph that the legislative reforms envisaged in the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement have not been adopted,
while recognizing in paragraph 8 that

"the National Assembly adopted most of the
legislative reforms planned under the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement which were subsequently
promulgated".

Sixth, paragraph 21 states that

"In the early morning of 28 February a serious
violation of the ceasefire took place when more
than 100 armed elements, allegedly belonging to
the Mouvement Ivoirien de Liberation de l'Ouest
de la Cote d'Ivoire (MILOCI), attacked a Forces
nouvelles checkpoint in Logouale, north of
Bangolo in the zone of confidence."

Why say that the assailants "allegedly" belonged
to MILOCI, when this is a proven fact? MILOCI is an
illegally constituted movement, just like the Forces
nouvelles, and therefore should be treated in the same
way by the international community.

Seventh, paragraph 22 states that

"Pro-Government forces operating in the west

include militias and so-called "patriotic youth

organizations" (both armed and closely linked to 
FANCI) and the Dozos [traditional hunters], who

are armed with traditional hunting weapons as

well as automatic weapons."

The link between the "patriotic youth
organizations" engaged in autonomous activities in the
western part of Cote d'Ivoire and FANCI should be
demonstrated rather than simply stated gratuitously by
the authors of the report, as this is very damaging to
the National Armed Forces of Cote d'Ivoire.

Eighth, paragraph 35 states that

"The Linas-Marcoussis Agreement provided for
the restructuring of the Ivorian National Police
and the Gendarmerie, but the Government of
National Reconciliation has yet to adopt a plan
for this purpose."

Reform of the security and defence sectors is a
segment of the last phase of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, and it cannot
be planned without the participation of the former
rebels, once they have been disarmed. However, such
disarmament, which, according to the provisions of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement, should have begun when
the Government of National Reconciliation was set up,
has not yet begun.

Those are my delegation's observations
preliminary to, as I said earlier, a more comprehensive
and exhaustive report on my Government's views.

I cannot conclude without touching on the
modalities for the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. My Government
will announce its decision in that respect following the
important meeting, set for 3 April in Pretoria, among
the various protagonists and the South African
mediator, President Thabo Mbeki. It will take account
of the outcome of that important meeting and hopes
that the international community will do the same.

