Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the
Dominican Republic on its non-permanent membership
of the Security Council and on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I also congratulate the other
new non-permanent members of the Council and wish
them every success in their new important duties.

I would also like to congratulate the State of
Palestine on chairing the Group of 77 and China and
to wish it every success in fulfilling that historic
task, hoping that it will obtain full membership status
at the United Nations. I would like as well to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his useful but worrying briefing. I
also welcome the presence of Her Excellency Ms. Retno
Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, at
this meeting. On behalf of Lebanon, I thank her and
Indonesia for the important role that its troops are
playing within the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL).

Yesterday marked the anniversary of the birth of

Martin Luther King Jr. I therefore recall his important
words, which are very relevant to today's debate on the
Palestinian question: "The are of the moral universe is
long but it bends towards justice". Justice is precisely
what the Palestinian people have been denied for many
decades. Today, that people still face an open war
against them, their territories, their properties, their
sons and their holy sites, as well as their historical right
to self-determination.

The continuing Israeli occupation with impunity
and lack of punishment has led to that deplorable
situation and to the loss of justice. Even if the world has
failed in its obligations towards the Palestinian people,
it remains true that the Palestinian question continues
to be a priority concern for the Arabs. Two days ago, the
work of the Arab Economic and Social Development
Summit concluded in Beirut. It affirmed support for the
Palestinian people in their resistance to the increasing
Israeli aggressions followed by the destruction of the
Palestinian economy and infrastructure. Their right to
establish an independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital is also undermined.

The State of Palestine is more important than ever
owing to the Israeli practices, which seek to eradicate
the Palestinian question by eliminating any final-status
issues, such as the two-State solution, putting an end to
the settlements and the occupation, as well as the right
of refugees to return and the legal status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.

In that regard, the Arab Summit in Beirut asserted
the need to join efforts in order to ensure the necessary
funding for the implementation of the strategic
development project for East Jerusalem. The Summit
also underscored the right of return and the need to
compensate Palestinian refugees and their descendants
in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, in particular General Assembly resolution
194 (III), as well as the need to support the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Summit
called on all States to uphold international law and the
resolutions of international legitimacy on the issue of
the legal status of the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, not to
recognize it as the capital of the Israeli occupation and
not to move their embassies there. At the Summit the
Arab leaders underscored their determination to take
political and economic measures against any decision
that undermines the legal status of the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif.

Lebanon's position is clear and steadfast. It supports

the inalienable right of the Palestinian people, in
particular the right to self-determination. My country's
delegation stresses the role of the international
community and the United Nations in safeguarding the
foundations for a comprehensive, lasting and just peace
in the Middle East by preserving the gains made during
more than 70 years of international efforts for the
Palestinian question, in particular by upholding United
Nations resolutions,the mostrecent ofwhichis resolution
2334 (2016), which calls for ending the settlement
activities and protecting Palestinian civilians. It also
calls for upholding international resolutions concerning
the occupied Syrian Golan, including resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and especially resolution 497 (1981),
which rejects the annexation of the Golan by Israel.

Today, the region has lost hope with regard to
achieving peace and to having prospects for any political
solution. The peace process now belongs to the past and
there is no glimmer of hope for its possible resumption.
There is no trust between the parties and dialogue has
been suspended owing to each unilateral step taken
by Israel against peace. What is required today is an
international leadership that could be provided by the
Council in order to restore hope and move forward
towards achieving peace.

Concerning Lebanon, Israel continues to occupy
Lebanese territory while maintaining its threats and
violations against Lebanese sovereignty through
flagrant violation of resolution 1701 (2006). In 2018,
Israel violated the sovereignty of Lebanon and resolution
1701 (2006) no less than 2,034 times. That compelled
our Mission to lodge protests with the President of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations no fewer than 22 times. In the first week
of January, the number of Israeli violations amounted
to 23 - 13 air violations, 4 sea violations and 6 land
violations. In our letter dated 27 December 2018,
we drew the attention of the Security Council to the
threat posed by the Israeli air violations against civil
aviation, which jeopardized the safety of air navigation
by endangering the lives of hundreds of passengers.
However, despite the complaint lodged by Lebanon
with the Council, Israel also violated Lebanese airspace
this week, once again threatening the safety of air
navigation. Should we wait for a catastrophe to happen
in order to deter Israel from violating Lebanese airspace
and endangering civilian lives and air navigation?

The most recent Israeli violation represents the
building of a wall and structures within Lebanese
territory on reservation areas along the Blue Line.
While that incident could have dangerously escalated
the situation, stability was maintained thanks to the
coordination between the Lebanese army and UNIFIL,
as well as the role of the tripartite committee in
reducing tensions.

Lebanon reaffirms its commitment to every inch
of its territory and every drop of its waters while
always remaining ready to work towards settling
border disputes within the framework of that tripartite
mechanism. We call on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibilities and to issue a clear and unequivocal
message condemning Israel for any violation against
resolution 1701 (2006).

The adoption in August of resolution 2433 (2018),
which extends the mandate of UNIFIL, demonstrates
the commitment of all members of the Security Council
to ensuring peace and security in Lebanon and in the
region. Lebanon continues to shoulder its responsibilities
with regard to achieving a comprehensive ceasefire
on its southern borders. We are committed to all
international resolutions, in particular resolution
1701 (2006). We therefore expect the Council to take
the necessary measures in order to compel Israel to
shoulder its international responsibility in that regard.

