Mr. Akram (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to see the
distinguished Foreign Minister of fraternal Guinea
presiding over the deliberations of this historic and
perhaps faithful meeting of the Security Council on
Iraq. I would also wish to take this opportunity to
congratulate Germany, Foreign Minister Joschka
Fischer and my friend Ambassador Gunter Pleuger for
the outstanding presidency of Germany during the
previous month.

Iraq is a fraternal Islamic country, a country that
should be among the most prosperous and advanced in
our region. It is sad to see the suffering of the Iraqi
people, suffering imposed on them as a result of two
tragic wars against two fraternal neighbours, and the
consequent sanctions and penalties imposed on their
country. These sanctions have persisted for a dozen
years now because of the resistance from the Iraqi
leadership to eliminate the weapons of mass
destruction they may possess or to provide credible
proof that these have been destroyed.

If war is to be avoided and a peaceful solution
realized, the Council must impress upon Iraq at this
meeting once again that it must comply fully and
faithfully with its resolutions prescribing the
elimination of its weapons of mass destruction and Iraq
must extend, as resolution 1441 (2002) demands,
active, immediate and unconditional cooperation in the
process of eliminating its weapons of mass destruction.
This is in Iraq's own supreme interest. The Iraqi
leadership must also take all possible measures to
prevent suffering for the Iraqi people that would flow
from a conflict.

We are grateful to Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei for
their respective reports. Their assessments have a
critical bearing on any judgement that the Council
would make on whether the objectives of resolution
1441 (2002) and earlier resolutions are being met. In
previous reports, we have been informed of mixed
results - cooperation on process, but far from
satisfactory cooperation on substance. The latest report
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Committee (UNMOVIC), the twelfth
quarterly report, notes the presentation by Iraq of new
documents, the beginning of private interviews, the
enactment of national legislation and the acceptance of
aerial surveillance. Overall, the report notes that the
results in terms of disarmament have been very limited
so far. It asks the natural question, "why a number of
the measures, which are being taken, could not have
been initiated earlier".

However, since this report came out, the process
of destruction of the Al Samoud missiles, as sought by
UNMOVIC, has been under way. Mr. Blix has stated
that the dismantling of these missiles is "the most
spectacular and the most important tangible evidence
of real disarmament". Mr. Blix has also outlined 29
clusters of questions pertaining to the remaining tasks
to complete the disarmament of Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction. We must move quickly to address and
resolve all these issues. The conclusions presented by
the IAEA Director General today indicate that there is
no evidence of the revival of Iraq's nuclear programme
at present.

It is unfortunate that, within the Council,
divergent approaches have emerged to securing the
elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, with
one side advocating urgent enforcement action and the
other suggesting an intensified inspections and
disarmament process. Pakistan believes that an agreed
approach can and must be evolved, even at this stage,
through consultations among Council members and
with United Nations inspectors. The best assurance of
success in securing the disarmament of Iraq's weapons
of mass destruction peacefully is the unity of the
Security Council.

We look forward, therefore, to the informal
consultations this afternoon. We should identify the
measures that could be taken by Iraq, by the United
Nations inspectors and by the Security Council which
could establish beyond doubt that the United Nations
inspections process is working and will result in the
elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction in a
relatively short period of time. Agreed ways and means
to accomplish key outstanding disarmament tasks can
be the basis for such a consensus. Once we establish
the ways to credibly achieve the disarmament of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction, we can also agree on a
relatively short time frame.

This approach, in our view, would be better than
propositions that could result in the early use of force.
We understand, of course, the legitimate concerns
which have been expressed here again today about the
presence of hidden weapons of mass destruction assets
or capabilities and about the consequence of relieving
the pressure which has evoked the cooperation now
being offered by Iraq, and the desire to secure the
implementation of Security Council resolutions.
However, we believe that there is no imminent threat to
international peace and security.

The cost of delay, in our View, will be much less
than the cost of war. A credible pause for peace will be
worthwhile. As our Secretary-General has said, "war is
always a human catastrophe - a course we should
only consider when all possibilities for a peaceful
settlement have been exhausted".

The Security Council's vocation is peace, not
war. War will have grave consequences for the Iraqi
people, for peace and stability in our fragile region, for
international peace and security and for a world order
based on the principles of the United Nations Charter
and the rule of law. We must take into account the
sentiments of our peoples and the views of other
United Nations Member States, the non-aligned
countries and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

Finally, the Security Council must uphold the
principle of equity and non-discrimination in
international relations. We must without doubt hold
Iraq up to the standards of international legality
established by the resolutions of the Security Council,
but we must ask the international community also to
adhere to the same standards in addressing other
problems and disputes. The Security Council has
adopted several resolutions to secure the solution to
other festering and dangerous conflicts, such as those
relating to J ammu and Kashmir and Palestine.

The resolutions of the Council must also be
implemented with vigour and determination. The new
architecture for global stability and prosperity at the
dawn of the twenty-first century cannot be built upon
double standards.

