Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin
by congratulating Poland on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August and on having organized this open debate
on children and armed conflict. I would also like to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland, His
Excellency Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, for presiding over
this important meeting. I would also like to thank Peru
for its effective presidency in the month of July.

I take this opportunity to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations, Ambassador Zhang Jun.

Please also allow me to express my sincere thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba,
for presenting the Secretary-General's annual report
(S/2019/509). I also wish to express my appreciation
to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF;
Ms. Mariatu Kamara, UNICEF Canada Ambassador;
and Mr. Majok Peter Awan, a former child soldier, for
their detailed briefings this morning.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his annual report, which
covers the period from January to December 2018, and
for providing information on the six grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict, such
as their recruitment and use; killing and maiming;
abductions; rape and other forms of sexual violence;
attacks on schools and hospitals; and the denial of
humanitarian access.

We are appalled to see the rise in violations against
children, with more than 24,000 grave violations
against children documented in 20 country situations.
It is not at all encouraging to hear that, even 10 years
after the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009) - which
mandated the Secretary-General to list parties to armed
conflict engaging in patterns of killing and maiming
children and/or committing rape and other sexual
violence against children 4 the number of cases of the
killing and maiming of children in 2018 was the highest
recorded, at more than 12,000, since a mechanism to
monitor and report on violations was set up in 2005.
The number of cases of sexual violence is also rising.
We hope that resolution 2467 (2019), which was adopted
by the Council this year, will act to provide an effective
means of preventing any further rise.

The initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-
General have yielded significant and tangible successes.
As reflected in the Secretary-General's report last year,
too (see S/2018/465), several listed parties to armed
conflict signed agreements to adopt action plans to
end their recruitment or use of child soldiers. The
United Nations system-wide response has also been
laudable. We are happy to learn that some positive
developments took place in 2018, including the release
and reintegration of 13,600 former child soldiers.
However, we agree with Special Representative Gamba
that more focus is needed on that issue. We are happy to
note that this year, no new entity is listed in the annexes
of the annual report. While the Special Representative
and her team deserve our commendation, we also
commend the Security Council for its continued
efforts. In this connection, I take this opportunity to
thank UNICEF for its leadership role in the monitoring
and reporting mechanism.

The use of children by non-State armed groups does
not take place in a vacuum. Conditions that might make
children in those settings vulnerable to recruitment
include poverty, discrimination, inequality, exclusion,
a culture of political violence, tensions over issues
of religion and identity and a history of the use of
child soldiers. Achieving success in ending children's
involvement in armed conflict therefore depends
largely on addressing the root causes of motivation
and desperation and on building societies in which
children's rights and dignity and the hope for a better
future for all children are upheld. In our View, the
parties responsible for the unfortunate situation facing
children should be held accountable for their actions.

Children are our future and they bear the torch of
the culture of peace. We believe in their rights and the
realization of their full potential. It is our solemn duty
to protect their physical safety and their right to live
on planet Earth with their minds free of fear and filled
with hopes and dreams. In that conviction, Bangladesh
signed the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
its Optional Protocols at the very first opportunity.
Bangladesh committed itself to protecting, promoting
and defending children's rights. Under the direction
of our honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina,
Bangladesh is undertaking all efforts to invest in
children's education, health care and skills-development
opportunities in order to enable them to take part in our
nation-building activities in due course.

In this connection, let me report once again that over
500,000 Rohingya children have fled to Bangladesh
since the start of the huge influx of Rohingya in August
2017 as a result of the extreme violence in Myanmar's
Rakhine state. During the exodus, they experienced
immense suffering and trauma that will require time to
heal. They now face a bleak future, despite the efforts
of our Government and the international community,
with few opportunities and no clear idea of when they
might return home. If we do not make sure of their
return in a safe and dignified manner, there will be
a real danger of seeing a lost generation of Rohingya
children - children who lack the skills they would
need to deal with their future.

As international efforts are under way to prevent
the Rohingya from falling prey to despair, some are
apprehending that about half a million able-bodied
Rohingya children could potentially become entangled
in activities that might endanger their future and the
communities in which they live. I would therefore like
to reiterate our call on Myanmar to ensure conducive
conditions in Rakhine state for their safe, voluntary and
dignified return. I urge the international community,
and particularly the Security Council, to provide the
guidance and necessary custodianship for the peaceful
resolution of this crisis.

