Mr. Llorentty Soli'z (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his informative
briefing. We also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Ambassador
Ivica Daeie, and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their statements.

Bolivia reiterates its call for compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999), including full respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence
of the Republic of Serbia. In that understanding, and
in accordance with that resolution, Bolivia believes it
important that the parties abide by the commitments
entered into during the negotiations held under the
auspices of the European Union. We urge them to
work within that framework towards a peaceful
solution through dialogue and in compliance with the
obligation to negotiate, in line with the provisions of
international law.

In that connection, Bolivia encourages the parties
to comply with the provisions set out over four years ago
in the Brussels Agreement on the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
in order to ensure that the security and human rights of
the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija are upheld. We ask
the Special Representative to report on the progress of
that agreement, which we consider essential to achieve
a peaceful long-term settlement.

Bolivia appreciates the efforts made by the
European Union and commends the mediation efforts
of the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to get the the parties
to agree on the final steps for the full implementation of
thejudicial agreement, which demonstrates willingness
to move forward in the implementation of existing
agreements. In that way, the dialogue facilitated by the
European Union is conducive to fostering mutual trust
between the parties.

We also commend the initiative of President Vucie
of Serbia to launch an internal dialogue on the question
of Kosovo. Likewise, we commend and recognize
his efforts to coordinate the institutionalization of
the dialogue process and to form a working group
comprising members ofthe Government, the opposition,
civil society and religious institutions.

Bolivia appreciates the work carried out by
UNMIK, in line with its mandate in the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). We encourage them to continue
working to build trust between the parties, make use
of their good offices to mitigate tensions, use peaceful
means to seek mutually acceptable solutions and
promote political dialogue and respect for human rights
in safeguarding peace, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.

Bolivia praises the work of UNMIK, which it
continues through collaboration with the municipal
authorities and the representatives of the community
of Kosovo to protect the rights of communities,
promote intercommunity reconciliation, create
confidence-building measures and facilitate the return
ofinternally displaced persons. We also hail their efforts
to encourage the adoption of normative regulations
for the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. In that connection, Bolivia welcomes the
convening of the conference financed by UNMIK on
the difficulties of identifying human remains, as well
as the production of the documentary Something Still
Missing to commemorate the International Day of the
Victims of Enforced Disappearances.

We praise the Secretary-General's establishment
of a trust fund to carry out community assistance
projects to benefit the minority communities of Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian peoples who were victims of
lead poisoning as a result of their transfer to camps for
internally displaced persons in northern Kosovo. We
encourage Member States to contribute to that fund.

Finally, we urge political leaders to exercise
prudence in their public statements regarding the
special court for Kosovo - the Kosovo Specialist
Chambers - and to refrain from making statements
that contain bellicose or inflammatory rhetoric. Bolivia
considers the rule of law and its impartial application
essential to combat impunity. Those responsible for
committing war crimes must take responsibility for
their actions, regardless of their condition. The victims
deserve justice.

