The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Timor-Leste, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Santos
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest possible terms the attempt on the life of
the President of Timor-Leste, Jose Ramos-Horta,
during an attack at his residence on ll February
2008, and wishes him a speedy recovery. The
Council also condemns the attack on the convoy
of the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Xanana
Gusmao. These represent an attack on the
legitimate institutions of Timor-Leste.
"The Security Council calls on the
Government of Timor-Leste to bring to justice
those responsible for this heinous act, and urges
all parties in Timor-Leste to cooperate actively
with the authorities in this regard.

"The Security Council further calls upon all
people in Timor-Leste to remain calm, exercise
restraint and maintain stability in the country. The
Security Council urges all parties in Timor-Leste
to resolve any disputes through political and
peaceful means within the framework of its
democratic institutions.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support to the Government and people of Timor-
Leste in their continued efforts to strengthen
democracy and ensure public security and
maintain stability in their country.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the work of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste and for the
continued deployment of the international
security force in response to the requests of the
Government of Timor-Leste.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report on developments in
Timor-Leste, as necessary. The Security Council
will continue to monitor closely the situation in
Timor-Leste and will act, as appropriate."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15pm.
08-23578

