Mr. Adoum (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
to join previous speakers in thanking you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate on what is not
just a relevant theme, but one that has many legal
and especially ethical implications, and is therefore
of interest to us all, so that we may find urgent and
appropriate solutions to the problems facing the civilian
victims of the various armed conflicts in the world
today.

Allow me also to commend the statements made by
Ms. Pillay, Mr. Ladsous, Ms. Amos and Mr. Daccord
on this issue.

Ashasjustbeenpointedoutbyotherspeakers,civilian
populations are the main victims in armed conflict
today, despite the tireless efforts of the international
community to protect them by strengthening and
promoting international humanitarian law, human
rights and the rules, procedures and mechanisms
defined at the United Nations.

International humanitarian law stipulates a whole
array of rules regarding the protection of civilians,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. Under
those rules, the parties to a conflict are prohibited from
withholding water and food supplies from civilians,
from attacking facilities liable to release hazardous
substances, and from massive and indiscriminate
bombing of cities or any urban centres. Besides those
general provisions, women are entitled to special
treatment to protect their specific vulnerability. They
are therefore protected from rape, sexual slavery and all
discriminatory or degrading practices linked to their
gender, such as forced prostitution, forced artificial
insimination and so forth. However, we regret to
note that in conflicts under way throughout the world
those obligations are rarely observed. In fact, they are
routinely violated.

Given the challenges related to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, we should recall and
welcome the fact that the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular have made
tireless efforts to put an end to humanitarian tragedy.
Thus, in its resolution 1265 (1999), the Security
Council deems that certain situations characterized
by grave violations of humanitarian law and human
rights, particularly attacks targeting civilians, could
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
In resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of civilians,
the Council also reiterated its determination, obligation
and responsibility to protect civilians, as well as the
need to bring those responsible for the most serious
crimes to justice, including by referring such cases to
international justice mechanisms.

Many other relevant resolutions were also
adopted on the protection of civilian populations,
including resolution 1612 (2005), on children and
armed conflict, which established a monitoring and
reporting mechanism for parties to conflict; as well
as resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual violence in armed
conflict, adopted 19 June 2008, which provides for the
possibility oftargeted sanctions being imposed on those
responsible for such crimes and gives the Secretary-
General and peacekeeping operations a mandate to
address the various aspects of these questions.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689),
of 22 November 2013, on the protection of civilians,
and the recommendations it contains are invaluable
contributions to efforts to strengthen the tools and
mechanisms for the protection of civilian populations
in armed conflict.

The task ofprotecting civilians in armed conflict is
not an easy one, and difficulties on several levels make
it a difficult mission to carry out. However, whatever
the obstacles, the primary responsibility of ensuring the
protection of civilians in an armed conflict lies with the
warring parties, in particular the State, which should
under no circumstances shirk its duty to protect the
population from heinous crimes such as genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Those duties require that the domestic legal
framework be brought in line with the country's
international commitments. The State must crack down
on violations of the instruments and conventions that it
has ratified. Such a crackdown could be carried out by
specialized military or regular tribunals. Domestic or
international tribunals' efforts in that regard could very
well dissuade those who, absent such consequences,
would commit the most serious crimes against civilians.
In that respect, the role of the International Criminal
Court in the fight against impunity is a vital instrument,
and one that must be strengthened and promoted.

The United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations should reinforce their cooperation on
questions having to do with the protection of civilians
and establish a mechanism to evaluate the effectiveness
of their joint efforts on the ground to shield civilians
from the atrocities to which, unfortunately, they
continue to be subjected.

