Ms. Royal (France) (spoke in French): As the
Security Council is aware, France has yet again violently
and most painfully been struck by terrorist attacks. For
that reason, I wish to thank the New Zealand presidency
and the United Kingdom for organizing this ministerial
meeting of the Council dedicated to aviation security.
My ministerial responsibilities include oversight of
land, rail and air transport modes.

I would like to thank the Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization for her very
enlightening statement regarding the vulnerability of
civil aviation and possible avenues for improvement.
I would like to commend the numerous efforts she
mentioned in her briefing by the organization in the area
of aviation security. I assure her of France's continued
support in that work.

The targeting of civil aviation by terrorists began
in Entebbe in 1976, and there have been various other
deadly attacks against civil aviation over the past
few decades, claiming thousands of lives. Despite
considerable strengthening of security measures,
this threat remains present and topical, as Mr. Boris
Johnson so rightly said, reiterated by Mr. Jeh Johnson,
Secretary of Homeland Security. Da'esh claimed
the attack downing Metrojet Flight 9268 in the Sinai
on 31 October, which claimed 224 lives. In Somalia,
Al-Shabaab has claimed the attack that struck Daalio
Airlines on 2 February. What has changed in these
attacks is both the intensity and global nature of the
threat, as well as the methods used by terrorists. This
is why it is extremely important that the international
community continue to mobilize itself against this
scourge and that it shows greater solidarity. I welcome
the unanimous vote that has just taken place because, as
the Secretary General rightly said, , we are all linked to
one another: we leave one place and arrive in another.
As such, there is clear international solidarity. This is
why it is so important for us to be able to detect weak
links, which are all chinks in our collective armour. In
the past, the Group of Seven (G-7) mobilized itself by
granting pride of place to this topic in the action plan
adopted at G-7 Summit in Ise-Shima in May. We will
have to ensure that commitments undertaken at the

Summit are effectively implemented.

I will conclude by underlining two important
issues.

First, as the Secretary General stated, it is important
that States implement the standards set out in annex 17
of the Convention on International Civil Aviation, to
which they have subscribed, by ratifying the text, but
also that they move beyond them, without hesitation,
when required.

Secondly, it is very important to lend assistance
to States that request it to ensure that they are able to
upgrade their airport infrastructure and bring them
in line with international norms. Such States must
make the necessary efforts to ensure that the air routes
linking them to the rest of the world remain reliable
and sustainable, which is also in the interests of their
economic development. That is why the mobilization of
all the expertise of a State's administration responsible
for aviation security must remain unfailing.

I would also like to mention security in airports,
to which Ms. Fang Liu also referred, specifically the
link between national and international security. Very
recently in France there was an attack on a European
Thalys train. The attack fortunately claimed no victims,
thanks to the courage of a number of individuals on the
train, some of whom were American, who were able
to incapacitate the terrorists. Following that attack we
installed a number of detector gates in stations and, in
the same vein, we are currently looking at the possibility
of placing security checkpoints at the entrances of
airports, not only when one wishes to board the plane
but also when one enters the airport itself. Moveable
gates have also been deployed, as well as a number of
patrol dogs, as was just mentioned by the Secretary of
Homeland Security of the United States.

We have to bear in mind the necessity to exchange
best practices in terms of new security technologies,
namely, moveable gates, which are much more difficult
to identify and are extremely effective. For the fact is
that there is a democratization of air transport taking
place, with the costs of flying falling, leading to a
growing number of travellers. Especially following the
tragedy in Nice, one can imagine the awful tragedy that
could strike if there were an attack during the holiday
period, with airports full of families with children.
Reinforcing detector gates in airports is therefore
something I believe to be essential. As the minister
responsible for safeguarding air transport, this is one
of my concerns when I think of the possible damage
that could be caused from attacks launched where there
are large numbers of people. An example of this is in
airports during the holiday period where there are a
great many people and a great many families.

