Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of the
120 member States that make up the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. Due to lack of time, I shall
read out a summarized version of our statement.

The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to renew its commitment to the fight against terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, considering it one
of the gravest dangers and threats to international
peace and security. Any act of terrorism is criminal
and unjustifiable, regardless of its motivation as well as
where, when and by whom it is committed.

Acts of terrorism are among the most blatant
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian law, in particular the right to life, as
they deprive people of the full enjoyment of their
human rights and fundamental freedoms. Such acts
endanger both the territorial integrity and stability of
States, as well as national, regional and international
security, while destabilizing legitimately constituted
Governments, existing constitutional order and the
political unity of States.

Against that backdrop, we believe it is necessary
to address in a comprehensive way the conditions that
facilitate the spread of terrorism. Experience shows
us that terrorist groups are fuelled by, among other
things, hopelessness, injustice, frustration, the lack
of opportunity and the denial of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in order to promote their criminal
agenda based on hatred, intolerance, sectarianism and
extremism. Poverty, social and economic inequalities;
political, ethnic and religious intolerance, as well as the
imposition of unilateral coercive measures, colonial
and foreign domination and foreign occupation, as well
as violations of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, among others factors, are also part of the
fabric of so-called determining drivers of terrorism.

The Movement expresses its determination to
take prompt and effective measures to eliminate
international terrorism and, in that context, urges all
States, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to comply with their obligations, under
international law and international humanitarian law,
in the fight against terrorism by prosecuting or, where
appropriate, extraditing the perpetrators of acts of
terrorism; preventing the organization, instigation or
financing of acts of terrorism against other States from
within or outside their territories or by organizations
based in their territories; refraining from organizing,
instigating, assisting, financing or participating in
acts of terrorism in the territories of other States;
and refraining from encouraging activities within
their territories aimed at the commission of acts of
terrorism and from allowing the use of their territories
to plan, train or finance such acts; and refraining from
supplying arms or other weapons that could be used in
terrorist acts in other States.

The Member States of the Movement note that
the financing of terrorism is a matter of great concern
that must be fought with determination. We therefore
reiterate the obligation of the international community
to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist
acts and to criminalize the intentional provision or
collection, by any means, directly or indirectly, of
funds by their nationals or in their territories with the
intention that they be used, or with the knowledge that
they might be used, to commit terrorist acts. On that
point, it is worth noting the increase in recognized
potential links between transnational organized crime
and the financing of terrorism. We therefore stress the
need to promote cooperation in the fight against those
criminal activities.

We encourage United Nations entities to cooperate
with Member States and continue to provide assistance,
uponrequest, to implementtheir international obligations
in the fight against the financing of terrorism. We also
recognize the importance of sharing information and
good practices, through our financial intelligence units,
domestically and among Governments, in order to
effectively combat the financing of terrorism.

In conclusion, the 120 Member States that make up
the Movement express their full solidarity with those
countries that recently suffered from terrorist acts.

Allow us now to make a few comments in our national
capacity. We reaffirm our unwavering commitment to
combating terrorism and its financing. Our resolve
is all the greater today, given that our country is a
victim of terrorist attacks, including against our vital
infrastructure, including our national electric system,
in flagrant violation of resolution 2341 (2017), and
against our own Head of State, as occurred in August
2018 when there was a failed assassination attempt
was carried out against President Nicolas Maduro
Moros. In that regard, we conclude our statement by
denouncing before the international community the
fact that the terrorist activities against Venezuela are
planned, instigated, implemented and financed using
resources that have been stolen from our nation as part
of a campaign of aggression that has the backing of
foreign Powers whose policies and practices are a threat
to peace and security, both at the international level and
for my country. We therefore urge the Security Council
to insist that its resolutions be implemented to the letter
and to reject the use of terrorist practices as a political
weapon against our legitimate Government institutions.

