Mr. Motoc (Romania): What is now resolution
1546 (2004) was worked out in numerous meetings and
lengthy discussions of the Security Council. We have
the sponsors and all our other colleagues to thank for
this outcome. This is also a good time to commend
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and his Special Adviser,
Lakhdar Brahimi, for the leadership and skilled
diplomacy they have shown in a context that was not
only exceptionally challenging but also, in many
respects, uncharted territory.

Romania supported and sponsored resolution
1546 (2004) for three reasons. First, it is in our national
interest to see that our selfless contribution to
maintaining stability in Iraq and to shouldering the
work of the country's political and institutional
reconstruction is duly recognized and that it continues
to be founded on the solid basis of a clear and
workable United Nations mandate, backed by the
wishes and requests of the Iraqi people and their
representatives. The Romanian delegation pursued with
particular resolve the goals of the Security Council,
working out, through this resolution, an essential role
for the United Nations in fostering the political
processes ahead of us in Iraq and of further mobilizing
the support of the international community for the
bright, democratic, stable, independent and prosperous
future that Iraqis have so truly deserved for such a long
time. Romania is a part of the multinational force, but
also shares with many other countries the task of
preparing the future Iraqi security forces, in the
expectation that they will soon take over, in the spirit
of the resolution.

The second reason for our sponsorship of
resolution 1546 (2004) has to do with the kind of
approach followed by the Security Council in order to
properly reflect the transfer of full and genuine
sovereignty to the interim Iraqi Government and to
chart the way for future political processes in Iraq. This
approach amounted to constructive, genuine teamwork
by Council members. Indeed, I do not know of any
delegation that was not involved by contributing
valuable proposals, suggestions and ideas for bettering
this seminal text. I think that what we saw developing
in the Security Council regarding this important topic
was effective multilateralism in action.

We are satisfied that we achieved the main goals
we set for our work. First, the resolution reflects the
genuine and complete transfer of sovereignty into Iraqi
hands on 30 June. Secondly, it provides for a leading
role for the United Nations in Iraq. Thirdly, it
articulates a workable partnership arrangement for the
multinational force and the interim Government of Iraq
to handle security challenges. Fourthly, what is now
Security Council resolution 1546 (2004) has met with
complete consensus, not only inside the Security
Council, but also outside its realm, reaching out to all
relevant stakeholders.

We have just come from the meeting convened by
the Secretary-General with the Friends of Iraq. We
have been encouraged by the appreciation expressed by
States of the region and contributing countries for the
ongoing stabilization and reconstruction efforts in Iraq.

With the transfer of sovereignty in Iraq on 30
June, an important historic step will be taken towards
the completion of the political transition there. At the
same time, Romania will assume the functions of
President of the Security Council. In addition to what
have already undertaken in support of the aspirations to
freedom and prosperity of the Iraqi people, Romania
will stand ready in that capacity to assist in the process
opening up ahead for the Iraqis and their many friends
around the world.

