Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Mauritius condemns in
the most serious terms the recent attack perpetrated by
Israeli forces on civilian targets in Palestine. Mauritius
has on various occasions condemned the use of
excessive and disproportionate force by Israel on
unarmed Palestinians and innocent civilians. Mauritius
has equally condemned all acts of terror on the part of
Palestinian suicide bombers. But we have always
pointed out that retaliatory measures by Israel were
unlikely to put an end to suicide bombings. On the
contrary, they would incite further reactions and
embroil the region in a spiral of violence. Yesterday's
attack in the area of Yarmuk in the northern Gaza Strip
claimed the lives of 15 Palestinians - the majority of
whom are innocent civilians, including infants and
children - and wounded more than 150 civilians.
There has been unanimous condemnation of this attack
around the world, and even by the President and
Cabinet ministers of the Israeli Government. Mauritius
would like to present its condolences to the families of
the innocent civilians killed in the attack.

Mauritius believes that the use of F-16 aircraft to
launch missiles against civilian targets cannot be
tolerated. A matter of still greater concern is the fact
that the attack took place at a time when security
officials from both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides
were working very seriously to curb violence and
restore cooperative security arrangements. It also came
at a time when Hamas leaders had declared that Hamas
was going to put an end to all terrorist acts. In the
circumstances, the Israeli action is not at all conducive
to peace and reconciliation. In fact, it has the potential
of creating more anger, more frustration and, hence,
more violence among the Palestinians.

Mauritius looks forward to the investigation that
has been announced by the representative of Israel on
this air strike, and we hope that it will focus on why an
F-16 warplane was allowed to drop a bomb in a
crowded residential area. We believe that Israel must
take full responsibility for this heinous act and take
remedial measures.

While Mauritius understands Israel's concerns
with respect to terrorist acts perpetrated against its
civilians, we must emphasize that, as a State and under
international humanitarian law, Israel has the
responsibility to take necessary measures to avoid the
loss of innocent civilians lives in any action against
terrorism. Indeed, we believe that Israel must commit
itself to ensuring that such acts are not repeated.

Not later than last week, the Security Council
welcomed the positive efforts of the "quartet" and the
international community to look for a just and durable
solution to the Middle East problem. The plan,
which includes the vision of two States - Israel and
Palestine - living side by side within secure
boundaries, presented a road map for a definitive
solution to the Middle East problem. That is very likely
to suffer a serious setback unless renewed commitment
is made by both parties to genuine and constructive
dialogue, culminating in the fulfilment of the objective,
with the assistance of the international community.
For this to happen, Israel must immediately
withdraw to the pre-September position and ease
internal closures to allow people to enjoy their rights
and freedom of movement. It is unacceptable that more
than 800,000 Palestinians have been kept under
continuous curfew for more than a month now. We call
on Israel to stop all new settlement activity and to
refrain from constructing the new security fence. We
equally call on Israel to put an end to its attempt to
prevent Palestinian militants from entering the West
Bank, as such collective punitive measures are neither
legitimate nor acceptable.

On the Palestinian side, we call upon the militants
to put an end to all terrorist attacks, especially those
targeting Israeli civilians. More importantly, we appeal
to the Palestinians not to take any retaliatory measures
following the Israeli attack. Both sides must exercise
extreme restraint if peace is to be achieved.

I would like to conclude my statement by making
a special appeal to the international community to
provide, as a matter of extreme urgency, all assistance
needed in order to alleviate the dire humanitarian
situation faced by the Palestinians. The damage to
infrastructure, combined with a collapse of economic
activities, has placed the Palestinian population in the
most severe situation, to the extent that even the Israeli
Prime Minister has recognized the need for them to be
given humanitarian assistance. We hope that at the
conclusion of this meeting, we will be able to adopt a
decision along those lines.

