Mr. Kolby (Norway): It is almost a decade since
the first Middle East Peace Conference in Madrid in
1991. At the time, we were filled with hope and
expectations. For the first time the two sides
recognized each other's right to exist and vowed to
work together towards peace.

Over the last six months, the situation in the
Middle East has deteriorated dramatically. The
situation is critical, both in terms of the overall security
situation and the level of violence and acts of
terrorism. We have also seen a worsening of the human
rights situation, the living conditions for the
Palestinians and the fiscal situation for the Palestinian
Authority.

There is no alternative to peace. In our View, the
peace process is the only viable way of resolving the
difference between the parties. However, it will take a
lot of time and effort to bring the peace process back
on track. Building a sustainable peace means finding a
balance of interest and establishing mutual trust
between the parties. If the Security Council is to play a
constructive role in order to achieve this aim, we need
a common approach and a common platform. The
priority at this stage should be to halt the violence and
to stabilize the situation. Furthermore, we should
strongly encourage confidence-building measures, in
order to re-establish the dialogue between Israel and
the Palestinians. The Security Council should be a
bridge-builder and should strive to achieve the broadest
possible agreement on issues related to peace and
security in the region.

Norway has repeatedly urged the parties to
resume the negotiations and to renew their dialogue on
security issues. We have also called on both Israel and
the Palestinians to bring an end to violence. While we
understand Israel's security needs, Israel must also
respect the safety and security of the Palestinians.
Furthermore, we have urged the Israeli Government to
lift the closure of the West Bank and Gaza and to
transfer the outstanding tax revenues owed to the
Palestinian Authority. We have also called on Israel to
freeze settlement activities.

The basis of any solution to the present crisis
must be Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)and
338 (l973)and other relevant United Nations
resolutions. Norway also wants to stress that the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, relative to the protection
of civilian persons in time of war, is fully applicable to
the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.
We urge Israel as the occupying Power to comply with
its legal obligations and responsibilities under the said
Convention.

Norway supports the idea of an international
observer presence. If such a presence is to play a
meaningful role, it must have the full support of both
parties. We therefore call on the Secretary-General to
continue his consultations with the parties to ascertain
when and within what framework such a presence
might appropriately be established in the area.

The Sharm el-Sheikh fact-finding committee, of
which the Norwegian Foreign Minister Thorbjorn
Jagland is a member, is due to visit Israel and the
Palestinian area next week. In our view, the committee
can play a moderating role in the present situation and
assist in charting the way ahead.

Norway believes that the Security Council has a
clear role to play in the continuing quest for peace in
the Middle East. We should do what we can to bring
the parties back to the negotiating table and bring the
present situation of violence and bloodshed to an end.

