Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the briefings by the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Kyung-wha
Kang, and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres.
We did not want to say this, but in reading the report
of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation
in Syria (S/2015/124), we were struck by a sense of
death, desolation and desperation. It is evidenced in the
fact that, four years after the conflict's start, we have
stopped counting those who die daily. Over 12 million
people need humanitarian assistance. More than half of
the Syrian population are displaced and 16 per cent of
the population is outside of the country.

Chile strongly condemns the violence committed
against the civilian population, regardless of where it
originates, in particular the escalation of violence in
Aleppo, Hama, Horns, Damascus and rural Damascus,
among other areas. We deplore the use of any kind of
weapon that does not distinguish between combatants
and the civilian population, in particular the use of
barrel bombs and the ongoing indiscriminate bombing
and attacks with explosives, which have increased
the number of dead, wounded and displaced by the
conflict. The attacks and the capturing of individuals
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and their
executions does nothing but exacerbate instability
and insecurity for the Syrian population. All of those
responsible should be held accountable before the law.

We believe it highly important that enhanced
measures be taken to ensure that the parties cease to put
up obstacles to aid delivery in areas that are out of their
control and put an end their ongoing attacks on basic
services and infrastructure. We stress the importance
of an end being put to attacks on schools and other
educational facilities. The displacement of children,
in addition to denying them the right to education,
increases the risk of them being marginalized in
society, with the resulting well-known consequences.
For that reason, we support the Secretary-General's
observation in his report that there must be an urgent
effort to rebuild the Syrian education system.

Chile urges the parties to unequivocally implement
humanitarian resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014) in order to prevent the delivery of
humanitarian aid from being used as a weapon of war.
We stress the pressing need to free the besieged areas, in
which there are over 200,000 people, and ensure access
for the population to medicine and medical supplies.

We take this opportunity to recognize the agencies,
programmes and funds of the United Nations and their
implementation partners for the tireless efforts that
they undertake to deal with the tragic humanitarian
crisis in Syria and the region in a climate that is very
complex and marked by insecurity. Chile condemns the
fact that less than a year after the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2165 (2014), which ensures the protection
and security of humanitarian workers, there are endless
ongoing attacks against them.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that the
humanitarian crisis can only be overcome if we can
reach an inclusive political solution to the crisis, and
therefore we should continue to encourage the search
for such a solution. We value the initiatives taken at the
meetings held in Cairo and Moscow, mentioned by the
Secretary-General in his report, which constitute a first
step. We hope that they can be complemented by the
holding of other dialogue exercises on the basis of the
Geneva communique. We reiterate our support to the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, in carrying out that task.

