Mrs. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
work as President of the Security Council during the
month of December. We thank Mr. J an Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
illustrative presentation. We would also like to express
our thanks to him for his support in this important area.

The Government of Colombia reaffirms its
commitment to international humanitarian law,
particularly to the norms related to the protection of
civilians. We underline the importance for international
assistance in this field to adhere to the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
enshrined in General Assembly resolution 46/182.

06-6406]
Following these principles - while appropriately
channelling the collective efforts in support of national
authorities - acquires a greater significance when
cooperation is directed at countries that enjoy
democratic institutions and legitimately constituted
Governments.

On this occasion my delegation also wishes to
reiterate the importance of United Nations agencies
being fully familiar with the work being carried out by
national Governments in the area of protection of
civilians when establishing the priorities of their work
and informing the Organization on the respective
situations. Objective, balanced and impartial
information includes the identification of shortcomings
and challenges, but also includes the recognition of the
progress in each country.

In the case of Colombia, it is necessary that the
reality of our situation and the efforts made by the
national Government to face the complex problems that
affect the civilian population be properly reflected in
the reports on humanitarian affairs being distributed in
the United Nations. They help to define appropriate
and effective support from the international
community.

Colombia has had to face the actions of violent
groups that have attacked the civilian population.
Those groups, financed by transnational drug
trafficking, have caused internal displacements,
kidnappings, the recruiting of children and other forms
of violence against civilians. The National Government
has been acting decisively to face the violent actions of
those groups, restore security and thus create the
conditions for the proper protection of Colombians.
Our population has responded to violence from those
criminal organizations with solid civic support for the
Government's democratic security policy and for
strengthening that policy during the second term of
President Alvaro Uribe Velez, which began recently.

As a result of that policy, the security situation in
the country has improved noticeably. Today in
Colombia, the national police and civilian authorities
have established a permanent presence in all of the
country's municipalities, a situation that four years ago
was not guaranteed in 157 communities. Today, the
State has strengthened its capacity to intervene using
the armed forces to deal with criminal groups. Coca
crops have been reduced by nearly 50 per cent since
2000. The demobilization of violent groups is being

carried out and nearly 43,000 former members of
guerrilla and self-defence groups have surrendered
their weapons.

As a result of those realities, in the last four years
all crime indicators have been substantially reduced,
including homicides, kidnappings and various attacks
against the civilian population. The number of new
annual displacement cases has also been reduced. In
2002, that number included 425,000 people. In 2005, it
was reduced to 169,000, and to 90,000 in the first ten
months of 2006.

A fundamental part of Government action
involves care for vulnerable groups. The State is
implementing humanitarian policies to care for
civilians who have become victims of Violence. The
Presidential Agency for Social Action and International
Cooperation coordinates the comprehensive care
programme for displaced persons. That programme is
carried out using an approach based on the restitution
of the rights of displaced households and their social
and economic reintegration into their places of origin,
or into the places of voluntary relocation.

To that effect, national and international
cooperation resources are allocated. Likewise, the
programme includes emergency care for displaced
persons. Furthermore, the promotion of the return of
families - keeping in mind the humanitarian
principles of voluntary return and security - has
fostered the return of 120,000 people in recent years.
On the other hand, stabilized socio-economic
conditions are being promoted through actions
including loans for productive projects and technical
training, complementary support for the acquisition of
homes and subsidized health services for those families
and guaranteed education for their children.

Several recommendations that have been
repeatedly presented in United Nations reports on the
issue of displacement have been implemented in my
country in recent years. The problems are complex, but
the Government has spared no effort to face them
decisively. Colombia hopes that this progress is
recognized. The challenge in front of us is still great,
but only through a realistic vision of our situation, free
from prejudice, will it be possible to concentrate our
efforts in an effective manner for the benefit of
affected groups.

The protection of civilians also includes specific
measures and actions for indigenous communities. The
Defence Ministry has implemented a policy for the
protection of ethnic minorities, which has been agreed
by indigenous organizations, through instructions to
State forces that seek to promote the protection of
communities and guarantee the respect for their
collective and individual rights in carrying out their
operations. Likewise, the Government has prepared,
with the participation of indigenous organizations, a
comprehensive plan of support for vulnerable
communities, aimed at raising long-term social welfare
and guaranteeing security conditions for the
communities affected by poverty, violence or drug
trafficking. The situation of the specific groups that
have been the object of displacement or threats by
violent groups deserves special priority and action by
the State, in the framework of policies to care for the
displaced.

The Government of Colombia fully shares the
objective of guaranteeing the protection of the civilian
population and of the enjoyment of their rights. Any
action in that area, including international support,
should be realized on the basis of cooperation and
appropriate coordination with national authorities,
under an impartial approach and in strict observance of
the principles that guide the activities of the United
Nations in the area of humanitarian assistance.

