Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for the initiative of convening this
meeting, which we find timely and appropriate.

The serious situation in the Middle East requires
the constant and dedicated attention of the international
community. The events in the occupied Palestinian

territories clearly demand renewed efforts by the
United Nations and its Member States to find a lasting
solution. A comprehensive approach is necessary to
simultaneously address the interrelated humanitarian,
socio-economic and political aspects of the problem.

Brazil follows with interest the situation in the
Middle East. We have traditionally supported the
aspirations of the Palestinian people to a free,
cohesive, democratic and economically viable State,
living side by side with Israel, within internationally
recognized borders. The excellent relations that Brazil
maintains with both Israel and the Palestinians have
moved us to encourage a peaceful solution since the
beginning of the conflict, through both multilateral and
bilateral means. The creation of an office in Ramallah,
our observer status in the League of Arab States, the
designation of a Special Envoy to the Middle East and
the visits of our Minister of Foreign Affairs and of
other senior officials to the region express our interest
in raising the level of our dialogue with Palestinian
authorities and all interested parties.

The Palestinian population in the West Bank and
especially in Gaza is daily subjected to unacceptable
deprivation, as too often seen in the reports of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies. Abating the suffering of the civilian
population is not only humane, but also an essential
step to paving the way for a successful rekindling of
the peace process.

In this context, the reopening of Karni crossing
and other access points to Palestinian territories is
essential to improving the living conditions of the
population in Gaza. Unimpeded connections to other
countries and the resumption of international assistance
are also necessary for the Palestinian Authority to
provide assistance, including water, food and medicine,
to the population in distress.

We welcome the release of additional taxes and
customs revenues withheld by Israel, which will enable
the Palestinian Authority to meet humanitarian needs
and other basic expenses. We also welcome the
launching of new projects by international donors.
However, the improvement of people's daily lives
requires much more.

Brazil welcomes the recent talks between Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert and President Mahmoud Abbas
in Palestinian territory early in August. Those high-

07-49sz
level political talks show commitment and constitute a
positive sign towards the resumption of the peace
process. We encourage both parties to revitalize the
cooperative mechanisms and reinforce confidence-
building measures with the implementation of projects
that improve the economic and social conditions in the
occupied territories.

Measures such as the release of Palestinian
prisoners, and that of the Israeli soldier held in Gaza,
and the interruption in the construction of settlements
could further foster an appropriate atmosphere at this
juncture. Promoting the economic and social
development of the Palestinian territories is essential to
the efforts of establishing a peaceful solution for the
region. The rehabilitation of degraded infrastructure,
the re-establishment of basic public services and the
restoration of the confidence of investors in the
Palestinian economy are priorities for ensuring the
sustainable development of the Palestinian territories
and the livelihood of its population.

For development to be possible, Israel should
take the necessary measures to remove roadblocks and
checkpoints, allowing people their freedom of
movement. Another important step would be the
granting of visas to Palestinian workers to find jobs in
Israel. Brazil is convinced of the need for qualitative
change in the daily lives of the Palestinian people as a
precondition for the sustainability of the political
process.

Brazil believes that sustained peace can only be
achieved with the involvement of all the actors
concerned. The resolution of the conflict hinges on
respect for legitimately constituted authorities and on
refraining from all acts of violence. The conflicts in the
Middle East transcend the Israeli-Palestinian situation.
They are, in many ways, intertwined. The creation of
positive momentum in one area could generate a
virtuous circle leading to favourable results in others.

The Brazilian Government favours an expanded
debate on the Middle East, in order that other actors
can contribute ideas and efforts so as to strengthen the
peace process. We therefore encourage the
establishment of a group of friends of peace in the
Middle East comprised of countries from different
regions interested in promoting dialogue and
reconciliation, which might join those that are already
directly involved in the peace process.

In line with the proposal put forth by
President Lula in his address to the General Assembly
last year, we welcome President Bush's initiative to
hold an international conference on the Middle East.
Such an international conference could certainly
benefit from the involvement of countries outside the
region, including developing countries.

Allow me to say a few words on the Lebanese
situation, which we follow with concern.

I would like to express Brazil's support for the
Government of Prime Minister Siniora, and to reiterate
the right of the Lebanese people to its sovereignty and
self-determination, free from any foreign influence in
deciding its own future.

