Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
voted in favour of resolution 2351 (2017) because we
believe that the parties will resume the political process
with the goal of achieving a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that accords with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In that regard, we
would like to express our commitment to ensuring that
the efforts to enable the people of Western Sahara to
achieve self-determination continue. The Plurinational
State of Bolivia also underscores its support to the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his new Personal
Envoy to arrive at a political solution that is mutually
acceptable to the parties. We commend the decisions
of the Kingdom of Morocco and the Frente Polisario to
withdraw from the Guergerat area, representing a clear
expression of good will by both sides. We also reaffirm
our support for the work being done by the United
Nations Mission on the Referendum in Western Sahara.

Bolivia is a member of the Decolonization
Committee and has strong ties of friendship with the
people ofMorocco and ofthe Sahara. We firmly believe
that the only way that the peoples of the world can
resolve any dispute is through dialogue, which is why
we categorically reject any violent approach. We will
continue to focus our efforts so that the Members of
the United Nations ensure respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and for the conduct of relations among
States based on respect for the principles of equal rights
and a people's right to self-determination.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the presidency
for the conduct of the negotiations on today's resolution,
which in our view were transparent, flexible and adapted
to the situation on the ground. That flexibility enabled
us to adopt the resolution unanimously, and that is due
primarily to the way that the presidency, particularly
as the penholder, moved the process forward. We are
also grateful to your delegation and its experts, Madam
President, for the political coordination, and to your
country's Permanent Representative for their efforts in
presiding over the Council this month.

