Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the briefers - Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Mr. Ivan Simonovie, Mr. John Ging and
Mr. Ertugrul Apakan - for their presentations, and to
welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania
and Ukraine to the Security Council.

Chad is concerned about the continuing serious
situation in eastern Ukraine despite the signing of
the Minsk agreements on 12 February. The chief
victims of the fighting and bombings are civilians.
The humanitarian agencies' statistics attest to the high
human cost of the crisis in Ukraine, with more than
9,000 people dead and more than 2.5 million refugees
and internally displaced persons, with thousands of
the vulnerable having no access to humanitarian aid.
Added to all that is the massive destruction of public
and private infrastructure, never mind the enormous
suffering that the affected civilians have endured.

In the face of this worrying humanitarian situation,
it is vital that we ensure free and unhindered access
to the conflict zones in order to deliver essential
humanitarian assistance to the internally displaced
and improve their living conditions. Chad believes
firmly that the solution to the Ukrainian crisis must
be a political one, and as such is greatly dependent
on the willingness of the parties concerned to commit
to a genuine negotiation process aimed at achieving a
lasting peace. In that regard, we call for implementation
of the Minsk agreements, as laid down in resolution
2202 (2015), of 17 February, including a durable
ceasefire, whose constant violation by the parties
to the conflict we deplore. The withdrawal of heavy
weapons and the observance of the agreements" other
relevant measures represent, among other things, ways
to ease the violence. In that regard, the observers of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
should not be hindered in fulfilling their mission.
Similarly, the implementation of the measures outlined
must be carried out with respect for international norms,
the recommendations in the reports of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and international law concerning the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.

