Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): We congratulate the
Russian Federation on having assumed the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), thank the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador
Arias, for his outstanding contribution, and welcome
Ambassador Ruperez, the new Executive Director of
the CTC Executive Directorate (CTED).

We would also like to thank Ambassador Konuzin
for having presented to the Council the twelfth work
programme (see S/2004/541), and to express
appreciation for his leadership role in guiding the work
of the CTC.

The CTC is going through a transitional phase
aimed at its revitalization. We look forward to the
finalization of the organizational plan of the CTED. In
that regard, we share the view that the Committee will
need to maintain a balance between reform efforts and
its short-term activities. We agree with the need, as
expressed by the Chairman, for the Committee to play
a more active role in coordinating the provision of
technical assistance. In that context, the integration of
the analysis of country assessments of assistance needs
into the review process should be done in an objective
manner.

On the question of reporting, while emphasizing
the need for the timely submission of reports, the
Committee should also try to address issues such as
reporting fatigue, technical capacity for rendering such
reports and other areas on which Ambassador Baja also
touched.

We have noted the efforts of the Chairman to
pursue closer coordination with other United Nations
structures dealing with various aspects of counter-
terrorism. However, we understand that such
coordination will be pursued within the respective
mandates of the Committee and other United Nations
structures.

We have noted the Committee's intention to begin
preparations for the first visit by the CTC to a Member
State, subject to its consent. Such visits should lead to
the creation of a climate of cooperation and to the
provision of technical assistance, as pointed out by the
Chairman in his statement today.

We support activities aimed at improving
communication between the Committee and Member
States so as to enhance the capacity of States to fight
terrorism more effectively. We also share the View that
the Committee needs to improve its communication
methods to promote transparency and avoid
misperceptions about its work. We look forward to the
meeting of the CTC with international, regional and
subregional organizations to be hosted by the League
of Arab States later this year.

