Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): South Africa would
like to congratulate your country, Sir, on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January, and to thank you for convening this
important debate. Furthermore, my delegation wishes to
express its appreciation to AssistantSecretary-General
ad interim for Political Affairs Jens Toyberg-Frandzen
for his insightful briefing. I also take this opportunity
to congratulate all the new members of the Security
Council.

South Africa wishes to align itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representative
of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community and by the representative
of the Kingdom of Morocco on behalf of the African
Group, as well as with the statement delivered earlier
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

During the commemorative year of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, despite the
Organization's numerous achievements, it still remains
to be seen when there will be a resolution to the decades-
long Palestinian and Israeli conflict. This decade's long
conflict is a stain on the very purposes and principles of
the United Nations as enshrined in the Charter.

Last month, the Council had an opportunity to take
decisive action on an issue that has long eluded it and to
provide a ray oflight to the Palestinians in the occupied
territories, who endured a horrible year that witnessed
a human tragedy of unprecedented proportions,
particularly after the tragic events that took place in
Gaza. Unfortunately, once again, to the dismay of the
Palestinian people and the international community,
the Security Council failed to take decisive action on
a Palestinian Government-led initiative that sought to
provide a time frame and parameters for ending the
illegal occupation of the Palestinian lands.

My delegation wishes to commend Council
members that took a principled step by voting in
support of the draft resolution (S/2014/916), which
had as its sole purpose the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and the realization of the two-State solution.
While disappointed that the Security Council fell short,
South Africa nonetheless welcomes the increasing
support and recognition of the Palestinian statehood,as
reflected in various national assemblies around the
world. such as in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain,
France and Sweden.

My delegation believes that the only way to
bring about genuine and ever-lasting peace between
Israel and Palestine is by having comprehensive
and unconditional negotiations to deal with all the
final-status issues, including the unrelenting and
illegal expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories of Palestine as well as the lifting of the Gaza
blockade and the continuing illegal occupation of the
Palestinian territory. My delegation is supportive of all
international efforts aimed at brokering a just resolution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and urges all parties
to the conflict to negotiate in good faith in order to
reach a permanent and just solution to the conflict.

South Africa expresses its appreciation to the
Government of Switzerland for convening the recent
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as all participating
High Contracting Parties for reflecting the
overwhelming importance of ensuring the protection of
the inalienable human rights of the Palestinian people.
The holding of the Conference was an important step in
ensuring respect for the provisions of the Convention
and international humanitarian law. Last year's
violent incursions in Gaza illustrated the need for the
international community to do more to protect civilians
in that conflict.

We are also concerned by reports that the
Israeli Government decided to freeze the transfer of
$127.6 million in tax revenue collected on behalf of
the Palestinians following the Palestinian leadership
decision to become a State party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. South Africa
respects the sovereign right and wishes of the State of
Palestine to accede to the Rome Statute and calls upon
all Member States to refrain from punitive steps in
retaliation to that sovereign right.

South Africa would like to call for the redoubling
of efforts to rebuild homes and infrastructure destroyed
during the war. We remain committed to supporting
international efforts to assist the peoples of Palestine
and Israel in finding lasting peace in the context of the
two-State solution through a negotiated settlement.

With regard to Syria, my delegation is concerned
about the humanitarian crisis brought about by nearly
four years of Syrian conflict. The conflict in Syria has
been characterized by a high number ofhuman casualties
and a large number of internally displaced people and
refugees fleeing into neighbouring countries, which
has had a destabilizing impact on the entire region.

The only hope for the Syrian people lies in the
willingness ofthe parties to the conflict to immediately
put an end to the violence and engage each other
constructively in a dialogue with a View to reaching
an agreement on the political transition based on the
Geneva communique of June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
It is the responsibility of the Syrian Government and
the opposition to sincerely engage each other in the aim
of making difficult decisions concerning the future of
Syria.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to extend
its deepest condolences to the Governments and peoples
of France, Yemen, Nigeria, Australia and Pakistan, who
in recent weeks have suffered inhumane and barbaric
terrorist attacks. The South African Government joins
the international community in condemning all these
attacks, and reiterates its stance that terrorism in any
form and from whichever quarter cannot be condoned.

