Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan is not a
party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Nevertheless, we strongly believe that the
protection and vindication ofrights, as well as insistence
on accountability, contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our decision to vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us today is based
on the following understanding.
First, Kenya and the region in which it is situated
are facing complex security challenges. Kenya is
a front-line State in and one of the key regional
contributors to the fight against international terrorism.
In that connection, the judicial proceedings against the
country's senior officials would undoubtedly create
serious obstacles to the normal functioning of State
institutions in Kenya and thereby pose a threat to
the ongoing efforts to ensure and promote peace and
stability in the region. Azerbaijan understands the
concerns of Kenya and the African Union, and deems
them legitimate and reasonable.

Secondly, the request for deferral cannot be
considered a measure of impunity. It is important that
the draft resolution recalls the need to fight impunity
and to hold accountable all perpetrators of the 2007-
2008 post-election violence in Kenya.

Thirdly, the Government of Kenya has demonstrated
a strong commitment to fighting impunity and to
complying with its international obligations, including
those deriving from the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, to which Kenya has been a party since
1 June 2005. It should be particularly noted that both
the President and the Deputy President of the Republic
of Kenya have extended full cooperation to the ICC
process.

Fourthly, the Government of Kenya has made
considerable efforts to restore the stability and
security in the country since the 2007 post-election
political crisis. The peaceful and democratic conduct
of the general elections in March is illustrative of the
country's progress and determination to move forward.

Fifthly, the concept of complementarity is the
cornerstone of the operation of the International
Criminal Court. We believe that Kenya is capable of
investigating the alleged post-election crimes, and we
take note of its ongoing efforts and measures in that
regard.

Azerbaijan voted in favour of the draft resolution
before us today to express its support for the deferral of
the investigation and prosecution against the President
and Deputy President of the Republic of Kenya for a
period of 12 months, in accordance with article 16 of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

