Mr. Atran: I thank the Security Council and the
Government of Jordan for letting me try to help.

I am an anthropologist. Anthropologists, as a group,
study the diversity of human cultures to understand
our commonalities and differences, and to use the
knowledge of what is common to help us bridge our
differences. My research aims to help reduce violence
between peoples by first trying to understand thoughts
and behaviours as different from my own as any I can
imagine, such as suicide bombings that kill masses
of people innocent of direct harm to others. The key,
as Margaret Mead taught me long ago when I worked
as her assistant at the American Museum of Natural
History here in New York, was to empathize with
people without always sympathizing; to participate in
their lives to the extent you feel is morally possible, and
then report.

I have spent much time observing, interviewing and
carrying out systematic studies among people on six
continents who are drawn to violent action for a group
and its cause, most recently with colleagues last month
in Kirkuk, Iraq, among young men who had killed for
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), and with
young adults in the banlieus of Paris and the barrios
of Barcelona who seek to join it. With some insights
from social science research, I will try to outline a few
conditions that may help move youth from taking the
path of violent extremism.

But first, who are these young people? None of
the ISIS fighters we interviewed in Iraq had more
than primary school education; some had wives and
young children. When asked "What is Islam?" they
answered "my life". They knew nothing of the Quran or
the Hadith, or of the early caliphs Omar and Othman,
but had learned of Islam from Al-Qaida and ISIS
propaganda, teaching that Muslims like them were
targeted for elimination unless they first eliminated the
impure. This is not an outlandish proposition in their
lived circumstances; they told of growing up after the
fall of Saddam Hussein in a hellish world of constant
guerrilla war, family deaths and dislocation, and of not
being even able to go out of their homes or temporary
shelters for months on end.

In Europe and elsewhere in the Muslim diaspora,
the recruitment pattern is different. About three out
of every four people who join Al-Qaida or ISIS do so
through friends; most of the rest do so through family
or fellow travelers in search of a meaningful path in
life. It is rare that parents are ever even aware that
their children desire to join the movement. In diaspora
homes, Muslim parents are reluctant to talk about
the failings of foreign policy and ISIS, whereas their
children often want desperately to understand.

Most foreign volunteers and supporters fall within
the mid-ranges of what social scientists call "the normal
distribution" in terms of psychological attributes like
empathy, compassion, idealism and wanting mostly to
help people rather than to hurt them. They are mostly
young people in transitional stages in their lives:
students, immigrants between jobs or mates, having
left or about to leave their native family and looking
for a new family of friends and fellow travelers with
whom they can find significance in life. Most have had
no traditional religious education, and are often "born
again" into a socially tight, ideologically narrow but
world-spanning sense of religious mission. Indeed, it is
when those who do practice religious ritual are expelled
from the mosque - not in it - for expressing radical
political beliefs, that the move to violence is most likely.

Last summer, a poll by ICM. Research revealed
that more than one in four French youth - of all
creeds - between the ages of 18 and 24 had a favourable
attitude towards ISIS. In Barcelona just this month, 5 of
11 captured ISIS sympathizers who planned to blow up
parts of the city were recent atheist or Christian converts.
The unholy alliance of narrow xenophobic nationalism
and militant jihad, which play off one another's fears,
are beginning to destabilize the European middle class
much as fascism and communism did in the 1920s and
1930s, while inciting willingness to sacrifice among
both nationalist xenophobes and militant jihadis. By
contrast, our own research shows that even among
native Western youth, ideals of liberal democracy no
longer elicit willingness to make costly sacrifices for
their defence.

Europe has a birth rate of 1.4 per couple, which
means that without massive immigration it cannot
sustain a viable middle class, upon which every
successful democracy depends. Yet Europe is arguably
further from effectively dealing with problems of
immigration than ever before. As one young woman
from the Paris banlieu of Clichy-sur-Bois told us, she,
like so many others she hung out with, felt neither
French nor Arab, and because she will always be looked
on suspiciously for the acts of others, she would choose
the caliphate to help create a homeland where Muslims
could pool their resources, be strong again and live in
dignity.

But the popular notion of a clash of civilizations
between Islam and the West is woefully misleading.
Violent extremism represents not the resurgence of
traditional cultures, but their collapse, as young people
unmoored from millennial traditions flail about in search
of a social identity that gives personal significance
and glory. That is the dark side of globalization. They
radicalize to find a firm identity in a flattened world:
where vertical lines of communication between the
generations are replaced by horizontal peer-to-peer
attachments that can span the globe. Young people
whose grandparents were Stone Age animists in
Sulawesi, far removed from the Arab world, told me
they dreamed of fighting in Iraq or Palestine in defense
of Islam.

Although typically viewed in military terms,
Al-Qaida, ISIS and related groups pose the greatest
threat as the world's most dynamic countercultural
movement, one whose values run counter to the
nation-State system represented here in the United
Nations, and to its Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It has drawn youth from many places into the
largest, most potent extraterritorial fighting force since
the Second World War. Just as it took more than a decade
for Al-Qaida to mature into a global menace, it may be
many years before we see the full effect of ISIS, even
if it is kicked out of its current territorial base. Unless
we understand those powerful cultural forces, we will
fail to address the threat. When, as now, the focus is on
military solutions and police interdiction, matters have
already gone way too far. Ifthat focus remains, we lose
the coming generation.

What might therefore be done? Foremost,
Governments should continue their important work
on problems of development, and on immigration and
integration, with a goal of transforming the much-
lamented youth bulge into a youth boom by unleashing
youth's inherent energy and idealism. But let me
propose three conditions that I believe young people
need, with brief illustrations. Each country will have to
create and mobilize those conditions, suited to its own
circumstances.

The first condition is to offer youth something that
makes them dream of a life of significance through
struggle and sacrifice in comradeship. That is what
ISIS offers. The IdaratAZ-Tawahhush manifesto - The
Management ofSavagery - states,

"Fly to us youth from the regions we manage. For
the youth of the nation are closer to the innate nature
of human beings on account of their rebelliousness
within them. And the inert groups, they only try to
suppress this."
When I hear yet another tired appeal to moderate
Islam, usually from much older folk, I ask, "Are you
kidding? Don't any of you have teenage children?
When did 'moderate' anything have wide appeal for
youth yearning for adventure, glory and significance?"

Members of the Council should ask themselves,
"What dreams may come from most current Government
policies that offer little beyond promises of comfort and
security?" Young people will not choose to sacrifice
everything, including their lives - the totality of
their self-interests - just for material rewards. In
fact, research shows that offering material rewards or
punishments, carrots or sticks, may only push truly
devoted actors to greater extremes. Research also
shows that the greatest predictor of willingness to
sacrifice and join comrades in a sacred cause, one that
provides a sense of special destiny and the will to fight,
is what initially enables initially low-power insurgent
and revolutionary groups to resist and often prevail
against materially more powerful groups that depend
on material incentives, such as armies and police, which
in turn rely mainly on pay and promotion rather than a
heartfelt duty to defend the nation. Sacred values must
be fought with other sacred values, or by sundering the
social networks in which those values are embedded.

The second condition is to offer youth a positive
personal dream, with a concrete chance of realization.
The appeal of Al-Qaida and ISIS is not about jihadi
websites, which are mostly blather and bombast,
although they can be an initial attractor. It is about what
comes after. There are nearly 50,000 Twitter hashtags
supporting ISIS, with an average of 1,000 followers
each. They succeed by providing opportunities for
personal engagement, where people have an audience
with whom they can share and refine their grievances,
their hopes and their desires. In contrast, Government
digital outreach programmes typically provide generic
religious and ideological counter-narratives, seemingly
deaf to the personal circumstances of their audiences.
They cannot create the intimate social networks that
dreams need.

Moreover, counter-narrative messaging is mostly
negative: "So Daesh wants to build a future?" Well, is
beheading a future you want, or someone controlling
details of your diet and dress? Can anyone not know
that already? Does it really matter to those drawn to the
cause despite, or even because of such things? As one
teenage girl from a Chicago suburb retorted to United
States Federal Bureau of Investigation agents who
stopped her from flying to Syria, "Well, what about
the barrel bombings that kill thousands? Maybe the
beheading helps to stop that." For some, strict obedience
provides freedom from uncertainty about what a good
person is to do. Besides, once a person is convinced of
the mission's moral virtue, then spectacular violence is
not a turn off, but sublime and empowering, as Edmund
Burke noted about the French Revolution, which
introduced the modern notion of terror as an emergency
defence of radical political change.

Make no mistake: few if any of those who join
militant jihad, or xenophobic nationalisms for that
matter, are nihilists. Nihilism is an accusation levelled
by those who wishfully refuse, ostrich-style, to consider
the moral appeal, and hence the real danger, of such
movements. Being willing to die to kill others requires
a deep conviction of moral virtue. In Singapore last
week, some speaking for Western Governments argued
that the caliphate was mythology, covering traditional
power politics. Research with those drawn to the cause
show that this is a dangerous misconception. The
caliphate has re-emerged as a mobilizing cause in the
minds of many Muslims. As one imam in Barcelona
told us,

"I am against the violence of Al-Qaida and ISIS,
but they have put our predicament in Europe and
elsewhere on the map. Before, we were just ignored.
And the caliphate, we dream of it like the Jews
dreamed of Zion. Maybe it can be a federation,
like the European Union, of Muslim peoples. The
caliphate is here, in our hearts, even if we don't
know what real form it will finally take."

Without recognizing those passions, we risk
fanning them. Any serious engagement must be attuned
to individuals and their networks, not to mass marketing
of repetitive messages. Young people empathize with

each other; they do not lecture at one another. From
Syria, a young woman messages another,

"I know how hard it is to leave behind the mother
and father you love, and not tell them until you are
here, that you will always love them but that you
were put on this Earth to do more than be with or
honour your parents. I know this will probably be
the hardest thing you may ever have to do, but let
me help you explain it to yourself and to them."

We need that kind of engagement.

A third condition is to offer youth the chance to
create its own local initiatives. Social science research
shows that local initiatives, begun with small-scale
involvement, are better than national and large-scale
programmes in reducing violence. It does not matter
which Government agencies we want to help facilitate
this. Let youth engage youth in the search for meaningful
ways to make sense of the issues on their personal
agenda, whether that be about oppression and political
marginalization, lack of economic opportunity, the
trauma of exposure to violence, or problems of identity
and social exclusion. Most of all, we must support
personal engagement, through mutual support and
community-based mentors - because it is almost
always a particular personal circumstance, shared with
friends, that radical extremism probes for, draws out
and tries to universalize into moral outrage and violent
action.

Allow me to close with this consideration. At just
16, Gulalai Ismail and her sister Saba set up the Seeds of
Peace network with a group of school friends to change
the lives of young women in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
North-West Pakistan. They began by focusing on
women's place in society, and as their membership
has grown, they are now training young activists to
become local peace-builders, challenging violent
extremism. They trained 25 young people in each of
the past two years to join together to promote tolerance,
non-violence and peace. The initiative is proving so
popular that last year they had over 150 applicants. The
50 trained young volunteers are now, in turn, reaching
out to people in their communities who are vulnerable
to radicalization. They hold study circles and one-on-
one meetings with those people to develop and promote
ideas for a peaceful future.

Still in its early stages, the programme will
reach almost 1,500 young people in the next three
years - building a movement of activists against
religious and political extremism. The results are really
a lot more remarkable than that, but Gulalai Ismail will
not claim credit publicly. Imagine a global archipelago
of such peace-builders: if you can find concrete ways
to help and empower them, without trying too hard to
control them, they could well win the future.

In sum, what is most important is quality time and
the sustained follow-up of young people with young
people, who understand that motivational factors can
vary greatly with context and despite commonalities,
whether it be for a young father from Kirkuk, a teenage
girl from Paris, neighbourhood friends from Tetuan,
Morocco, or high-school soccer fans from Fredrikstad,
Norway - all seeking and yearning for ISIS. It takes
a dynamic movement, at once intimately personal and
global - involving not just entrepreneurial ideas, but
also physical activity, music and entertainment - to
counter the growing global counterculture of violent
extremism.
