Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): When the illegal military junta
in Freetown forcefully and brutally deposed the
democratically elected legal Government of President Alhaji
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah on 25 May 1997, Kenya joined the
rest of Africa and the world in unequivocally condemning
that completely unacceptable act. This condemnation was
emphatically stated by the thirty-third summit of the
Organization of African Unity held in Harare, Zimbabwe,
from 2 to 4 June 1997. We in the Council had already
acted in a presidential statement and followed it with even
stronger condemnation on 11 July 1997 and 6 August 1997.

Africa was saying, and the international community
was supporting the clear statement, that military coups
overthrowing democratically elected Governments were no
longer going to be accepted. No equivocation, no
compromise. As we speak today, no nation in the world has
recognized this regime. In fact, more and more voices are
being heard all over the world reaffirming over and over
again this united stand against the illegal junta in Freetown.
This illegal junta must not enjoy any kind of support. In
this regard, Kenya appreciates and strongly supports the
Secretary-General's position contained in his letter dated
October 7 1997:

"At stake is a great issue of principle, namely,
that the efforts of the international community for
democratic governance, grounded in the rule of law
and respect for human rights, shall not be thwarted
through illegal coups." [S/1997/776, p.2]

The superb efforts currently being exerted by the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
through its Committee of Five - Nigeria, its Chairman,
Ghana, Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia - were initiated
in good faith to try and negotiate a way for the illegal junta
peacefully to relinquish power. These efforts have been
focused and concerted. Above all, they have been
conducted in good faith. The coup leaders said they wanted
to talk but, because of their greed and duplicity, they have
equivocated and sought to buy time in order to consolidate
their illegal grip on power. They have been insincere and
cynical. The illegal junta has even tried to divide the
international community. We have stood firm and rejected
its cynicism completely.

In a statement before the General Assembly
yesterday, Kenya's Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, the Honourable Stephen
Kalonzo Musyoka, recalled President Tejan Kabbah's
appeal for help on October 1, 1997 at that very rostrum.
Today, we voice the same plea and unequivocally support
the timely regional initiative. As a country that has
consistently employed regional initiatives to resolve
regional problems, Kenya believes that the importance of
this effort cannot be emphasized enough. This is African
self-help, buttressed in a cooperative and solid manner by
the international community. We are happy to note that
this Council expresses its full support and appreciation for
their mediation efforts.
ECOWAS cannot assist in the faithful
implementation of this decision of the Security Council
without solid financial help from the international
community. The draft resolution therefore urges all States
to provide it with technical and logistical support.

Looking ahead, we are confident that this draft
resolution will be a useful tool for ECOWAS as it
continues in its mediation efforts. When President Kabbah
is reinstated in Freetown, we look forward to a speedy
and faithful implementation of the Abidjan Agreement in
a spirit of reconciliation and goodwill for all the people
of Sierra Leone. On our part, we will continue to support
this post-conflict peace-building effort with others,
hopefully including the vehicle of a group of friends of
Sierra Leone, in which we will be willing to participate.

Today, the international community, in reaffirming
its commitment to democracy, will impose sanctions on
the illegal junta. The sanctions come into effect
immediately and will be lifted as soon as the junta
relinquishes power and President Kabbah's democratic
Government is back in its rightful place. They are
targeted and, in our View, well calibrated, taking into
important account the humanitarian considerations of the
innocent civilians of Sierra Leone. We are obviously
concerned about the added impact of these sanctions, but
we believe that this is a necessary and well thought-out
push by the international community to dislodge the
illegal junta in Freetown.

For all these reasons, Kenya will vote in favour of
the draft resolution. We thank all those within this
Council who have worked tirelessly in ensuring this

 

outcome and call upon the entire international community
faithfully to implement the decisions of this draft resolution.
Our resolve is firm, our voice united and loud. The junta
must go.

