Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): First of all,
Mr. President, on behalf of the President of the Republic
of Benin, Mr. Boni Yayi, I would like to convey to you
the congratulations of our Government on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We were very happy with the choice of theme for today's
debate, a topic that makes the issue of security in Africa
a central concern on the international agenda. My
delegation fully subscribes to the analysis contained in
the concept note presented by Togo (S/2013/264, annex).

Owing to its many vulnerabilities, Africa has
become a favourite target for terrorist entities
operating under the cover of violent extremism and
religious fanaticism and in collusion with global
criminal networks seeking to set up sanctuaries on the
African continent by destabilizing its countries. The
phenomenon, which we have seen manifested in Mali,
is liable to repeat itself in other places on the continent
already under siege, given the adverse effects of the
proliferation and illicit circulation of small arms and
light weapons. The flood of dirty money, produced from
all sorts of trafficking, further contributes to making
States more fragile. The report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on terrorism and violent
extremism in Africa, presented during the summit that
was held in January, focuses on evidence of collusion
between extremism and transnational crime in the
various regions of the continent.

As a negation of the fundamental values of the
free world, narco-terrorism must be fought with
determination wherever it emerges. It is fortunate that
the international community has correctly sized up the
global nature of the challenge posed by the phenomenon
in Africa and is doing what it can to put in place an
effective partnership to eliminate it.

We reiterate our support for the operations
launched by France and supported by Chad, which
made it possible to save the Malian State and recover
territories occupied by terrorists in the northern part of
the country. The establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali will allow for integrated assistance for the rebirth
of Mali. Benin is ready to make its modest contribution
to the effort.

The situation that the international community had
to face in Mali has shown the limits of the continental
peace architecture for Africa. It also illustrated the
obvious need to correct the situation, the reasoning for
which emerged during the high-level thematic debate
held in the General Assembly on 25 and 26 April.

Interregional compartmentalization, not only with
respect to markets but also with respect to security, must
be eliminated, so as to be able to conduct an integrated
fight against the new threats. It is also necessary for
international solidarity to be deeply involved, along
with the meaningful implementation of the global
strategy for the Sahel that is being developed. There
should also be debt forgiveness measures, improved
access to markets and support for the private sector
and for the creation of businesses, in order to permit
the establishment of sustainable peace and security in
Africa. In that respect, we should emphasize that the
resilience of individual States is an essential factor
in combating terrorism. The global counter-terrorist
machinery is as strong as its weakest link. Building
national capacities is therefore vital.

There is an obvious correlation among the fragility
of States, poverty, conflicts and terrorism. That is truly
a challenge for Africa. It is from that perspective that
the Security Council summit held on 14 September 2005
(see S/PV.5261) adopted two important resolutions. I am
speaking ofresolution 1624 (2005), on terrorism, which
calls for a ban on terrorist propaganda, and resolution
1625 (2005), on conflict prevention, particularly in
Africa, which advocates for the elimination of the
underlying causes of conflict. Both resolutions are part
of a complementary approach that must be maintained
in the efforts that are currently under way.

Benin believes that combating terrorism, along
with military measures and the provision of technical
assistance appropriate for strengthening the security
structures of States, must also include measures
designed to promote sustainable development,
eradicate poverty in all its forms, create jobs, fight
hunger, empower women and create opportunities for
young people in order to save them from the allure of
criminals. The success of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy depends on it.

