Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank Special
Representative De Mistura for his very inspiring and
lucid briefing. I also want to thank Ambassador Tanin
not only for his comprehensive briefing, but also for
the tremendous courage that he has demonstrated even
in trying times.

Nigeria welcomes the steady progress being made
in Afghanistan. The quest for honourable peace and
stability has been steadfast. A new Constitution is in
place; several elections have been held; economic
growth seems promising; the new counter-insurgency
strategy bolsters recent military gains; and donor
commitment to funding civilian reconstruction remains
very strong. We believe that these political
developments should be consolidated through a
rigorous reconciliation and reintegration process
involving Taliban and non-Taliban insurgents,
especially in the Kandahar area.

As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/381) cautions, we must be vigilant in ensuring
that the reconciling parties are indeed genuinely
committed not only to the new code of conduct
delineated by the Government, but also to upholding
the Constitution. The political process must be led and
driven by Afghans and in accordance with the
Constitution. It must promote not only lasting peace
and stability, but also the protection of the interests of
women. A successful political process will serve to
underpin the ongoing efforts of the Government to
improve governance and accountability, including the
unimpeded participation of women in the peace
process.

The Government should remain committed to its
anti-corruption agenda and its obligations arising from
the London and Kabul conferences. A greater
commitment of the Government to its anti-corruption
agenda and its obligations arising from the London and
Kabul Conferences will strengthen these efforts.

On the security sector, the recent attacks on the
United Nations operations centre in Mazar-e-Sharif and

on the capital's premier hotel are tragic reminders of
the tense and fragile security situation in the country.
We condemn such cowardly acts, which
indiscriminately target innocent civilians, security
forces and the personnel of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). The perpetrators of those
attacks must be brought to justice. Indeed, such attacks
undermine the capacity of the Afghan security forces
and raise questions about the readiness of the Afghan
authorities and security forces to meet the security
challenges ahead. We support the urgent strengthening
of the implementation phase of the security transition
process through enhanced training and capacity-
building and greater cooperation between the United
Nations and ISAF forces.

The participation of the Afghan Government in
the listing and de-listing process will provide a more
secure platform for the fight against terrorism,
especially against the background of the Kabul
communique. That is why Nigeria supported the
decision to split the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regimes. In this regard, we wish to reiterate that such
de-listing requests should be addressed by the
Committee on a case-by-case basis, and especially on
their own merits.

In the economic sphere, Nigeria commends the
Government's continued commitment to implementing
the national priority programme in accordance with the
Kabul process. Implementing the programme and
meeting the Government's set benchmarks will require
greater coordination and timely international assistance
on the part of the donor community. We support the
channelling of donor funds and other assistance to the
country through the Afghan budget system in order to
ensure greater coherence and efficiency.

The current socio-economic growth and the
Government's prioritized programme, including
education and health care, will suffer reversals if a
viable solution to the continued impasse on the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme is not
urgently found. We therefore support the setting-up of
an appropriate mechanism that the Government and
donors alike can utilize to advance and implement the
IMF programme.

On regional cooperation, we welcome the
growing cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours, especially in overcoming counter-terrorism
challenges and combating drugs, arms, human
trafficking and organized crime. We welcome the
revival of the tripartite meeting between Afghanistan,
Pakistan and the United States. Both developments
reaffirm the commitment of regional partners to
Afghanistan's stability, economic development,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. It is our hope that
the tripartite initiative will be sustained as we all look
forward to the Istanbul Conference scheduled for
2 November and the international conference of
foreign ministers scheduled to take place in Bonn at the
end of this year. Through these conferences, the
international community can renew its commitment to
and support the Afghan-led peace process.

The future and destiny of Afghanistan may defy
imagination, but the international community must be
eternally vigilant to make certain that it is a future of
peace, security and, indeed, genuine reconciliation and
development. In this formidable endeavour, we
commend Special Representative Staffan de Mistura
for his inspiring and exceptional leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The
distinctive accomplishments of the staff of the Mission
and their invaluable contributions to the concerted
global effort to restore democracy, peace and security
to Afghanistan will endure eternally.

