I wish to thank Ambassador Tarek Ladeb for his comprehensive briefing on behalf of the three committees, and Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani for his stewardship of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). As we all adapt to new working conditions, we greatly appreciate the efforts made to deliver on those critical mandates during this period of disruption. Despite the coronavirus disease pandemic, terrorists continue to inspire and perpetrate violence. In Syria, Iraq and beyond, Da'esh continues to pose a threat, while recovery from their reign of terror remains a struggle for many. The United Kingdom is committed to pursuing all available avenues in seeking justice and accountability for those who have fought alongside Da'esh, whatever their nationality, through prosecution in the most appropriate jurisdiction, which is often in the region where the crimes took place. Any justice mechanism must respect human rights and the rule of law, as well as ensure fair trials and due process. To strengthen accountability for terrorist crimes, we continue to work through the 1267 Committee to sanction individuals and groups associated with Da'esh and Al-Qaida. We also strongly support the work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and, in June, together with Ms. Nadia Murad, we launched the draft Murad Code to ensure investigation into sexual violence crimes is safe, ethical and effective. There must be no impunity for the use of sexual violence and human trafficking to fund and support terrorism. The United Kingdom condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We are very concerned by the increased violence perpetrated by right-wing terrorists. While we may use different terms to describe the phenomenon, we join like-minded partners in recognizing the need to prevent and address the threat. Since 2016, we have proscribed several right-wing terrorist groups, such as National Action, Feuerkrieg Division and Sonnenkrieg Division. We are pleased to partner with the United States, Germany and Norway in hosting events bringing together policymakers, researchers and practitioners to increase understanding of the international dimensions of the threat, as well as emerging responses. Prevention remains a cornerstone of our approach to counter terrorism. The United Kingdom's Prevent programme seeks to tackle the causes of radicalization, and we have seen a marked increase - from 10 per cent to 24 per cent - in referrals relating to right-wing terrorism. As more people, especially young people, are staying at home and spending time on screens, terrorist groups have increased opportunities to radicalize and recruit online. The United Kingdom is working closely with technological companies, including through the Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism, and with international partners, law enforcement and industry to coordinate our efforts. The Security Council has frequently affirmed that all counter-terrorism measures must comply with international human rights obligations. Promoting and protecting human rights, integrating a gender dimension and engaging with civil society partners are critical elements of credible, sustainable and effective counter-terrorism. The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned about the human rights violations being perpetrated against Uighurs and other minorities in Xinjiang. Culture and religion are severely restricted, and we have seen credible reports of forced labour and forced birth control. Staggeringly, up to 1.8 million people have been detained without trial. China's actions are disproportionate and indiscriminate and will be counter-productive from a counter-terrorism perspective, as they will exacerbate ethnic tensions. Fifteen years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 1540 (2004) to address emerging threats from weapons of mass destruction. These persist and, indeed, have evolved. We therefore thank the States that have shared information with this Committee, some for the first time. We look forward to working with partners through the forthcoming comprehensive review to ensure that the work of the Committee remains both relevant and practical to addressing such threats. The United Kingdom wishes to take this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment to other key elements of the disarmament and non-proliferation architecture that are also critical to maintaining international security, such as the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and other bodies. With the prospect of a vaccine, our thoughts turn to the process of building back better. That should be reflected in our counter-terrorism efforts too. In both the Security Council and the General Assembly, we will have several opportunities to consider the United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, the achievements of States and what more needs to be done. In terrorism we have an enemy that does not rest. We must ensure that the architecture we helped to develop remains fit for purpose and that we hold ourselves to the very standards we set out in our resolutions.
