Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and I extend my gratitude to your predecessor.

Regrettably, the draft resolution was not adopted.
In our View, this is a sad day for the Security Council.

First of all, we would like to extend our sincere
thanks, on behalf of the Palestinian people, to the non-
aligned States members of the Security Council -
Bangladesh, Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia and
Tunisia. We would like also sincerely to thank Ukraine
and China for having voted in favour of the draft
resolution, together with its sponsors. We deeply
appreciate their position of principle and their strong
sense of responsibility vis-a-vis the events that have
taken place in our occupied territories, where Israel,
since 28 September last, has been waging a bloody
military campaign against our Palestinian people.

More than 300 Palestinians have been killed at
the hands of the Israeli occupation forces, and more
than 10,000 have been injured, one third of them
children under 18. The destruction and sabotage of our
property continues, as does the siege. Yet today the
representative of Israel comes to us with yet another
statement that does not respect the intelligence of the
international community and tries our patience and
tolerance. We can only condemn that statement and all
of its contents.

All of this is taking place despite the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 1322 (2000) on 7
October last and despite the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 October last, during its
resumed tenth emergency special session.

The Palestinian people and the Arab countries, as
well as the members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement, have requested adequate protection for the
Palestinian people through the establishment of a
United Nations observer force. We have been moving,
patiently and slowly, in that direction in the Security
Council since 25 October last.

We have attempted to deal with all the parties
concerned in order to reach an agreement. During that
period, President Arafat personally came to New York
and met with the Council, as did the members of the
Ministerial Committee of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. Representatives of the Non-
12
Aligned Movement also came to New York more than
once during that time.

The Security Council held an open meeting on
the situation, as well as a number of informal
consultations. Despite all of this, however, the bloody
Israeli campaign against our people and against
Palestinian civilians continued, making the need even
greater for adequate international protection for those
innocent civilians, or, at the very least, for a
contribution towards providing such protection through
a United Nations observer force.

The non-aligned caucus in the Security Council
submitted its draft, after making certain important
changes to it. The draft's sponsors showed a great deal
of flexibility in dealing with the other members of the
Security Council, with a view to reaching an
agreement. Among other things, they accepted the idea
of a two-phased approach, as proposed by other
members of the Security Council. They were also
willing to accept further changes so as to increase the
level of support, if not achieve agreement and
consensus. That willingness extended to postponing the
adoption of a draft resolution based on specific
demands by specific members of the Council.

But our people have continued to ask important
questions. Why is this taking so long? Why is the
international community allowing Israel, the occupying
force, to continue to oppress our people? Why do some
suggest the idea of getting the approval of the
occupying force, although the issue involves occupied
territories that are not under the sovereignty of the
Israeli occupying force?

Along with the sponsors of the draft resolution,
we demonstrated great flexibility up to the last minute.
The sponsors introduced further changes in the draft.
Nevertheless, none of this was enough to change the
final result.

We were then obliged to take a necessary
decision. We did so with extreme difficulty, with the
highest sense of the responsibility required by realities
in the Security Council and on the ground in our
occupied territories, and in the absence of any other
practical options. We asked our friends in the Security
Council to submit the draft resolution to a vote,
regardless of the result of the voting, so as to confront
the Security Council with its responsibilities and to
show our people their options for action. Once again,

S/PV.4248

 
we highly appreciate our friends' clear request to hold
a vote on the draft resolution.

The obvious result now is that the Security
Council has shown itself unable or as yet unprepared to
take even a minimal step to establish a United Nations
observer force to protect Palestinian civilians, despite
the horrific material and human losses and the ongoing
siege. Some have tried to suggest that their positions
are connected with tomorrow's resumption of the talks.
In our View, that is incorrect. Events in Washington
should not preclude action in the Security Council. On
the contrary, the Council's successful adoption of the
right decision could only help the projected talks,
which can achieve no agreement that can be
implemented without the essential measures addressing
the situation on the ground.

The representative of Israel informed us today
that his country does not object in principle to a
foreign presence. By this, he is in fact telling us that
this Council should understand that it can do nothing
without his approval. We have not accepted and will
not accept Israel's approval as a precondition for the
Security Council's assumption of its responsibilities.

In our View, the result which the Security Council
achieved today has only one explanation and one
cause- the position of the United States, which is
openly and surprisingly linked to that of Israel, the
occupying force, and the heavy pressure exerted by the
United States on all the other members of the Security
Council. Regardless of whether the United States used
the veto or found another solution to prevent the
adoption of the draft resolution, as we have just heard,
the result is the same.

We say with all due respect that some members,
our friends, have taken positions that have occasionally
varied. Others have taken positions that we could not
understand, at times rejecting texts that they had
previously proposed. The reason for this is no mystery.
Once again, we believe that the main cause - and
there could be others - is the position of the great
Power and its influence in this Security Council.

For us, this phase of the Security Council's work
is over. We feel no shame, and our friends should feel
no shame, that we have not succeeded in adopting a
resolution today. The results of today's action will not
absolve the Security Council of its responsibility for
events in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem. Today's actions have persuaded the
Palestinians and other Arabs that they cannot rely on
the Security Council for justice. It would seem that the
Security Council takes action only in issues involving
the enemies of the United States, not, of course, in
issues involving Israel, despite that country's violation
of the United Nations Charter, international law,
international humanitarian law and Security Council
and other United Nations resolutions.

There is not one noble objective declared by the
international community that Israel has not
contradicted, such as the protection of human rights, of
civilians in times of war and of the vulnerable,
particularly children, or the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons, and so on. Nevertheless, all these rejections
are ignored when the situation involves Israel. That is
the pattern of automatic protection prevailing here.

I cannot determine the consequences of the
Security Council's failure to fulfil its duties on the
ground, nor can I foretell the price that will be paid by
Palestinian civilians under the continued Israeli
campaign or its repercussions throughout the region.
We can only expect things to remain bad, but we still
hope that justice and peace will ultimately prevail.

