Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has always maintained that the search
for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict
in Syria must be based on respect for the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of the
country, bearing in mind the legitimate Government as
a key figure in the process. In the midst of this bloody
and prolonged conflict, the cessation of hostilities
agreement announced on 9 September by the co-Chairs
of the International Syria Support Group was welcomed
positively, yet cautiously, with a View to paving the
way for greater understanding in pursuit of peace and
stability in Syria.

Unfortunately, it must be said that the United
States-led coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant took military action last weekend against the
Syrian army, jeopardizing the cessation of hostilities
agreed to a few days earlier. Venezuela condemns and
laments the inexplicable attack on positions of the
Syrian Arab Army carried out by American, British
and Australian aircraft, manned by the aforementioned
coalition, on 17 September. The attack was followed by
a ground offensive launched by Da'esh in an effort to
make headway on the ground. At the high-level meeting
on Syria on Wednesday, 21 September (see S/PV.7774),
United States Secretary of State, John Kerry said the
attack was a mistake. We have to say that it seriously
undermined the cessation of hostilities and the fragile
trust between the parties. This is especially grave in
the light of the fact that, as we all know, the city of
Deir ez-Zor and its 250,000 inhabitants is besieged by
Da'esh and is being defended only by a Syrian military
contingent.

This unfortunate attack was immediately followed
by another attack against humanitarian aid convoys
heading to the city of Aleppo, resulting in the deaths of
humanitarian workers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
This was an appalling act against humanitarian staff
who, in the adverse conditions of war, carry out the
noble duty of providing aid to civilians in need of
humanitarian assistance. We reiterate that such people
cannot be viewed as military targets, which is why
all attacks directed towards them have international
criminal consequences. Furthermore, we hope that
premature conclusions will not be drawn regarding
the perpetrators of this attack, and that the facts will
undergo a thorough investigation.

Without a doubt, these two regrettable events
have sparked an escalation in the conflict and led to
attacks on both sides. Added to all of this is suffering,
which is what matters most in a country whose entire
institutional framework has been severely impacted by
the war waged on it by terrorists and their alliances, who
refuse to accept self-evident truths. Any decision about
the fate of Syria and its Government belongs solely and
exclusively to the Syrian people, since the solution to the
conflict and its differences can be reached only through
political dialogue and negotiation. That is why armed
confrontation and foreign intervention are doomed to
failure and only damage the prospects for peace and
stability in the region. That was tragically manifest in
the horrific events in Libya and Iraq, brother countries
left forlorn and blood-stained by military interventions
and interference of foreign Governments.

Given that the main enemy in the region and
country is terrorism, a genuine commitment to
peace requires that the moderate opposition end its
relationship of convenience with Da'esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and the recently created Jabhat Fateh al-Sham.
The latter seeks to disguise its terrorist acts by
aligning itself with moderate opposition groups so as
to continue receiving the political and military support
of other countries. However, the abdominal images of
the atrocities committed by these so-called moderate
opposition groups against the civilian population
of Aleppo - such as is the beheading of a 12-year-
old Palestinian boy among the sadism, laughter and
mockery of the combatants of the so-proclaimed
moderate opposition - are still fresh in our memory.

Our country shares the widespread concern over
the humanitarian situation in Syria. It is a catastrophe.
There have been major violations of international law
and in the protection of civilians in Aleppo. We are
alarmed by the loss of human life and that the situation
on the ground may threaten the progress achieved since
the cessation of hostilities. However, we believe that
convening this emergency meeting only to turn it into
political propaganda against the Russian Federation
and the Syrian Government contributes in no way to
restoring trust among the parties or to alleviating the
humanitarian situation, much less to supporting efforts
on the ground to resume negotiations and the a potential
ceasefire.

We believe that the Security Council must shoulder
its enormous responsibilities in this conflict in terms
of maintaining international security and peace.
Furthermore, regardless of the differences among its
members or their own national positions, the Council
must support the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in his efforts to
resume political negotiations and pursue a path towards
peace that includes the legitimate Government of
President Bashar Al-Assad throughout the entire long
and complex process.

Lastly, we must not give up. The Syrian people
have hope for and trust in the United Nations to move
forward in restoring peace to their long-suffering
country.

