Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): First of all, I would like
to thank Ambassador Mufioz for today's detailed
presentation.

As demonstrated by the recent cowardly terrorist
attacks which took the lives of many citizens of the
Russian Federation, including a large number of
innocent children, and the terrorist bombing outside the
Australian embassy in Jakarta, cases of terrorism seem
to be on the increase rather than in decline, leaving us
far from our goal of eliminating terror. The situation
continues to deteriorate and is truly worrisome. Japan,
while extending its deepest condolences to the families
and relatives of the Victims, strongly condemns these
brutal acts and feels all the more acutely the necessity
of further strengthening international cooperation with
a view to preventing similar acts from occurring in the
future.

Having heard the Chairman's briefing and
reviewed the first report (S/2004/679) of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, issued
last month, I wish to express my country's concern
over the situation highlighted in the report. The threat
of terrorism perpetrated by Al Qaeda and related
groups remains as real today as it was three years ago,
as exemplified by the terror-related activities of the
new generation of Al Qaeda members as well as the
remaining Taliban elements in Afghanistan. Bearing in
mind the continuing threat posed by terrorism
worldwide, I would like to make the following three
points.

First, Japan places importance on the
Committee's Consolidated List, and we strongly hope
that more information will be submitted for inclusion
in the Consolidated List in an efficient manner, so that
Member States will have access to more substantial
information. However, as my country has already
learned through experience, inclusion in the List of the
names of individuals or entities suspected of
involvement in terrorism is not an easy process,
because it can only be accomplished through consensus
and there are several hurdles a submitting country must
overcome to secure final approval of its application
from the Committee. From this point of view, as
recommended by the Monitoring Team in its report,
Japan welcomes the Committee's policy of updating
the List so as to make it a more effective and accurate
tool for combating terrorism. We also believe it
important to establish a procedure that would facilitate
amendments based on new information. In particular,
based on our experience, we consider it necessary that
effective methods be devised to deal with cases in
which terrorists open financial accounts abroad by
illegally assuming the identities of actual individuals.
Furthermore, we welcome the Monitoring Team's
recommendation to add to the Consolidated List the
names of individuals and groups found to be supplying
Al Qaeda-associated terrorists with materials and
expertise for the construction of weapons designed to
cause mass casualties. We believe that this will serve to
hinder the terrorists' preparations for attacks.
My second point concerns terrorist financing and
weapons. As the report of the Monitoring Team
indicates, in the most recent terrorist attacks, which
have been causing in a high number of casualties, Al
Qaeda members have been operating at a relatively low
cost, relying on amounts in the five-figure range in
United States dollars. This tactic makes it difficult to
detect transfers of funds and to cut off the sources of
financing. The high frequency of suicide bombings, as
seen in the recent attack near a subway station in
Moscow, also presents an alarming situation, and it is
important that we discover the means to prevent
devices and materials not covered under arms
embargoes from being diverted for use in terrorists'
weapons. The Monitoring Team's indication that
sanction measures must be adjusted according to the
changes in the methods adopted by terrorists is entirely
appropriate, and we need to take effective measures to
prevent terrorists from taking advantage of loopholes
in our sanction measures. From that viewpoint, we
understand that the Monitoring Team will undertake
further studies in order to make recommendations on
stronger and more effective sanction measures, and we
are looking forward to the outcome of these efforts.

The third matter I wish to emphasize is the need
for greater intra-organizational cooperation within the
United Nations. Japan has pointed out in the past that
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) in information-sharing and analysis is
important, and we appreciate that the Monitoring Team
has already, on several occasions, engaged with the
experts of the CTC in assessing threats and evaluating
the needs of Member States in the area of capacity-
building. Cooperation with the Committee established
under Security Council resolution 1540 on prevention
of proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons is also crucial, since terrorists associated with
Al Qaeda are using unconventional weapons to murder
non-combatants on a massive scale. We believe it very
important that the committees and other organizations
related to counter-terrorism start cooperating more
effectively among themselves in the fight against
terror.

As Ambassador Munoz has also emphasized on
previous occasions, we need to pursue our counter-
terrorism policy in a concerted manner, in view of the
fact that the Al Qaeda network is global in its reach
and that the world is watching to see how decisively
the United Nations will act to undertake counter-
terrorism initiatives.

Japan supports the work of the sanctions
Committee and the various related Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 1526 (2004), and
wishes to offer its full cooperation toward the
realization of an effective counter-terrorism policy
through the implementation of the relevant resolutions.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
for the dedication of Ambassador Mufioz and of his
outstanding staff, as well as for the efforts of the
Committee secretariat and of the Monitoring Team
experts, whose activities are now fully under way.

