Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
thank Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Recent developments in Israel and Gaza have
elicited a terrible sense ofdeja vu, mixed with a profound
feeling ofpowerlessness. The deja vu is that ofreprisals
following reprisals; ever growing numbers of civilian
casualties; the voices ofhawks and extremists drowning
out the voices of moderates. The powerlessness is that
of the international community which, since the end of
the Second World War, has continued to experience in
the Middle East one of its most serious political and
diplomatic failures.

Today, the peace process is at moribund and
violence prevails. Today, however, we must reiterate to
all of those who are willing to listen - and above all
to those who are not - that more war will not lead to
more security. War leads to nothing but new tragedies
such as that of two days ago which caused the death of
a group of children - four brothers who were killed by
shelling as they played on a Gaza beach.

The ground offensivejust launched by Israel against
Gaza has therefore provoked our deepest concern.
Certainly, Israel has the right to protect its people from
rocket attacks from Gaza, which we condemn, but in so
doing Israel must act proportionately while at all times
ensuring the protection of civilians. According to the
latest information, in 11 days Israeli military operations
have produced many Palestinian casualties, including
more than 270 dead and nearly 2,000 wounded, the vast
majority of whom are civilians. We are particularly
shocked by the number of Palestinian children who
are victims. As stated by Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, we are facing a crisis involving
the protection of children in Gaza.

Let us recall that all parties are fully obligated
under international humanitarian law to protect the
lives of civilians trapped by hostilities. Naturally, that
also applies to Hamas and other militant groups that
seek to strike indiscriminately at the heart of Israel's
urban centres in order to produce the highest number
of civilian casualties. Yesterday, as Mr. Feltman has
mentioned, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), discovered rockets that had been hidden
in one of its schools in Gaza. It is unconscionable and
cynical to jeopardize the lives of children in that way.
Effectively, those responsible for such acts and those
who are intensifying their calls for the destruction of
Israel are deliberately sacrificing the interests of the
Palestinian people.

In the short term, all efforts of the international
community should focus on the full cessation of
hostilities. We deplore the fact that the humanitarian
truce proposed yesterday by the United Nations has
not led to a lasting ceasefire. We appeal to the parties
to de-escalate tensions and to immediately conclude a
ceasefire agreement. For its part, Luxembourg fully
supports all efforts to end the violence, particularly the
initiative of Egypt, whose mediation efforts we take this
opportunity to recognize. We welcome the Secretary-
General's intention to visit the region and urge him
to pursue his efforts towards de-escalation. On the
humanitarian front, we reiterate our full support for
UNRWA and its crucial role in alleviating, howsoever
modestly, the suffering of the Palestinian people.

Ultimately, since war offers no solution, we must
give peace a chance. But a chance for peace requires first
giving a chance to the peace process. It is imperative
that Israelis and Palestinians resume dialogue in order
to try to fill the political vacuum prevailing between
them today. To end the spiral of violence, the best and
only way forward is the resumption of talks seeking a
comprehensive agreement in the framework of a two-
State solution.

