Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Ethiopian
presidency for convening today's briefing.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia, as a pacifist
country, believes that the only way to guarantee a
just and lasting peace in the conflict between Israel
and Palestine is through sincere dialogue and clear
expressions of political will on both sides with a
view to achieving the two-State solution. Based on
that conviction, we reaffirm our full commitment to
multilateralism and a debate on a level playing field
in the framework of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States.

The present context requires that we, from the seats
that we occupy, put an immediate halt to the expansionist
policy of Israel, which insists on continuing to move its
inhabitants into Palestinian territory, in clear violation
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War and resolution 2334
(2016). It continues to reject the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice of July 2004 on the
construction of walls in occupied territories. It refuses
to recognize that Israeli settlements in occupied
Palestinian territory have been established in breach
of international law, as concluded by the International
Court of Justice.

On 22 November 1967, resolution 242 (1967) was
adopted precisely as a result ofIsrael's cruel occupation
of Palestinian territories. The resolution refers to
the fact that one of the fundamental principles for
achieving peace in the Middle East is the withdrawal
of the Israeli armed forces from the territories they had
occupied during that conflict. To date, this resolution
has still not been implemented.

The humanitarian situation continues to unravel
due to the electricity crisis in the Gaza Strip. In order
to maintain a minimal level of emergency service,
generators that are at constant risk of fuel shortages
or excessive use are relied upon, and spare parts and
replacement generators cannot be obtained because
of restrictions. We hope that this dire situation will
come to an end immediately and that the Palestinian
civilian population that inhabits these territories will
have access to more humane living conditions. We
again urge the Security Council to enforce the demand
that Israel, the Power occupying the Gaza Strip,
immediately and completely halt its illegal blockade of
the territory, which is a collective punishment of the
civilian population of Palestine, through, inter alia,
the immediate, ongoing and unconditional opening
of border crossings in order for humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to move in and out of
the Gaza Strip.

As we have said on previous occasions, we
request that the Secretary-General's quarterly report
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) be
presented in written format, which will allow us to
analyse the resolution's implementation in detail,
and that it include updated maps of all settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory. Bolivia wishes to
express its commitment to the rapid implementation of
the resolution without further delay, and we encourage
all members of the Security Council to join forces to
make this happen right away. We believe that all the
resolutions of the Council should be implemented with
the same rigour and commitment that they require,
with the sole objective of guaranteeing international
peace and security.

In conclusion, Bolivia reaffirms its support for the
self-determination ofthe Palestinian people and its right
to a free, sovereign and independent State within the
pre-l967 international borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.

