Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish to begin by sincerely thanking the sponsors of
draft resolution S/2004/783, on which the Council has
just voted: Algeria, Pakistan and Tunisia. I wish also to
thank all the delegations that voted in favour of the
draft resolution. The Palestinian people and the other
peoples of the region appreciate the position they have
taken.

This is yet another sad day for the Security
Council. Once again the Council has failed to fulfil its
Charter responsibility with respect to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Security
Council has failed to take a stand on the bloody attacks
that at this very moment Israeli occupation forces are
carrying out against the Palestinian people in northern
Gaza.

The Council failed to do that and to call for an
end to bloodshed and destruction. A greater cause for
sorrow is the fact that, at the beginning of today's
meeting, we heard words referring to victims among
Israeli children but not a single word about Palestinian
children. Palestinians usually suffer much more. A
Palestinian child was killed today; her name was
Iman Al-Hams, aged 13. Twenty bullets riddled her
body while she was on her way to school. That does
not count, apparently. We also heard at the beginning
of the meeting words referring to rockets launched
against Israel, as if they were transcontinental missiles
or weapons of mass destruction being fired by the
Palestinian side against Israel. We did not hear a word
about the tanks, bulldozers, military gunships and
fighter jets made in the United States, or about the
flechette missiles. Nor did we hear anything about the
destruction of the lives and future of the entire
Palestinian people.

Allow me to tell the Council, from our own
perspective, the real difference between the acts of
some Palestinian groups and the excessive actions of
Israeli occupying forces. Both acts are aimed largely at
civilians, but the real difference is that the Palestinian
groups continue to be groups working outside the law
and against the will of the Palestinian Authority;
whereas the actions of Israeli occupying forces are
being committed by an official army pursuing the
official policy of the Government of a Member State of
the United Nations: an official army committing war
crimes and acts of State terrorism.

Allow me also to say a word about Israel's so-
called right to self-defence. It is inadmissible to talk
about Israel's right to self-defence as if it were a
regular peace-loving country that fully respects laws as
other countries do. Under law, Israel is an occupying
Power. The International Court of Justice recently
addressed that matter. Of course, Israel has the right to
defend its citizens. However, given that it is an
occupying Power, attempts to exonerate Israel from its
responsibilities as such a Power are unacceptable,
neither now nor in the future.

The veto used today is the seventh veto of the
current United States Administration against draft
resolutions concerning the situation in occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. It is
the twenty-ninth veto cast by the United States against
such draft resolutions. The fact that 29 vetoes have
been cast sums up the entire tragedy of the Middle
East. This has prevented the Security Council from
discharging its duties and responsibilities under the
Charter. It has also provided cover for the occupying
Power, permitting it to pursue its violations of
international law. In practical terms, those vetoes have
blocked the upholding of law and undermined the
status of the Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Obviously, none of that is in the interest of the
Palestinian people. It is indeed regrettable that it is not
even in the interest of the Israeli people - at least not
in the long-term, as the interests of both peoples lie in
the upholding of law, allowing international
mechanisms to operate normally and reaching a
genuine settlement, rather than a fake settlement, that
will indeed lead to the creation of two States, Palestine
and Israel, on the basis of the 1967 borders. I am
convinced that that will eventually happen, despite all
the wrong and destructive positions that have been
taken, and that continue to be taken.

