Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In recent days Israel has launched large-scale
military strikes against parts of southern Lebanon, leaving
dozens of civilians dead and massive property damage in
the wake of shellings. As a result, large numbers of
civilians have been displaced or reduced to refugee status,
the conflict in southern Lebanon has escalated, and
tension has once again mounted.

The Chinese Government and people are deeply
concerned about this turn of events. We call on the Israeli
side immediately to cease all military actions. We urge all
sides to exercise restraint, to settle their disputes through
dialogue and consultation and to eschew force or the
threat of force so as to safeguard peace and stability in
the region.

We believe that Lebanon's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity within
internationally recognized boundaries should be fully
respected and that the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, including resolution 425 (1978) should be
implemented.

The escalation of the conflict in southern Lebanon
has dealt another setback to the peace process in the
Middle East. The Chinese delegation is deeply alarmed by
this development. The realization of peace in the Middle
East is a shared aspiration of all peoples of the region.

 

Progress in Middle East peace has been hard won.
Undermining it is easier than fostering it; all sides are wise
to cherish it.

At this very delicate and crucial moment, we hope that
all sides will exercise restraint. Most importantly, they need
to keep their calm and their reason and refrain from any
action that might aggravate the conflict or harm the Middle
East process.

The international community should steer the situation
in a manner that nurtures the momentum of the peace
process in the Middle East. This is the only guarantee that
the Middle East question will find a comprehensive, just
and durable solution at an early date.

China pursues no gains for itself in the Middle East.
We have always supported the peace process there and
have held that a political solution of the Middle East
question should be sought on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions. We hope that the peoples of the Middle
East will return at an early date to a happy life
characterized by peace, stability and good-neighbourly
relations.

We hope that any action taken by the international
community will be conducive to the realization of this goal.

