Mr. Schori (Sweden): Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you, and Singapore, on your role in the
presidency and on the initiative you have taken. I
would also like to thank the other members of the
Council for this opportunity for us to speak today.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
Countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia- as well as the associated countries of
Cyprus and Malta align themselves with this statement.

The commitment of the European Union to the
primary role of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security, and to the core
function of peacekeeping, is evident in the
contributions of troops, police officers, military
observers and civilian personnel from the member
States of the European Union to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The European Union also
supports the Standby Arrangement System as an
essential element in strengthening the United Nations
peacekeeping capacity. In addition, the Union has
thousands of men and women assigned to United
Nations-mandated operations in the Balkans, where the
European Union is by far the most important troop
contributor, with its contribution representing
approximately 60 per cent of the international effort on
the ground. The share of the European Union member
States for the United Nations peacekeeping budget is
almost 40 per cent. By paying their assessed
contributions on time and in full, they play a decisive
role in ensuring that peacekeeping activities continue
functioning smoothly.

The crisis-management capacity of the European
Union is rapidly developing. The goal is to contribute
effectively to the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. Recognizing the primary responsibility of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the European Union will continue
to cooperate, in a mutually reinforcing manner, with
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Council of Europe
and other international organizations in conflict
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
resolution. In this context, the European Union has set
itself the headline goal of being able by 2003 to deploy
within 60 days, and sustain for at least one year, forces
of up to 60,000 persons. The European Union also
committed itself to providing by 2003, by way of
voluntary cooperation, up to 5,000 police officers-
1,000 of them to be deployable within 30 days - for
international missions across the full range of conflict-
prevention and crisis-management operations.

At its meeting in Nice last month, the European
Council confirmed its determination to continue
strengthening the crisis management capabilities of the
European Union in the military and civilian fields. The
European Union intends to coordinate its activities
closely with the United Nations principal organs, as
well as with the OSCE and, in particular, the REACT
special team and the Council of Europe. To this end, it
was decided in Nice to identify possible areas and
modalities of cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations in crisis management.

It is against this background that the European
Union takes a keen interest in the cooperation between
the Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries. One of the priority issues for the European
Union in the ongoing process to strengthen the United
Nations activities for peace and security is the
formulation of clear, credible and achievable mandates
for peacekeeping operations. This objective implies,
among other measures, a qualitative and quantitative
improvement of consultations between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries, as well as
greater transparency, a process which must be
maintained throughout all phases of any peacekeeping
operation, from the formulation of the mandate to its
successful implementation. The European Union
therefore welcomes the Security Council resolution
1327 (2000), which was adopted last November. It is a
first and very important step in the right direction,
consistent with the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter.

The issue was also dealt with in the report of the
recent extraordinary session of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, which the General
Assembly considered last month. The report
emphasized the necessity of significantly strengthening
and formalizing the consultation process between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries in
order to make it more meaningful. Such an evolution
would also encourage more countries to contribute in
proportion with their capacities and to increase the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Similarly, the European Union believes that the
planning process within the Secretariat can be made
more effective, coherent and transparent. There is
everything to be gained by involving troop-
contributing countries in the early stages of planning
new missions and throughout the lifetime of a mission,
particularly with regard to risk analysis and rules of
engagement. In that context, the European Union
would like to express its appreciation for the priority
given to this issue by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno.
The safety and security of peacekeeping personnel is a
matter of utmost concern to all troop-contributing
countries. Further measures in this regard should be
developed as a priority.

Looking to the future, the European Union stands
ready to consider positively other mechanisms that can
strengthen the link between the Security Council and
troop contributors. Among the ideas that could be
considered is the proposal in the report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, the so-called
Brahimi report, that troop-contributing countries'
advice to the Security Council might usefully be
institutionalized via the establishment of ad hoc
subsidiary organs of the Council, as provided for in
Article 29 of the Charter.

The European Union would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate its support for the Brahimi
report. We welcome the work that has already been
carried out in order to implement its recommendations,
inter alia, the partial strengthening of the Secretariat
that can be achieved since the Fifth Committee gave its
approval last month.

While welcoming these developments, the
European Union underlines the importance it attaches
to an appropriate organizational structure and staffing
of the Secretariat. More is needed in order to provide
the Secretariat with sufficient resources to enable it to
carry out its missions. The EU looks forward to the
comprehensive review of the management, structure,
recruitment processes and interrelationships of
elements in the Secretariat that deal with peacekeeping,
and to a resumption of the consideration of the Brahimi
report in the General Assembly later this year.

