Mr. Oshima: I thank you, Mr. President, for
providing me once again with the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I appreciate the commitment that the
Council has shown to the protection-of-civilians
agenda by establishing regular dialogue on this
increasingly important issue. The Secretary-General's
most recent report to the Security Council
(S/2002/l300), which was submitted in December
2002, was the third report on this topic and outlined the
practical means by which the United Nations could
promote and develop a culture of protection. This
briefing is part of the semi-annual briefing process that
provides the Council with updates on progress made
and on changes in the protection environment.

For the moment, much of the world's attention is
focused on Iraq and on the hardships faced by the Iraqi
population. We must, however, remind ourselves that
the plight of civilians in armed conflict remains a
considerable and grave problem in many other parts of
the world. Sadly, this year has witnessed some of the
more horrendous acts of violence carried out against
civilians. In the past year, Security Council missions to
areas of conflict have proved their value by bringing
international attention to bear on situations where the
lives of civilians have been at the utmost risk. I hope
that such missions become an established feature of the
workings of the Council. I also hope that the
framework provided by the protection of civilians will
assist the Council in its assessments and will establish
a more effective basis for protection in areas of
conflict. The recent Security Council mission to
Central Africa provided a considerable impetus for
addressing protection issues, and I hope that the
mission to West Africa will do the same.

In the case of Cote d'Ivoire, the practical results
of the Council's increased engagement in the protection
of civilians are enshrined in resolution 1464 (2003).
That resolution explicitly mandates the forces of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and of France in Cote d'Ivoire to ensure
the protection of civilians. It recognizes the paramount
importance of ensuring the protection of civilians
where they are deliberately targeted by parties to the
conflict who have seemingly demonstrated indifference
to their own responsibilities for protection. I appreciate
the fact that incorporating the protection of civilians
into the role of peacekeepers is not a straightforward
task. Nevertheless, we are increasingly confronted with
situations where we are left with few alternatives but to
explore that option; Liberia is the most recent example.
I therefore hope that, through the closer collaborative
relationship that is developing among the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the Department
of Political Affairs (DPA) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), we
shall be better able to provide members with the
analysis necessary to promote appropriate Council
action.

In the first part of my briefing, I shall outline
progress made since the last report of the Secretary-
General was submitted to the Council, in December. In
the second part, I should like to review a number of
current country-specific situations against key themes
of the aide-memoire (S/PRST/2002/6, annex). In my
concluding comments, I should like to reflect briefly
on some of the progress made over the past two years.

As Council members will recall, the main
emphasis of the Secretary-General's 2001 report
(S/200l/33l) was to make the culture of protection a
practical reality. As the Council itself has recognized,
this is the time to move from words to action. The
report outlined three key approaches. The first
approach was to develop an agreed action plan that
would allocate responsibility for the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the first two reports
of the Secretary-General on this subject. This road map
tries to establish a shared commitment among Member
States, the United Nations system and concerned
international organizations to a timetable for action.
The second element was to establish a strong
programme of dissemination and advocacy with
Member States and concerned parties on the relevant
principles and responsibilities. The third element
involved establishing a stronger common base of
analysis, assessment and response within the United
Nations system around the aide-memoire adopted by
the Council in March 2002.

I turn first to the road map issue. The Council
may recall that the last report of the Secretary-General
presented an initial version of the road map that
grouped actions under common themes. Since then, we
have been assisted in defining the road map, making it
a more practical and time-bound document through the
establishment of two bodies.

First, within the Secretariat, we have established
an implementation group for the protection of civilians
under the auspices of the Executive Committee on
Humanitarian Affairs, which I chair. In parallel to that,
a Member States support group for the protection of
civilians has been formed. In the past months, both
groups have met a number of times and have begun to
identify key areas of responsibility. They intend to
complete their work towards the end of this year, and
we hope to present a final version of the road map to
the Security Council in December.

Secondly, the process of dissemination and
advocacy among Member States and concerned parties
has been undertaken through a series of regional
workshops. Three workshops, covering Southern
Africa, East Asia and Europe, were held over the
course of last year. So far this year, two further
workshops have been held - one in West Africa and
the other in the Pacific region. Three more workshops
are planned for the remainder of this year; they will be
held in Central and Latin America, in South Asia and
in the Middle East. These workshops have proved to be
an extremely useful basis for identifying major
regional concerns on the protection of civilians.
The workshop in West Africa was the first such
workshop held in a zone of conflict. As members know,
there is an urgent need for improved protection in that
region. The practical recommendations, therefore,
focused on new mechanisms to secure humanitarian
access, to screen and separate combatants and non-
combatants, to strengthen disarmament and
demobilization programmes, and to control the flow of
small arms. Member States in the region have shown a
commitment to following those recommendations
through their regional organizations, including the
African Union and ECOWAS.

The Pacific Islands Forum made a similar
commitment following our most recent regional
meeting of Pacific island States, held in early June in
Fiji. Following the workshop, the Solomon Islands -
which has experienced years of civil conflict - formed
its own protection-of-civilians mechanism between
political and civil society leaders to address the
problems. A number of the countries participating in
these workshops have identified the need for training-
of-trainer programmes on the protection of civilians,
which could help to make the aide-memoire understood
at the community level. We appreciate the support that
we have received from Member States for the holding
of these workshops, which we hope will continue.

Moreover, in line with the need to keep the
protection agenda current, OCHA has organized a
series of round tables since 2001. In May of this year,
OCHA convened the most recent discussion, which
explored ways to apply protection principles to the
impact of terrorism and counter-terrorism on civilian
populations in armed conflict, an issue that had been
raised in the Council in December. The discussion by
representatives of Member States, of United Nations
agencies, of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and of select non-governmental
organizations reflected the complexity of this issue.
While no general agreement was reached on how to
move the process forward, there was consensus on the
need for counter-terrorism policies and measures to be
undertaken in accordance with recognized principles of
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
shall continue to pursue this issue in the coming
months, and we are grateful to the Governments of
Norway and Switzerland for their support.

Lastly, building upon the existing international
legal framework, the aide-memoire has proved to be an
important tool in establishing a stronger common base
of analysis and assessment on key protection-of-
civilians requirements and responses within the United
Nations system as a whole. Also, the aide-memoire has
been used as a practical tool in the field to develop an
active collaborative framework for protection
undertaken on an inter-agency basis in countries such
as Burundi and Afghanistan, and more recently in Iraq.
This practical use of the aide-memoire has also
contributed to increased and systematic reporting and
monitoring of protection issues in conflict situations.

I would now like turn to the second part of my
briefing, using the aide-memoire to highlight key
patterns of protection concerns.

Restricted access, or the lack of it, remains the
primary concern in most conflict areas around the
world. In West Africa severe restrictions on
humanitarian access are increasing the suffering of an
already traumatized population. Hundreds of thousands
of civilians across the region cannot be reached by
humanitarian agencies. They are denied potable water,
shelter, medical assistance and food, and are subject to
indiscriminate attacks.

I particularly wish to draw the Council's attention
to the current situation in Liberia. Despite the
courageous efforts of ICRC, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and United Nations national
staff, humanitarian access to internally displaced
populations remains severely limited. There are also
reports of widespread abuse, which includes rape and
summary executions. There are also reports of acts of
reprisals against internally displaced persons by
Government forces, who accuse them of collaboration
with rebel groups.

As a result, the humanitarian situation is
becoming literally overwhelming. In the last few days
some 70,000 internally displaced persons have
concentrated in Monrovia's city centre, in deplorable
conditions. Increasing occurrences of diarrhoea and
other major communicable diseases provide an
immediate threat to the lives of thousands of people,
including children. With most international
humanitarian workers out of the country, the current
humanitarian system can no longer adequately address
the rapidly spiralling needs of the population.
Immediate international intervention is required to
stabilize the security situation and to allow
humanitarian agencies to assist the vulnerable, and thus
to prevent a further deterioration of this most desperate
humanitarian situation.

Equally, the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory has further deteriorated
over the past six months, with closures and curfews
continuing to impact harshly on almost the entire
civilian population.

In Aceh, Indonesia, optimism about a peaceful
resolution of the conflict has proven to be premature.
Moreover, I was concerned by recent policies by
Government authorities suggesting constraints on the
delivery of international humanitarian assistance in that
province. After sharing my concerns with the
Indonesian authorities, I am encouraged by this week's
decree by the President of Indonesia clarifying the
presence and operations of humanitarian organizations.
I am hopeful that, as a next step, we will be able to
agree to the establishment of appropriate mechanisms
and terms of engagement with humanitarian agencies
in order to secure adequate humanitarian access to all
vulnerable populations and to ensure the impartiality
and independence of humanitarian assistance.

Consider the widespread use of rape and other
atrocities committed against women and girls as a
brutally devastating weapon of war. For example, in
Ituri and elsewhere in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, mass rapes and
other severe atrocities against women and girls have
been committed on a chilling scale. Women are
punished as outcasts and are vulnerable to contracting
HIV/AIDS. Strong cultural sensitivities make it even
more difficult to address the issue in protection terms.
Nevertheless, their moral repugnance demands our
fullest engagement to end such acts, to support local
initiatives to help victims and to bring perpetrators to
justice. I need not remind the Council that such acts
constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian, human rights and criminal law. I would
therefore like to ask the Council to investigate this
issue further.

The need to separate civilians from combatants
also remains one of the key protection challenges. The
presence of combatants in camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons drastically increases the
vulnerability of civilians. A particularly disturbing
development in that context is the continuing use of
refugee camps in West Africa as recruiting grounds for
armed groups, and in particular for the forcible
recruitment of children. Resolution 1479 (2003), which
explicitly mandates the United Nations military liaison
group attached to the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to monitor the
security of Liberian refugees in C6te d'Ivoire, is an
important step in better addressing this issue.

As recent weeks have again shown, situations of
armed conflict are invariably accompanied by a general
breakdown in security and law and order. For example,
it was palpable during my recent mission to Iraq that
the desire for a quick restoration of security and law
and order was the foremost concern of all parties,
including Iraqis with whom I met. In the security
vacuum that has evolved, looting and violent crimes
have become persistent obstacles to the resumption of
normal life, and have exacerbated the suffering of an
already vulnerable population. Hospitals have gone
unprotected, electrical and water sanitation plants have
become open supply grounds for looters, and
humanitarian assistance has been held back. In short,
the breakdown in law and order has severely
disrupted all sectors of public and private life. In
situations of transition, therefore, it is crucial that law
and order - including police, courts and prisons - be
re-established quickly and as a measure of utmost
priority, in order to enable civilians to regain a
semblance of normalcy in their lives.

It has become almost commonplace in recent
years to recall that the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation (DDRR) of combatants
is a complex challenge. However, I would like to
reiterate that DDRR is fundamental to the protection of
civilians, particularly during the transition to peace.
Demobilization and reintegration cannot happen if
disarmament does not take place. The disarmament of
combatants - including the thousands of child soldiers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example - is a key prerequisite to the protection of a
civilian population tormented by years of war. I would
therefore like to use this opportunity to ask the Council
to give serious consideration to more proactive
disarmament measures aimed at curtailing the violence
against civilians in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, thereby stabilizing the peace process in that
war-torn country.

Safeguarding the security of their humanitarian
personnel remains a key challenge for the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners. Recent months
have witnessed ongoing threats and horrific attacks
against humanitarian personnel in Liberia, C6te
d'Ivoire, the occupied Palestinian territory, Chechnya,
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia and Sudan, among others. The death of six
humanitarian workers in Liberia and C6te d'Ivoire at
the beginning of the year, the deadly attack on an ICRC
colleague in Afghanistan, the fate of some 100
humanitarian workers who remain unaccounted for in
Liberia since an attack on the border town of Zwedru
in March 2003, and the kidnapping of many other
humanitarian colleagues mark a disturbing trend of
blatant disregard for humanitarian principles and of
deliberate targeting of humanitarian workers for
political or tactical purposes. By further restricting
humanitarian access, these acts ultimately aggravate
the suffering of the civilian population.

I would therefore like to encourage the Security
Council mission to West Africa to stress to the parties
once again - Governments and armed opposition
groups alike - the obligation to ensure the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and to ensure that
those responsible for the attacks are promptly brought
to justice. Specifically, I would like to ask the mission
to demand, as a matter of urgency, the safe return of the
missing United Nations and NGO workers in Liberia.

The important issue of protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse by humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers has remained a priority for the United
Nations and its implementing partners. Specifically,
there are three significant developments to note in that
respect.

First, as has already been reported, last July the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee adopted a plan of
action that established six core principles representing
the minimum standards of behaviour expected of all
United Nations civilian staff members. A Secretary-
General's bulletin that will incorporate those core
principles into the codes of conduct and staff rules and
regulations of all member organizations will soon be
issued. This will have the effect of applying the core
principles to all United Nations civilian personnel.

Secondly, peacekeeping missions have started to
incorporate these issues into their rules. Obviously, that
is a very important step. In that connection, I welcome
the codes of conduct regarding the prohibition of
sexual abuse and/or exploitation that have been
adopted by the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL).

Thirdly, several Member States have
complemented the United Nations policy by formally
adopting - or being in the process of adopting -
policies requiring the incorporation of the six core
principles into their funding agreements with
operational partners. I commend Member States that
have taken that essential action and would like to
encourage others to follow their example.
Finally, allow me just a brief observation on the
status of the internally displaced. While the promising
peace processes in Angola and the Sudan have allowed
humanitarian assistance finally to reach most internally
displaced populations in those countries, generally
speaking, internally displaced persons remain the group
that has the least access to protection and humanitarian
aid. That was again confirmed during my recent
mission to Colombia last week, where I was able to
witness first-hand a situation that easily ranks among
the worst internally displaced persons crises in the
world.

Over the past decades of conflict in Colombia -
a conflict that has come to involve trafficking of illicit
narcotics and terrorist-related issues - an estimated
between 1 and 3 million civilians have been forced to
flee their homes, as illegal armed groups are
deliberately targeting civilians. While recognizing the
difficult challenges faced by the Government in
addressing that very complex crisis, the current anti-
terrorist measures have raised certain concerns. Those
operations must not result in restricting humanitarian
access or call into question the civilian character of the
population in targeted areas.

Before concluding, I want to take the opportunity
of my last briefing to the Security Council to reflect
briefly on the progress achieved over the past few
years in the area of the protection of civilians and to
suggest some action that is still necessary towards that
end. I have been privileged to witness how much work
has been done to promote the greater sensitivity and
responsibility of Member States towards the pleas of
civilians caught in conflict. While greater awareness is
not always reflected in a greater observance of
principles, it is nonetheless the key element in pushing
for change.

I am therefore reassured that the framework for
the protection of civilians initiated by this Council on
12 February 1999 (S/PRST/l999/6) is now well
established within the United Nations system. The
aide-memoire is becoming a regular point of reference
for the Security Council in its considerations and has
started to guide the drafting of mandates of peace
operations. An even more systematic application will
ensure that the culture of protection called for by the
Secretary-General is reflected in all aspects of the work
of the Organization relating to peace and security.
Also, by bringing together the mandates and skills of
departments and agencies across the United Nations
system, and even beyond, the document has already
contributed to a more effective and coherent
humanitarian response in this area.

To remain a living document, however, the aide-
memoire must continue to reflect the evolving nature
and actual needs of protection. Therefore, I would like
to recommend that an update of the aide-memoire be
presented to the Council, along with the road map, at
the next briefing on this issue in December.

Yet, much more clearly needs to be done. More
support is required to facilitate the incorporation of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement into
national legislation and to implement it. The
recognized norms and principles of international law,
most notably the Geneva Conventions and the 1951
Geneva Refugee Convention, need to be fully respected
and implemented.

On the advocacy side, further regional workshops
to disseminate analysis and awareness on the protection
of civilians are needed, with an expanded focus on
workshops in zones of conflict.

In concluding, I would like to remind all of us
that the culture of protection urges us to put the
individuals in need of protection at the centre of our
efforts. It is the millions of voiceless that require our
attention and commitment. It is the father who is too
powerless to protect his family from brutal attacks; the
mother who has no access to medical care and is
helpless to save her sick child; the young child who
wakes up each morning faced with the trauma of war
and violence and a life without a future; the teenage
girl who has been brutally raped and may never fully
recover from the injuries she has suffered.

Those are the people who are depending on us.
They will judge our success - success that will be
determined by the number of people we are able to
protect as a result of swift and decisive action. That is
the ultimate purpose of our work: the humanitarian
imperative. The Council's continued commitment to
that shared goal is vital.

