Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his very enlightening briefing and for the tireless
commitment of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo (MONUSCO) to the Congolese people.

This meeting is being held at a critical moment,
six months after the signing of the political agreement
of 31 December 2016 and three months after the
adoption of an innovative mandate for MONUSCO. It
allows us to review developments in the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to reaffirm
our shared priorities. I should like to lay out France's
assessment of three aspects: the growing political
backlog; the worrisome deterioration of the security
situation and human rights, in particular in the Kasais;
and the welcome responsiveness of MONUSCO in
implementing the mandate set forth in resolution 2348
(2017).

First, as to the growing delays in the implementation
of the 31 December agreement is of concern to France
as the deadline for holding elections approaches.
The agreement is the only credible road map for the
end of the crisis. That is why the lack of consensus
and the systematic blockages in its implementation
are very worrying. Elections must take place in less
than six months, time is running out. It is therefore
urgent that the Government take the steps necessary to
reaffirm its commitment to respecting the provisions
of the agreement. The organization of elections, the
effective establishment of the National Council for
Oversight of the Agreement and the implementation of
confidence-building measures are priorities.

We welcome the progress made on voter registration.
That is a positive step forward and a dynamic that needs
to be pursued. We regret, however, the delays in the

registration process, in particular in the three provinces
of Kasai and Kinshasa. We call on the authorities to
take the measures necessary to finalize the registration
and the voter register. I wish to stress that compliance
with the deadlines set out in the agreement is essential.
France calls on the Congolese authorities to take all the
measures necessary to organize the elections as soon as
possible and recalls the need for an urgent publication of
an electoral timetable in accordance with the provisions
of the 31 December agreement. These advances are all
the more urgent as the current impass is already leading
to an increase in areas of instability in the country.

Secondly, the unprecedented intensification of
violence in the west is particularly alarming and requires
our full attention. Violence in the Kasais has reached
an unsustainable level. The clashes between the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and
Kamwina Nsapu militia are taking a heavy toll on the
populations, as evidenced by the continued increase in
the number of displaced persons and refugees.

We are also very concerned about the rapid
spread of insecurity to Tanganyika and the increasing
intercommunity conflicts in these regions. In that
regard, Ijoin the Secretary-General in condemning the
attacks in the strongest possible terms and in calling on
the belligerents to lay down their arms in order to put
an end to this climate of insecurity and its disastrous
humanitarian consequences. The escape of detainees,
which is increasing in unusual proportions, also adds
to growing insecurity.

A key aspect of the resolution of this crisis will be
the response of the Congolese authorities to the fight
against impunity. We call on the Congolese authorities
to deploy the means necessary to investigate these
violations thoroughly, identify those responsible and
take appropriate measures to ensure that they are
held accountable, irrespective of their affiliation. We
welcome the adoption by the Human Rights Council on
23 June - by consensus and with the agreement of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - of the resolution
authorizing the dispatch of a mission of international
experts, in cooperation with the Congolese authorities.
We call on the Congolese authorities to cooperate fully
with that team of international experts.

Thirdly, we commend the significant efforts made
by MONUSCO to adapt to the mandate provided for in
resolution 2348 (2017). MONUSCO responded quickly
to the adjustments provided for in that resolution. It must
focus on its two priorities: the protection of civilians
and support for the implementation of the 31 December
agreement. We welcome the rapid translation of this
reconfiguration of the Mission on the ground, and
encourage it to pursue its efforts in that direction.

In conclusion, France reiterates once again the
importance of the consensual implementation of all
the provisions of the 31 December agreement, which
is the framework agreed by all the Congolese parties
for the transition towards the holding of elections.
Failure to comply with one or more of its provisions
would entail significant risks for the stability of the
entire region, including a deterioration of security,
outbreaks of violence, political destabilization and
repercussions for the human rights situation and
humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions. This
scenario is, unfortunately, unfolding before our eyes
now, as evidenced by the upsurge of violence in the
Kasais, in Tanganyika and in the east of the country.
France therefore solemnly calls on all political actors
to redouble their efforts to meet the commitments made
last December and to organize the elections. There is an
urgent need to do so.

