Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I too would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing today. I would also
like to thank Foreign Minister Dacie and Ambassador
Citaku for their statements.

As Ambassador Citaku pointed out, this month
marks 10 years since Kosovo's declaration of
independence. Over that decade significant progress
has been made in the consolidation of peace and
democracy in Kosovo. However, further efforts on the
path of progress are needed. We are concerned about
recent attempts to undermine the Specialist Chambers
and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office. It will be crucial
to ensure that Kosovo's political leadership respects its
previous commitments in that regard.

Like others, we strongly condemn the murder of
Oliver Ivanovie. It is vital that the investigation under
way be able to run its course. But while Kosovo is
addressing its recent challenges, its European Union
(EU) perspective is clear. Irreversible steps are needed,
and the Government must resume the dedicated reform
agenda that the people of Kosovo so desire. To that end,
the Government needs partners across the political
spectrum, and we encourage all political actors to
engage in a constructive dialogue that will enable the
necessary reforms to be speedily implemented.

The future of Kosovo will be saved by courage
and committed leadership from Pristina and Belgrade.
We welcome the steps being taken to breathe new life
into the European Union-facilitated Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue, and we encourage both sides to fully engage
and deliver on their respective parts of all agreements
reached. Good-neighbourly relations are vital for
a stable and prosperous Western Balkans, and the
success of the dialogue will also have positive effects
on the wider region. In the meantime, it is essential
to ensure that the status issue does not hamper
Kosovo's European perspective or its membership in
international organizations.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and my European Union colleagues highlighted
earlier today, yesterday the European Commission
adopted its strategy for a credible enlargement
perspective for an enhanced EU engagement with the
Western Balkans. The strategy reaffirms Kosovo's
place in Europe and its European Union perspective. It
recognizes that the challenges Kosovo faces with regard
to the rule of law, relations with its neighbours, and the
reform agenda can and must be addressed within the
framework of the European Union integration process.

Lastly, almost two decades after its establishment,
it is clear that UNMIK has made an invaluable
contribution in Kosovo but, looking forward, we hope
that the Council will be able to consider the possible
prospect of further downsizing the Mission's structure,
size and tasks, as well as of adjusting the reporting and
briefing period from three to six months.

