Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Indonesia
presidency for focusing the spotlight on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

On the twentieth anniversary of the protection
of civilians agenda, civilians continue to make up
the majority of casualties in conflict, and this issue
remains as critical as ever. My delegation supports
the Secretary-General's call for urgent and concrete
progress on three actions, as reflected in his previous
report (see S/2018/462), and would like to make the
following observations.

First, strengthening the protection of civilians
demands that international humanitarian law be
respected and strictly complied with. The United
Nations, the Council, Member States and other
stakeholders should actively advocate enhancing
respect for international humanitarian law by all parties,
including non-State actors. All serious violations of
international humanitarian law must be investigated
and perpetrators must be brought to justice.

Secondly, we need to address the special needs
of each of the disproportionately affected vulnerable
groups: women, children, internally displaced persons
and persons with disabilities. Victims of the indirect
effects of armed conflict, such as disease and famine,
also need special medical care and specialized
services. Therefore, functioning medical facilities and
ensuring access to humanitarian aid are critical to the
protection of the civil population. Hence, Kazakhstan
co-sponsored resolution 2286 (2016) and signed the
French-led declaration of October 2017 on the protection
of humanitarian and medical personnel in conflict.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians is primarily a
responsibility of the host country. To that end, Member
States need to develop national policy frameworks,
which should include capacity-building, strengthening
the rule of law, comprehensive security sector reforms
and good governance, as well as the adoption of
legislation that regulates the export of arms. Kazakhstan
acceded to the Arms Trade Treaty in December 2017
and calls on others to do the same

Fourthly, the protection of civilians mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping operations should be
enhanced through a clearly formulated and practical,
whole-of-system approach with close cooperation
among all components and by forging relationships
with local populations. Mandates to protect civilians
need to be linked to a comprehensive political strategy
for durable and sustained peace. We must also actively
use innovative practical tools, including unarmed
civilian protection.

Many precious lives of civilians, peacekeepers and
other United Nations and humanitarian personnel can
be saved by introducing new technologies to upgrade
our force capabilities. In that regard, next week in Nur-
Sultan, Kazakhstan will host the fifth International
Partnership for Technology in Peacekeeping
Symposium, which is a platform for capacity-building
and improving the effectiveness of peace operations.

Finally, as the Secretary-General has prioritized,
the international community should focus on preventive
measures, including through overcoming the root
causes and promoting peacebuilding and economic
development. Kazakhstan is committed to promoting
regional stability by using a three-pronged strategy to
resolve conflicts, namely, strengthening the security-
development nexus and utilizing a revamped regional
approach and the One United Nations initiative to ensure
greater efficiency, transparency and accountability.

In conclusion, my delegation stands ready to work
with the United Nations on the security of civilians and
upholding international law.

