Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, let
me congratulate the Mexican presidency for organizing
today's open debate on the subject, "The promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security" and for preparing
the concept note (S/2010/322, annex). Let me add that
in View of your outstanding personal experience in this
matter, Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure to have
you presiding over the Council today. Austria warmly
welcomes the initiative. I would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for their statements and
their presence here today.

Austria reaffirms its firm commitment to an
international order based on international law,
including human rights law, and the rule of law with
the United Nations at its core. We believe that
international law and the rule of law are the
foundations of the international system. Clear and
foreseeable rules, respect for and adherence to these
rules and an effective multilateral system to prevent or
sanction violations are preconditions for lasting
international peace and security. In our View, it is
imperative to strengthen the rule of law in all its
dimensions - the national, international and

institutional levels.

For many years Austria has particularly focused
on the role of the Security Council in strengthening a
rules-based international system. You, Mr. President,
have already kindly referred to our initiative launched
in 2004 on the rule of law and the Security Council.
We started this with the New York University School
of Law and launched a series of panel discussions on
the topic. Together with you, Sir, in your then-capacity
as Permanent Representative of Mexico, and with
Liechtenstein and other like-minded members of the
Group of Friends of the Rule of Law, prepared a final
report on this subject. It was presented in New York in
April 2008 and published as a Security Council
document (S/2008/270, annex). The report contains 17
specific recommendations on how the Security Council
could strengthen the rule of law in its various fields of
activity. During our membership on the Council we
have consistently worked with other delegations to
implement and mainstream these recommendations in
the Council's daily business.

In this context, Austria also commends the efforts
of the Security Council Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions to
strengthen the transparency of the Council's working
methods by reviewing and updating the relevant
presidential note (S/2006/507), thereby enhancing the
rule of law in the everyday work of the Council.

Since the last open debate on the rule of law, in
June 2006 (5474th meeting), significant progress has
been made with the establishment of the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit. We are grateful for the personal involvement
of the Deputy Secretary-General in this important
matter. We strongly support the Group and the Unit in
their efforts to ensure a coordinated and coherent
response. We also support the specific proposals made
by the Deputy Secretary-General on the subject.

Among the topics raised in the concept paper, let
me first address the importance of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In resolution 1894
(2009), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
deliberate targeting of civilians and the commission of
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
applicable international humanitarian and human rights

law in situations of armed conflict may constitute
threats to international peace and security and imply
the adoption of appropriate measures by the Council.
Respect for international humanitarian law by all
parties to a conflict is essential for the protection of
civilians and should be an important aspect of any
comprehensive strategy for resolving conflict. We
stress the special rights and protection of women and
children under international law, which we urge all
parties to conflict to respect.

The rule of law is the cornerstone of all
peacebuilding efforts. We call on the Council to
express its commitment to ensure that all United
Nations efforts to restore peace and security
themselves respect the rule of law. The promotion of
the rule of law in post-conflict situations can only be
achieved through an integrated and coordinated
approach that encompasses all the actors involved. In
that context, the Peacebuilding Commission has a vital
role to play. We commend the important contributions
made by international and regional organizations in
this area, including the European Union and the
International Development Law Organization.

Turning now to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Austria strongly
supports the role of the International Court of Justice
as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
We call on all States that have not yet done so to
consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in
accordance with its Statute. For its part, Austria
accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court four
decades ago.

With regard to international efforts to end
impunity for the most serious crimes of international
concern, Austria stresses the important role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), ad hoc and mixed
tribunals and specialized chambers of national
tribunals. Austria strongly believes that the permanent
International Criminal Court is one of the most
effective tools for buttressing the rule of law and
combating impunity. In that regard, we commend the
stocktaking of international criminal justice undertaken
by the first Review Conference of the ICC, held from
31 May to 11 June in Kampala at the invitation of the
Government of Uganda. While the ad hoc Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are only temporary
institutions, as Chair of the Security Council's Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, Austria is
working to establish a mechanism to take over their
residual functions, and thus preserve justice and the
rule of law.

We believe that the United Nations and the
Security Council must continue to be at the forefront of
the fight against impunity and to ensure that alleged
violations are investigated and those responsible for
crimes held accountable. Accountability must be
ensured by taking measures at the national level, such
as through domestic prosecutions, truth-seeking,
providing reparations for victims and through
institutional reform. Justice is essential to achieving
lasting peace and reconciliation, as well as to avoiding
the recurrence of violations in the future.

As Chair of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee, Austria is also committed to enhancing the
efficiency and credibility of sanctions regimes - and
almost all the representatives who have spoken so far
have brought up that subject today. Sanctions play an
important role in promoting compliance with
international law and fighting international terrorism.
However, when they target individuals, sanctions also
raise questions about procedural guarantees and due
process. Austria welcomes the adoption of resolutions
1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009), which provide for
substantial improvements in the listing and de-listing
procedures of the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions regime.
Like others, we warmly welcome the Secretary-
General's recent appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost,
who is an outstanding lawyer, as the Ombudsperson. I
would specifically like to assure Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien, who made the point, that the
Committee is looking forward to working with her very
closely.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
strong support for the draft presidential statement that
the Council will adopt today and for the request to the
Secretary-General to prepare a follow-up to his 2004
report on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2004/6l6).

