Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I want to thank our
briefers for sharing their analyses with us today, and
particularly to welcome Police Commissioner Makotose
to the Council. I also want to thank the presidency
and the Secretariat for ensuring that we hear women's
voices in this Chamber, not just on policing but on all
the issues we discuss.

At the outset, I would like to echo my Swedish
colleague and to ask all the Blue Berets at today's
meeting to pass on to their officers the Security
Council's thanks and admiration for their service and
bravery. Their work and sacrifice in fragile and post-
conflict States is a vital part ofpeacekeeping operations
and special political missions. From Haiti to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, from Afghanistan
to South Sudan, the men and women of United Nations
policing put their lives on the line to protect the most
vulnerable as their communities emerge from conflict.
Their presence allows people to rebuild their lives,
their communities, their livelihoods after the guns
have fallen silent, and they help embed longer-term
stability by promoting the rule of law, human rights
and by helping build capable and accountable security
institutions that can stand on their own two feet without
United Nations support.

It is because of the important role of United Nations
policing that it is so vital that we hold these meetings.
We are the organ that tasks those men and women with
risking their lives, and so it is important that we hear
directly from the police commanders about what more
the Council can do to support them and their officers. As
we all know too well, the threats they face do not stand

still. If United Nations policing is to stay effective, then
we - whether Council members, police-contributing
countries or police commanders - need to be ready to
respond and reform.

That is why we would have liked to have seen
resolution 2382 (2017) go further in terms of reform.
There is still much to be done in order to ensure that
United Nations policing is as effective and efficient as
possible. For example, the United Kingdom wants to see
a more flexible approach to the police function - one
that adapts according to the situation each mission
faces. This should be underpinned by a strong analytical
capability that can undertake the continuous analysis
necessary to ensure support remains appropriate to
needs on the ground.

In parallel, we would like to see the Secretariat
make more regular and effective use of specialists
with skills relevant to the situation at hand. This would
require the introduction of better and more transparent
administrative arrangements to absorb and utilize this
expertise. Additionally, it is crucial that policing be
incorporated into integrated planning and assessment
processes, both in New York and in missions, so that the
various mission components complement one another.

In this regard, I want to highlight and commend the
good work of the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice
and Corrections, a working arrangement between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Programme, UN-Women, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and others, which provides joint
operational country support in the police, justice and
corrections areas in post-conflict and other crisis
situations. It is an example of the United Nations
providing more effective, coherent and coordinated
country-level assistance, which we would like to see
more of.

I also want to stress the United Kingdom's
continuing support for the external review 2016
recommendations. We are keen to see progress being
made on these areas, including those referenced in the
Secretary-General's report.

Let me conclude with a final reflection. United
Nations police are present throughout the continuum of
conflict. The Blue Berets are usually the first and the
last members of the United Nations family that a local
population meet during any intervention or response
to a crisis. So to succeed in their mission, across the
duration of their deployment officers need to establish
a relationship with the population, one founded on trust.
That trust is more readily formed if United Nations
police officers reflect the diversity of the world that
they are sent to protect.

Allow me to close by joining my voice to that of
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix in expressing my
support for police-contributing countries that are
addressing the obstacles preventing more women from
entering United Nations police. I also wish to encourage
even greater efforts within United Nations police
components to consult with communities, including
women, and ensure that their views and needs are fully
part of their day-to-day work and their reporting to
the Council.

