Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): First of all, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Sandra Honore, for her
briefing.

During the four years since the devastating
earthquake of 2010 the centre of gravity for rebuilding
Haiti has been shifting from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
international support to the Haitian people and their
leaders. The unprecedented catastrophe was extremely
challenging and still poses residual threats.

Having listened to the Special Representative's
briefing, we hope that the political actors will make
every effort to hold elections as soon as possible. The
importance of the ownership and responsibility of
national stakeholders cannot be overemphasized. We
expect the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to continue to actively engage to promote
political dialogue and consensus. Capacity-building
for good governance is a priority for the international
community, which should focus its resources in this
regard.

As the rule of law is one of the key elements of
good governance, technical and operational support
for the national police should be sustained until
it is able to provide public order. We support the
Secretary-General's recommendation concerning the
condition-based two-step drawdown ofthe MINUSTAH
military component. His recommendation is in line
with the ongoing consolidation process. We believe that
limited resources should be invested at a suitable time
and location. We hope that political leaders will tackle
the underlying causes of social grievances. Without
addressing the prevailing humanitarian problems,
especially those related to internally displaced people,
security and stability may remain elusive. Providing
social and economic alternatives to people will be
the best remedy to curb criminal activities. In this
regard, we believe that the role of the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations country
team and international partners should be enhanced
during the streamlining process of MINUSTAH.

The Republic of Korea previously participated in
the reconstruction process of Haiti, including through
the dispatch of an engineering contingent. This year,
we joined in the support of the national plan for the
elimination of cholera with a modest donation, and we
are considering ways to continually contribute to the
humanitarian needs in Haiti.

