Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Let me start
by congratulating Equatorial Guinea for today's
timely debate, and also to thank our briefers, Special
Representative Lamamra and Mr. Gounden.

Portugal aligns itself with the statement made by
the Head of Delegation of the European Union and
wishes to make some additional remarks.

Local security crises have global repercussions,
and they need to be addressed through joint efforts.
The African Union has assumed growing leadership in
the search for African solutions to African problems.
The strategic partnership established with the United
Nations is a crucial step towards strengthening the
chances of success, and it has already achieved
promising results, as in the recent case of the Central
African Republic.

We believe that the strong partnership among
the African Union, the United Nations and other
international partners, such as the European Union,
is the best way to achieve peace and security,
prosperity, environmental protection, gender equality,
human rights and democracy. Those elements are all
intertwined - when they concur, they are mutually
reinforcing. The framework is already in place. The
African Peace and Security Architecture, alongside
instruments such as the African Governance
Architecture and the African Union's Agenda 2063,
provides a solid regional basis, which complements
the existing multilateral framework. All of us must
remain engaged and mobilized to provide the necessary
support. Resolution 2457 (2019), just adopted, is a
further contribution to that end.

Silencing the guns will also require strong
determination in preventing future conflicts. We need
to strengthen the role of women and young people in
the prevention and management of conflicts, as well as
their civic and political participation at all levels. We
need to keep up our efforts to prevent the radicalization
of young people, and we need to combat the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
therefore encourage an active African participation in
instruments such as the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects, its International Tracing Instrument and the
Arms Trade Treaty.

But security measures alone will not be effective
if they are not accompanied by an effort to achieve
social inclusion. Alongside more traditional threats,
Africa also feels the strain of such global challenges as
climate change, water and food insecurity, pandemics,
terrorism and transnational organized crime.
Therefore, we must tackle the root causes of conflict
through a positive agenda, while combating poverty
and promoting development. The implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will be of
crucial importance in this process.

Portugal maintains a very close relationship with
Africa and remains engaged in contributing to thesejoint
efforts, both bilaterally and at the level of the European
Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP) and, of course, the United Nations.
Portugal currently participates in missions in Mali,
the Central African Republic, the Niger, Somalia,
South Sudan and Darfur. We have technical military
cooperation agreements with several African States,
and we are engaged in development projects, including
with the United Nations and the CPLP, aimed at the
implementation of the SDGs. We have made a long-
term commitment to the security and development
of an African continent that is globally relevant at all
levels and which undoubtedly deserves to increase its
representation in the Security Council.

We will remain committed and mobilized. We must
indeed silence the weapons ofthe present so that we can
focus on the future, ensuring that the hands of young
people will not be holding guns, but the tools to build a
life that lives up to their legitimate aspirations.

