Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Everyone is familiar with the saying that "truth is the
first victim of war". If that is so, then it is reasonable
to assume that the foremost task in the post-war order
should be to restore truth. Yet that is a formidable task.
What constitutes truth in a post-conflict context that is
torn apart by divergent historical narratives? The tragic
legacy of violence and atrocities not only results in
the immeasurable loss of human life and property, but
also is in violation of the conscience of humankind, as
mentioned in the preamble of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. When nothing is done to overcome
the legacy of conflict, it can dramatically affect future
generations. We therefore have a moral imperative
to fight against impunity, to develop strategies for
transitional justice and to face up to the past, so as to
embark on the path of truth.

The international community has made considerable
progress in developing norms that make it possible to
ensure victims the right to truth and justice, as well to
receive reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
The combination of those four elements contributes to
a higher degree of accountability for the perpetrators,
and to addressing the needs of the victims. Guarantees
of non-recurrence in particular, for instance through
institutional reforms, pave the way towards coexistence
and reconciliation. Experience shows that reconciliation
is a long-term endeavour that requires significant
work involving memory. In other words, ensuring
sustainable peace requires righting past grievances.
Switzerland acknowledges and supports the efforts of
all Governments that are courageously tackling those
difficult issues and are trying to develop their own
national strategies for dealing with the past. We also
commend the work of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence.

With regard to Syria and all other ongoing
conflicts, the search for lasting peace entails combating
impunity. To prevent further atrocities, it is crucial to
re-establish a system whereby each person assumes
their responsibility and is accountable. That is why,
returning to the problem of truth and historical memory,
we strongly support the establishment of fact-finding
commissions and commissions of investigation, such as
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic. We also want to recall
that, on the initiative of Switzerland, close to 60 States
formally petitioned the Council one year ago to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. As atrocities spread, truth and justice, as well
as reparations and institutional reforms, are more
important than ever. Those measures are central to any
lasting peace.

In line with the practical suggestions made by
the Jordanian presidency about what the Council and
the international community can do, I should like
to mention some of the efforts that Switzerland has
undertaken. Several years ago, Switzerland launched a
project with the objective of protecting and preserving
archives related to violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The project provides
technical assistance to States and civil society
organizations that request support in protecting their
archives and creating databases that could contribute
to the establishment of the facts and to the preservation
of historical memory. Thanks to a bilateral agreement,
for instance, Switzerland has on file a backup copy of
the national police archives of Guatemala. Switzerland
has also taken specific initiatives regarding the
dissemination of good practices of fact-finding and
investigation commissions. Last November, a seminar
was held in Geneva in cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, during which the High Commissioner shared
its guidelines for the very first time.

Finally, Switzerland would like once again to
stress the commitment of the Security Council to
the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and the
promotion of necessary preventive action to settle
disputes in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter
of the United Nations. Preventing armed conflict is a
more desirable strategy to ensure lasting peace and
security than having to react to violent clashes.

Stepping away from my written text, I should
like to make a quick personal comment in conclusion.
When I read the title of your proposal for the theme of
today's discussion, Sir, it reminded me of the German
philosopher Immanuel Kant, who wrote a tract on
eternal peace. I did some research into that philosopher
and found that he had the idea of writing a tract on
eternal peace by looking at the text of an innkeeper's
sign called simply "Eternal Peace". It was interesting to
me that the sign at that inn showed it to be a cemetery.
It showed that the only eternal peace that we will find
is after our mortal lives are ended. I hope truly that this
debate will help to ensure that eternal peace will be
seen by the living world, and not just in the afterlife.
I am pleased that this debate is making such a big
contribution.

