Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.

First of all, I would like to express my gratitude for
the initiative of the Netherlands to hold today's debate.
Today's meeting is a timely opportunity to assess
prospects for the reform of peacekeeping operations.

It is nothing short of symbolic that this important
session is held just two days before the closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) - one
of the milestone success stories of the United Nations
peacekeeping endeavour. Having contributed to
UNMIL from the very day of its deployment, Ukraine
takes pride in its role in making its success story
possible. Our Blue Helmets in Liberia pioneered such
innovative forms of peacekeeping as inter-mission
cooperation and robust peacekeeping, which are both
highly relevant to today's topic.

It is crystal clear from this debate that peacekeeping
operations are one of the most reliable and commonly
used instruments. Yet a lot remains to be done in both
the political and the technical dimensions in order to
bring United Nations peacekeeping up to speed and
meet the complexity of contemporary challenges. The
challenges are indeed contemporary, but they are not
new - at least not all of them. Wars, armed conflicts
and aggression are still proliferating and often spiralling
out of control. Therefore, the Organization must be more
proactive and preventive in its actions than ever before.
In this context, I would like to express our full support
for the Secretary-General's reform effort, which should
result in strengthening strategic advice to the Security
Council, including more active recourse to Article 99
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Comprehensive reform of United Nations
peacekeeping is important for the Organization's
continued success and relevance. In recent years, some
progress has been achieved in making peacekeeping
operations better prepared to execute mandated tasks,
but we are not there yet. I see the following areas as
ones that continue to need to be properly addressed.

First, we need to secure the use of appropriate
modern technologies in peacekeeping operations
and reinforce intelligence capacities of operations.
Secondly, the police capabilities of the Organization
need to be strengthened. Thirdly, efforts to eradicate
sexual violence in United Nations peacekeeping must
also remain among the priorities of peacekeeping
reform. Fourthly, we see significant room for increasing
women's participation in peacekeeping activity, as
well as for improving the human rights components
in peacekeeping operations. Fifthly, it is critical to
ensure that peacekeeping operations do not have a
harmful environmental footprint while executing
their mandates.

For peacekeeping operations to get stronger and
more effective, it is essential to provide them with the
right capabilities and manpower and to make them
ready and willing to implement mandates including on
the protection of civilians. Due attention must also be
paid to securing proper funding and providing sufficient
resources, such as helicopters, as needed. That is
imperative for ensuring the security and mobility of
peacekeeping personnel.
Missions should be provided with clear mandates
set out in accordance with the core tenets of United
Nations peacekeeping and with the focus on supporting
a political solution to a conflict. In that regard, the
impartiality of a mission and its personnel should be
one ofthe guiding principles. The tasks ofpeacekeeping
operations should not be limited only to the security
sphere; they also have to be capable of providing a
proper environment and supporting electoral processes,
in accordance with democratic standards, which often
become a turning point in post-conflict reconciliation
and peacebuilding. In cases of aggression, restoring
legitimate Government authority over occupied
territories, establishing control over the State border
and securing the withdrawal of the occupying forces are
prerequisites of successful peacekeeping operations.

For more than four years the situation in and around
my own country has remained as an example of the
unutilized potential of United Nations peacekeeping.
Our request to deploy a peacekeeping operation in the
Donbass region of Ukraine has still not been properly
considered and no action has been taken. We were
encouraged that from his first days in office Secretary-
General Guterres declared a clear position on the
primacy of conflict prevention, mediation and other
diplomatic peacebuilding tools. In that respect, his visit
to Ukraine last July was a sound manifestation of his
commitment to bringing peace to Europe.

There now hangs over the continent a very real
threat of another full-fledged war due to ongoing
aggression by a permanent member of the Council
against my country, as well as its aggressive actions
in other parts of the world, including in the territory of
other permanent members of the Council. That is why
what is urgently needed now are concrete actions, both
on the part of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General. We stand ready to engage constructively at
all levels.

Ukraine has been a strong and reliable partner
of the Organization in peacekeeping activities and
will remain a steadfast supporter and contributor. As
announced recently by the President of Ukraine, we are
ready to extend the geography of our engagement in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. For instance,
we are ready to participate in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to all
peacekeepers who lost their lives while safeguarding
international peace during the past 70 years.

