Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Russian Federation for
organizing such an important and timely debate.

Cyprus would like to pay tribute to all the men
and women who have served and continue to serve
in peacekeeping missions around the world. Their
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security is invaluable.

The year 2014 marks the fiftieth anniversary of
the establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). I take this opportunity
to extend our deep appreciation and gratitude to the
United Nations and its Member States, in particular
all those Member States who have contributed troops
to UNFICYP throughout the years. Cyprus can attest,
from its own experience, that the maintenance of
international peace and security would be precarious
without United Nations peacekeeping in many parts of
the world.

Peacekeeping remains one of the primary tools
through which the United Nations fulfils its principal
mandate - the maintenance of international peace
and security. Peacekeeping has gone through various
phases and is now more multidimensional than ever
before. That is largely due to the ever-changing nature
of conflicts, which have become more internalized and
thus more challenging and complex and with more far-
reaching effects on regional and international peace
and security.

The emergence of new challenges requires the
collective and organized response of the international
community. They underline the need for this debate, as
well as for our quest for efficiency and modernization
to be ongoing. Increased challenges also underline the
need for the cost-effective use of resources and the
most efficient resource allocation. Those, however,
should be in line, and not to the detriment of, the ability
of peacekeeping missions to adequately and effectively
fulfil their mandate.

It is necessary that modern peacekeeping
adapt to new needs and challenges, for example by
adequately equipping peacekeepers and civilian
personnel. Up-to-date technology is a sine qua non
for the execution of the mandate of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Cyprus commends the
efforts made so far in that direction and would like to
encourage the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to keep looking into possibilities for the expanded use
of modern technology.

In line with that, we would like to stress the
importance of the security of the Blue Helmets and
civilian personnel, which is closely associated with
the use of upgraded equipment and modern tools.
Safeguarding the welfare ofpeacekeepers and providing
an upgraded working and living environment should
also form part of our priorities. In that regard, we are in
favour ofthe idea of extending peacekeeping mandates,
when necessary, so that the safety and security of
peacekeepers is guaranteed. We also consider that
the recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations provide a comprehensive
context of specific ideas that correspond to evolving
needs.

In discussing modern peacekeeping, the need
for a broader introduction of a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations and the full implementation
of Security Council resolutions on women, peace
and security come to the fore. Cyprus attaches great
importance to the pivotal role of women in conflict
management and resolution with the aim of achieving
sustainable peace, and we would very much welcome
increased participation of women in peace processes
and peacekeeping operations, including in senior roles.

In that regard we feel privileged to have two women
at the top of the United Nations mission in Cyprus.
In addition to the current Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNFICYP,
Ms. Lisa Buttenheim, we will soon have the pleasure of
welcoming to Cyprus Major General Kristin Lund, the
next UNFICYP Force Commander and the first ever
woman to lead a United Nations peacekeeping force.
We are certain that their insight will prove decisive in
our effort.

In this volatile international environment, it is of
utmost importance to adhere to the principles of the
Charter, specifically to the principle ofrespect for State
sovereignty, when deploying peacekeeping operations.
It is essential that our efforts address the root causes
of international conflicts and that we undertake solid
and tangible steps that will enhance the United Nations
collectiveness and reaffirm our joint commitment to
upholding and strengthening the principles and values
of the Organization.

