Mr. Osman (Somalia): I am honoured once again to address the members of the Security Council today and would like to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia, for your visit to Mogadishu last month, during which you witnessed first-hand the progress on the ground. I wish also to thank you for your briefing. My purpose today is threefold: first, to present my Government's considerations on the threats to peace, security and stability in my country; secondly, to provide an update on the important work that my Government is undertaking to address those threats; and, thirdly, to update the Council on our engagement with the Panel of Experts on Somalia. In terms of existing and emerging threats to Somalia, Al-Shabaab continues to pose the biggest threat to Somalia and to the region. It retains the capacity and the network to sneak suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices and _ vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices into the capital, as seen in the recent security incidents there, including the 28 December 2019 attack in the vicinity of the ex-control Afgooye junction, and the vehicle-borne improvised explosive device at a checkpoint on Makka Al-Mukarama road in Mogadishu on 8 January. At the same time, the terrorist group continues to influence some parts of Somalia through its extensive extortion and intimidation techniques as well as propaganda. The Federal Government of Somalia remains strongly committed to the implementation of the transition plan, underpinned by the notion of a comprehensive approach to security. The Government recognizes that mutually reinforcing efforts on the reform front in the security sector, coupled with effective military operations and the delivery of stabilization initiatives, are prerequisites for consolidating successes in the transition plan. Operation Badbaado, in Lower Shabelle, has been the central focus of the Government after successful military operations in which joint military operations resulted in several strategic areas recovered by the Somali National Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia. Since February 2019, a total of 9,704 Somali National Army forces have been generated, of which 1,023, under the October 14 brigade, were directlyinvolved in the recovered areas in Lower Shabelle, namely Sabiid, Anole, Awdheegle and Bariire. Thus far, 2,000 militias have been integrated into the Galmudug forces and 374 into the Hirshabelle forces, based on the politically negotiated Hirshabelle and Galmudug frameworks. In addition, such efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia has resulted in the reintegration of the first battalion of 550 soldiers from existing Somali National Army units. The sustained offensive against Al-Shabaab terrorists illustrates the increasing capabilities of the Somali security forces, and, given the right conditions, the latter are capable of effectively implementing the transition plan and delivering security and justice. The Federal Government of Somalia has made substantial progress in building the institutional capacity of the Somali National Security Forces so as to promote the rule of law and access to justice as well as to improve the quality and delivery of governance. In 2019, key benchmarks met by the Somali National Army and overseen by the Minister of Defence included completing the biometric registration of its forces, the development of financial management and procurement guidelines for the Somali national armed forces, the creation of an efficient and effective system in managing rations as well as reviewing such key areas as personnel, logistics and finance. Logistical support to the Somali national forces by the United Nations Support Office in Somalia was also streamlined. The Somali Police Force has also illustrated its potential by supporting military operations and consolidating gains made in recovered areas. The first 100 Darawiish officers have been deployed in Lower Shabelle to support holding the liberated areas and assisting with humanitarian deliveries, allowing the Somali national forces to move further afield with their operations. The Federal Government of Somalia intends to accelerate force-generation efforts for holding recovered areas with a view to creating an environment conducive to stabilization activities and the implementation of the rule of law. On 30 December 2019, 385 new police recruits from South-West State graduated and are to be deployed to Lower Shabelle, following the new police model agreed by the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states in 2016. On 13 February 2020, a further 300 Darawiish cadets at General Kahiye Police Academy graduated and are now ready for deployment. The Federal Government of Somalia's objective is to generate 1,750 Darawiish police officers for deployment in 2020. In 2019 alone, the Somali Police Force generated a total of 3,212 new police officers. In addition to the ongoing operational and institutional capacity-building activities, the Federal Government of Somalia has continued with efforts designed to create the conditions needed to strengthen local governance, reconciliation and rule of law, among other stabilization efforts. To support the coordination of stabilization activities in the newly liberated areas as part of the Lower Shabelle military operations, an interministerial task force, consisting of the Ministers of Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation, Defence, Justice and Judiciary Affairs, Internal Security, Health, Information and Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management, was formed and has focused on the need to ensure coherent and conditions-based approaches to stabilization activities. While implementation of the transition plan is under way, the existence of armed elements that are not yet part of the Federal or state forces presents a risk to stability. Integration efforts are under way to incorporate militia groups into the forces, as set out in the transition plan. However, integrated militia forces require vast financial resources, equipment, training and such other efforts as the demobilization of non-active persons and civilian reintegration. The Federal Government of Somalia continues to strengthen weapons and ammunition management for the Somali security forces. It has improved storage capacities and undertaken consistent implementation of the marking and registration of weapons as well as efforts aimed at capturing data on weapons distributed. With regard to the Panel of Experts on Somalia, our aim is to begin and maintain a constructive working relationship with the Panel and to cooperate on determining how to address the security threats in terms of terrorism financing, illegal weapons flow and the illicit charcoal trade in Somalia, while helping to reach a deeper understanding of Al-Shabaab's use of improvised explosive devises. The Federal Government of Somalia has had a number of meetings with the Panel's Coordinator in the last few months, with a view to improving relationships. However, we have not agreed on the way forward, as our priorities remain unaligned and our concerns continue to be unexamined. As Council members are aware, the Panel or the Monitoring Group during the previous mandatemade unsubstantiated allegations against certain individuals within and outside the Government. Such allegations have damaged relations and caused significant reputational damage. We are aware that the best practice in monitoring the United Nations arms embargo is to use evidence-based reporting with a reasonable standard of proof, but that approach has not been followed for recent incidents. We therefore request once again that a reliable mechanism be established to redress cases where allegations are wrongly made. The Council must also ensure that all efforts are made in a timely manner to ensure full investigations in cases of misconduct by Panel of Experts, in line with the rules and the regulations of the United Nations. The Federal Government of Somalia is confident that all efforts will be undertaken to strengthen and improve accountability and responsibility in conduct- related matters, including through the application of policy and practice guidance and enhancement of investigation capacities. We trust that these efforts will continue to improve awareness and that violations are promptly investigated and addressed so that accountability is ensured in cases of sustained misconduct, thereby guaranteeing that full cooperation between the host country and the Panel of Experts is achieved. In conclusion, Somalia continues to face multidimensional challenges with competing priorities. The Federal Government of Somalia is concurrently engaged in countering an insurgency and building strong and stable institutions in line with the national security architecture and the Somali transition plan. Resource gaps and logistical flexibility remain key challenges in adapting to changing operational strategies by the insurgents. Strengthening intelligence-sharing mechanisms and joint planning is a priority for the Federal Government of Somalia and pivotal in joint operations to further recover the remaining areas under Al-Shabaab control. In this regard, the Federal Government of Somalia requests the continued support of the international community in the aforementioned areas to counter the threats of Al-Shabaab effectively and bring lasting peace and stability to Somalia and the region. However, the sanctions continue to be imposed on Somalia without proper assessment of its effectiveness. We therefore once again wish to go on record that we are seeking the full lifting of the arms embargo on Somalia, which has no time limit or clearly defined or verifiable benchmarks. Lastly, my Government remains seized of the important issues being discussed today, and I ask for the Council to support our continued constructive working relationship moving forward. Upon instructions from my Government, I would like to bring to the Council's attention an urgent matter that poses a serious threat to our peace and security. The Federal Government of Somalia has exhausted all diplomatic means in seeking the Government of Kenya to refrain from actions that threaten the historical relations between our two nations and the long-lasting economic, security and political cooperation between our two Governments and our citizens. Somalia believes that our region can best succeed with more cooperation and less interference. However, Kenya continues to be a consistent destabilizing force in Somalia, off-setting and negating its engagement in the African Union Mission in Somalia. Kenya's brash interference in Somalia's domestic affairs is a blatant breach of Somalia's sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and unity. Furthermore, Kenya's continuous encroachment in the Somali border areas clearly undermines our stability and sovereignty. Our hard-earned progress, with thehelp of the international community, is today being jeopardized by the negative anti-peace actions carried out by the Kenyan Government. These destabilizing actions not only negatively impact Somalia, but are also antithetical to the objective of regional and global peace and in clear violation of paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which states: "All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations." The Federal Government of Somalia strongly condemns those blatant violations and reaffirms that it will take all necessary measures proceeding from its responsibility to defend the inviolability, sovereignty and unity of Somalia, in accordance with our Constitution, as well as international law and covenants. The Kenyan Government continues its destabilizing actions against our nation, despite our multiple protests. If the aforementioned actions do not immediately cease, we will invoke Article 35 of the United Nations Charter and bring our case against Kenya's breach of Somalia's sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity to the Security Council. The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.
