Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to see you, Mr. President,
presiding over this meeting, and I would like to thank
Germany for organizing this debate.

I also thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for delivering
their respective briefings on the situation in Haiti and
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). I would further like to welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Haiti,
and extend my thanks to the Executive Director of

Zanmi Lasante for her briefing.

Argentina welcomes the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/l98), in particular the
comprehensive and inclusive strategic assessment of the
situation in Haiti in order to recommend the appropriate
timetable for the end of the MINUJUSTH mandate and
to identify the areas in which continued United Nations
support would contribute most to sustaining peace and
Haiti's path towards sustainable development. Progress
in the socioeconomic situation, in an equitable manner
and in accordance with 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, remains key to long-term stability.

Argentina also welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendation to establish a special political mission
to provide political and advisory capacities that would
continue to pay attention to development and, in turn,
enable the Security Council to continue to support Haiti's
efforts to achieve sustainable peace and strengthen the
role of the good offices of the United Nations. In that
regard, Argentina again underscores the need for the
Mission's transition to that new option to be based on
the progressive fulfilment of the Mission's mandate
in order to prevent an early exit from jeopardizing the
efforts of the past 15 years. We also understand that
the Mission must address the aforementioned transition
process and the establishment of the strategic advisory
office, in close cooperation with the Government of
Haiti and its leaders, respecting their national priorities
and taking into account the principle of national
ownership in the peacebuilding process.

We emphasize that the Haitian authorities have
expressed their approval of the deployment of a special
political mission under Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, Argentina believes that
such a mission should support Haitian actions related
to socioeconomic development during the transition
period, in coordination with the United Nations country
team in Haiti, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Economic and Social Council.

Although the challenges remain numerous,
Argentina once again underscores the progress made
in implementing the Mission's important mandate,
assisting Haiti in improving humanitarian conditions,
reducing community violence, consolidating rule of
law institutions, strengthening and developing the
professionalism of the Haitian National Police and
promoting and protecting human rights in the country.
In that regard, we highlight the achievements made
by the country overall in recent years and the efforts
made by the Haitian authorities, in conjunction with
MINUJUSTH, to build lasting stability and a better
future for the country.

In addition to maintaining bilateral cooperation
with Haiti, Argentina will continue to provide trained
police personnel for the Mission, to the extent possible
and in accordance with specific requirements. We will
continue to participate in both multilateral and bilateral
efforts with the country, as we have done since the
1990s. Likewise, Argentina reaffirms its commitment
to Haiti and its people, while emphasizing the invaluable
work of the men and women of MINUJUSTH in
fulfilment of its honourable mandate to support Haiti
on its path towards the consolidation of peace and
sustainable development.

