Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, and, like
the Ambassador of Portugal, I would like to deliver my
statement in Portuguese.

(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation)

I would like to welcome Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation Jose' Luis Guterres, who
honours us with his presence at this historic moment
for Timor-Leste. His presence attests to how important
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the United Nations are to Timor-Leste,
as well as the earnestness with which the Timorese
Government views the new phase in its relations
with the United Nations after 2013. I also thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for his briefing and
insightful comments. I would also like to express our
appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq for her extraordinary
work with UNMIT, and to congratulate South Africa
for its excellent coordination of the core group for
Timer-Leste. In that connection, we thank Ambassador
Sangqu for his briefing on the Security Council mission
to Timor-Leste (see S/PV.6858).

The year 2012 is a milestone in the recent
history of Timor-Leste. Ten years after the country's
independence, the Timorese people have been able to
organize and hold two very important elections and to
ensure a smooth transfer of power.

Sustained progress has also been made in other
areas. In the security sector, the transfer last year
of policing responsibilities to the national police of
Timor-Leste was a very important step. Economic
growth has accelerated, and a base for investment
and for development of the country's infrastructure
has been established. The Timorese have worked
hard to strengthen mechanisms for the protection of
human rights, implement anti-corruption programmes,
promote transparency and ensure social progress
and good governance. The participation of women in
Timor-Leste's nation-building process is also notable.
In the 2012 parliamentary elections, quotas established
through electoral legislation resulted in women
occupying 38 per cent of seats, which, as highlighted
by the Secretary-General, is the highest percentage in
the Asia-Pacific region. Brazil commends UNMIT's
important contribution in helping Timor-Leste in its
efforts to overcome the obstacles in its path towards
peace, stability and development.

In this new stage in Timor-Leste's history, it is
essential that the international community and the
United Nations continue to cooperate with the Timorese
in order to consolidate the positive results obtained
in areas such as security and institutional capacity-
building. We are confident that, as has been the case
so far, the future relationship of the United Nations
with the Government of Timor-Leste will be based on a
mutually beneficial dialogue focused on the country's
priorities and concerns.

Brazil supports the vision formulated by
the Timorese Government of an innovative and
cooperative relationship with the United Nations,
aimed at strengthening Timor-Leste's institutions and
socioeconomic development. We encourage the prompt
beginning of discussions on issues identified in the
Joint Transition Plan for a post-2012 agenda. Brazil
will continue to develop its strong ties with Timor-
Leste. We will maintain our support to the Timorese
Government through cooperative projects in areas such
as agriculture, education, justice and security.

We are also proud of the work that Se'rgio Vieira de
Mello, a Brazilian national, was able to do, as Head of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor, in supporting the country in the early stages of
its independence.

The commitment and dedication of the Timorese
people have been at the heart of the achievements we
celebrate today and constitute a solid base for an even
stronger partnership between Timor-Leste, the United
Nations and the international community in the years
ahead. Timor-Leste can continue to count on Brazil.

