Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): Allow
me begin by expressing my heartfelt condolences to
the people and the Government of Afghanistan on the
demise of Vice-President Mohammad Qasim Fahim.
His invaluable contribution to the peace, prosperity
and stability of Afghanistan will long be remembered.
Pakistan also condemns the 17 January terrorist
attack in Kabul, and we express our sympathies and
condolences.

We thank Special Representative Jan Kubis
for his effective leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for
his comprehensive briefing this morning. His visit to
Pakistan last month provided an opportunity for a frank
exchange of views, which we truly appreciate.

Pakistan strongly feels that UNAMA is a stabilizing
factorinAfghanistan. Its continuedrolethereforeremains
crucial. We also welcome the adoption of resolution
2145 (2014) this morning. We thank Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for
sharing his perspective with us. We welcome the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/163), which provides
an overview of developments in the region, and thank
Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his positive evaluation of Pakistan
with regard to bilateral relations.

As we celebrate Nowruz and a new beginning, the
season of change is upon us in more than one way. In
a little under three weeks, Afghans will go to the polls
to exercise their democratic right. Timely, inclusive,
transparent and credible elections are critical to the
continued stability of the country. We are encouraged
by the Secretary-General's assessment that preparations
are going well. We hope that the remaining challenges
will also be addressed.

Pakistan, for its part, has no favourites. It will
cooperate and work with the popular choice of our
Afghan brothers and sisters. Others should also
exercise such neutrality. A regional consensus on
non-interference is therefore required. Let me also
reassure Afghanistan that Pakistan remains committed
to strengthening security along the border during the
electoral process.

Elections are only the first challenge this year.
Security and economic transformations also need to
be carefully managed. The post-2014 Afghanistan
remains critical to international and regional peace
and security. It should therefore never be abandoned.
An inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation process is central to sustained stability.
It needs to be expedited and pursued with persistence
and perseverance. Our support for the process is
unwavering. Our work remains primarily an Afghan-
led process. We can at best encourage and facilitate
that.

Pakistan feels that terrorists and extremists should
not be allowed to influence relations, policies and
decisions. Securing the Pakistan-Afghanistan border
through consistent vigilance and effective management
is therefore a necessity, and the strengthening of
border controls a priority. The activation of the Joint
Commission on Border Management in early February
is a positive step. We hope that it will facilitate real-time
communication and improve security on the ground.

Increased opium production in Afghanistan and
the growing adverse impact of drugs on Afghans
themselves, as well as the link between drugs and
terrorism, are well established. The role of the
international community, led by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and UNAMA, remains
imperative to countering that threat.

Another issue of concern are the 3 million Afghan
refugees who are still in Pakistan. The economic
prospects outlined in the Secretary-General's report
are not rosy. Without improving economic conditions,
sustainable repatriation and reintegration will be very
difficult. While we have extended the stay of refugees
until the end of the year, a comprehensive plan for their
return home needs to be drawn up.

Frequent high-level exchanges and the growing
emphasis on bilateral trade, economic cooperation and
regional collaboration represent Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif's forward-looking vision of a peaceful and
prosperous neighbourhood. The Turkey-Afghanistan-
Pakistan trilateral summit last month, the fullest
summit-level interaction between Pakistan and
Afghanistan in the past eight months, continued that
momentum. The meeting of the Afghanistan-Pakistan
Joint Economic Commission in February was another
important milestone in that regard. Coupled with
contacts in the security and intelligence fields, such
exchanges have created a real momentum, and we hope
to continue building on that impetus.

Our multidimensional relationship is not restricted
to official visits. People-to-people contacts are also
growing. Afghan students are studying in Pakistani
institutions, laying the foundation for a brighter,
collaborative future.

Let me conclude by quoting Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif in Ankara. He said,

"Afghanistan today is at a defining moment in
its history. This is a time for all Afghans to come
together, make peace and rebuild their country."

We are with them on that road.

