Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Kai Eide for his work
and for the frank and exhaustive analysis of the
situation in Afghanistan and for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's regular report.

We are seriously concerned that, despite the
efforts of the Afghan authorities and the international
military presence, the security situation in the country
continues to deteriorate. The terrorist activities of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists, whose
activities undermine the foundations of Afghan State
structures and statehood and hamper the process of
stabilization and recovery, are steadily increasing. A
special concern arises from the fact that terrorists
practically control a whole set of regions of
Afghanistan, on whose territory they are setting up
parallel organs of power. Today, as never before, it is
important that Afghan power structures and the
international military presence jointly reverse the
negative security situation.

Russia backs the activities of the International
Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, implemented
on the basis of the mandate entrusted to it by the
Security Council. Our practical contribution to these
efforts is the implementation of agreements with
NATO regarding transit through Russian territory of
non-military supplies for foreign military contingents
in Afghanistan. In the last few days, along the North
Route, the first shipment of our supplies was delivered
in Kabul.

In the context of armed conflict with the Taliban,
there is serious concern at the continuing instances of
deaths among the peaceful population as a result of the
operations of the foreign military presence. We view
the agreement between NATO and Afghanistan's
Ministry of Defence on coordinating counter-terrorist
activities as an important step in preventing new
indiscriminate strikes.

We share the assessment of the Secretary-General
in his report that this year will be decisive for
Afghanistan as a result of the presidential and
provincial elections planned for August. The upcoming
ballot is especially important to make the democratic
changes and the development of State institutions
sustainable. We hope that the United Nations Mission
will, as in previous years, fully support the election
process.

The successful conduct of elections will
undoubtedly create additional opportunities for
promoting national reconciliation in Afghanistan. We
remain convinced that this process, including taking
into account the momentum of the military-political
situation in the country, must be implemented in strict
compliance with Security Council resolution 1267
(1999), which concerns the anti-Taliban sanctions
regime. Any attempts to flirt with extremists involved
in war crimes and gradually place them in power are
fraught with further destabilization.

Despite recent positive successes in countering
the Afghan drugs threat, the joint counter-narcotics
efforts must be further increased. That is especially
pressing, as drugs trafficking remains one of the main
sources of financing for terrorists.

Our country is actively backing the fight against
the Afghan drugs threat implemented at various levels.
At the beginning of this week, during the visit to Kabul
of Russia's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey
Lavrov, we signed a Russian-Afghan intergovernmental
agreement on cooperation in the fight against the illicit
trafficking in narcotic substances. We are convinced that
the implementation of that agreement will enable us to
step up joint efforts between Russia and Afghanistan to
counter drug-related crime.

We believe that in the fight against terrorism,
drug trafficking and organized crime there is a need to
fully utilize regional organizations, which have shown
their effectiveness in the work in this field. These
include, for example, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. Strengthening the counter-narcotics and
anti-terrorist security around the Afghan State will
enable us not only to significantly weaken the
financing of extremists but also to achieve rapid
stabilization in Afghanistan and in the region as a
whole.

We expect that a significant political impulse to
deal with the aforementioned tasks will be provided by
the convening in Moscow on 27 March of a special
conference on Afghanistan under the aegis of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We are grateful to
the United Nations Secretary-General for his readiness
to participate in that meeting.

We back the proposal of the Secretary-General to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for another 12 months. It is
important that the United Nations continue to play a
central role in coordinating international efforts for a
post-conflict settlement in and the socio-economic
recovery of Afghanistan.

Russia is interested in turning Afghanistan into a
democratic, stable and flourishing State. We have
promoted that objective with practical actions. With the
assistance of our country, over 140 facilities in the
fields of industry, infrastructure, transport and
communications have been set up. In other fields,
including the training of professional staff, joint
projects are being undertaken today. Russia provides
the friendly Afghan people with humanitarian
assistance, and we will continue that assistance.

