Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish in turn to begin by conveying our condolences to
the Government and people of the Russian Federation
for the terrorist attack committed yesterday.

We welcome the briefing provided by
Ambassador Sharma and congratulate him heartily on
his work as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for East Timor. We also welcome
the presence of Minister Pessoa Pinto here at this
meeting.

My delegation fully endorses the statement to be
made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union. We wish to add a few brief comments
of our own.

First, we wholeheartedly support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend the mandate of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
for a further year in order to consolidate and further
strengthen the enormous progress registered by Timor-
Leste since it achieved independence. We believe that
the composition and objectives of the three
programmes proposed by the Secretary-General will
make it possible to accomplish those tasks.

As we said here in February, the additional efforts
proposed are relatively modest in comparison to
achievements made to date. At the same time, it is
essential that we successfully conclude the
consolidation of the institutions of Timor-Leste and
avoid any setbacks. To that end, we need the full
cooperation of the Timorese institutions, just as they
have cooperated with us so far. The Secretary-General
is quite right to note that

"The Timorese leadership can lay the foundations
for future progress by fostering a culture of
political dialogue and debate, anchored in the
values of human rights, tolerance and respect for
the law" (5/2004/333, para. 69)

as well as by promoting key legislation in the areas of
human rights, public administration, anti-corruption,
policing and defence.

We welcome the excellent cooperation shown by
the Governments of Timor-Leste and Indonesia and
hope that it will bear fruit in the settlement of two
principal issues: the delimitation of their land borders
and the presence of thousands of refugees in West
Timor.

In conclusion, the United Nations can be proud of
the success achieved by the people of Timor-Leste with
the support of the international community. Spain is
prepared to continue to contribute to the consolidation
of the self-sufficiency and full development of Timor-
Leste.

