Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset, on behalf of
the delegation of Mali, to convey to you our warmest
congratulations on the accession of your country, the
United Kingdom, to the presidency of the Security
Council in June. I wish also to welcome the convening
of this meeting dealing with the consideration of the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali
(S/2013/338).

Exactly two months ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2100 (2013)
establishing, under Chapter VII, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). Since then, a number of new
developments have occurred in the context of the
implementation of the resolution.

Mali welcomes the report under consideration,
which sets out the considerable progress that has
been achieved in the security and political areas,
particularly with regard to the effective implementation
of the transition road map, the development of the
dialogue and reconciliation process, the stepping up
of preparations for the presidential and legislative
elections, improvement in the human rights situation
and the appointment of a Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali and of the MINUSMA
Force Commander.

In terms of security, the end of large-scale fighting
around the main urban areas in the north, the routing
of the armed groups and the drastic drop in their
capacity to be spoilers thanks to the joint efforts of
the Malian, African and French armed forces, all are
favourable indicators with respect to the transfer of
competence from AFISMA to MINUSMA within the
time limit set by resolution 2100 (2013). That is why
my delegation fully endorses the appeal made by the
Secretary-General calling on Member States to support
the deployment of MINUSMA.

Politically, I am pleased to recall the fact that
on 18 June last, the Government of Mali, faithful to
its commitments to the international community in
the quest for a peaceful and lasting solution to the
crisis in Mali, signed the preliminary agreement for
the presidential elections and for inclusive peace
talks in Mali, with the coordination of Malian armed
movements.

Signed in Ouagadougou under the auspices of
President Blaise Compaore, President of Burkina
Faso and mediator for the Mali crisis, the agreement
represents a decisive step towards the re-establishment
of the territorial integrity of Mali and creates conditions
conducive to the holding of the presidential elections
throughout the national territory.

In essence, the agreement provides for the
immediate cessation of hostilities, the cantonment and
disarmament of armed groups, and the deployment
of administrative and basic services and the Malian
defence and security forces in the Kidal region.

The Coordination des mouvements et forces
patriotiques de resistance and the Mouvement arabe
de l'Azawad have expressed their support for the
agreement.

Along those same lines, the President of the
Republic, Mr. Dioncounda Traore', held a number
of meetings with political leaders with a view to the
improved implementation of the agreement and the
holding of transparent and peaceful elections.

I cannot end this chapter of my statement without
reiterating the urgent appeal of the Government of Mali
to the Council to ensure the transfer of competencies
from the African-led international support mission
for Mali to the new United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
That transfer must take place quickly so as to ensure
that MINUSMA will be in Mali for as short a period
as possible. The brevity of its mandate will serve as
evidence of its success in Mali. For their leadership
and invaluable contribution to resolving the crisis in
Mali, we would like especially to thank His Excellency
President Alassane Ouattara ofCote d'Ivoire, ECOWAS
Chairman-in-Office; His Excellency Blaise Compaore
of Burkina Faso, mediator for the Mali crisis; and
His Excellency President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan
of Nigeria, the joint mediator. To the United Nations,
the European Union, France, Chad and its army and to
all our bilateral and multilateral partners, we express
our sincere thanks and deep gratitude for the crucially
essential role they continue to play for the definitive
return of peace and stability in Mali.

