Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for convening today's meeting. I Wish also to
express my appreciation to Executive Chairman Blix
and to Director General ElBaradei for their reports to
the Council on 7 March.
Based on their reports, Japan considers that, even
though some progress has been observed recently, Iraqi
cooperation is still insufficient and limited, despite the
ever-stronger pressure from the international
community. We think that there is a common
recognition in this regard among the international
community, including on the part of the members of the
Security Council.

The peaceful solution which the international
community, including Japan, is hoping for hinges on
whether or not Iraq changes its attitude drastically and
takes the final opportunity it has been given.

The Government of Japan recently dispatched the
Prime Minister's Special Envoy to Iraq and urged the
Iraqi Government to take this final opportunity and
disarm, but Iraq's response was insufficient. Nor has
there been a fundamental change in Iraq's attitude since
then. We consider it necessary for the international
community clearly to demonstrate to Iraq its
determined attitude and to apply further pressure in
order to make Iraq cooperate with the inspections
immediately, fully, unconditionally and proactively,
and comply with its disarmament obligations.

The revised draft resolution proposed by Spain,
the United Kingdom and the United States on 7 March
represents a truly final effort to maintain international
solidarity, to place the consolidated pressure of the
international community on Iraq, and to lead Iraq to
disarm voluntarily. Japan has therefore expressed its
support for this draft resolution. Iraq should take
seriously the fact that it is being pressed to decide
whether or not to take this final opportunity.

At this moment, consultations among the
members of the Security Council and other countries
are continuing in earnest. If a new draft resolution is
not adopted and the international community is
divided, not only will it benefit Iraq, but it will also
raise grave doubts as to the authority and effectiveness
of the United Nations. The Government of Japan hopes
that the Security Council will be united, demonstrate
clear and resolute judgment, and fulfil its responsibility
for international peace and security.

