Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Political Constitution
of the State of Bolivia enshrines a broad catalogue of
rights under various regional and universal instruments
as they relate to the protection of human rights. In that
regard, the Constitution provides that international
human rights treaties and instruments have been signed,
ratified or adhered to by the State that provide for more
favourable rights that those set out in the Constitution
shall take precedence over the latter. That is how Bolivia
shows its commitment to defending human rights
established at the regional and international levels.

However, my delegation would also like to make it
clear that the Charter of the United Nations stipulates
unequivocally that the primary responsibility of the
Security Council is the maintenance of international
peace and security - the Council not being the forum
to address issues pertaining to human rights. That is
why my delegation is opposed to the Council holding
meetings about human rights in any United Nations
Member country, in this case in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. These issues do not fall under the
competence of the Council, as they have their own
forum for debate and analysis within the specialized
bodies of the Organization, such as the Human Rights
Council in Geneva.

As an elected member of the Security Council,
Bolivia has never had any doubts about the need to
discuss the issues of the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, given its sensitivity for the international
community and the threat it poses to international peace
and security, and the fact that it generates instability
in the region. In that context, in line with our status
as a pacifist State, Bolivia has called, and always will
cal, for dialogue between parties. I therefore reiterate
that my delegation does not agree with using this forum
to address this issue, as it takes us further away from
the main goal of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula
and safeguarding international peace and security in
the region.

