Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mr. Haysom; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime at Vienna,
Mr. Fedotov; and the Ambassador of Afghanistan.

Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

It is my honour to be accompanied by an important
delegation from the Spanish Senate, headed by the
Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, who wish
to have a better and first-hand understanding of the
work of the Security Council.

We welcome the positive steps taken by the
Government of Afghanistan since our previous meeting
(see S/PV.7467) on Afghanistan in order to deal with the
political, economic and security problems facing the
country and to advance along the path of the reforms,
which the Afghans themselves decided to undertake,
a path on which they can and will continue to have
the international community's support. We commend
the progress made in the political transition process,
which has almost been completed, with the important
appointments to the leadership of the main Afghan
institutions, both at the central and local levels. We
encourage Afghans to complete and build upon that
process.

I would like to make a special reference to the
progress made in terms of electoral reform. The
re-established Special Electoral Reform Commission
has presented an initial package of recommendations.
This is a vitally important area and we welcome the
initiative of the Special Representative in giving it the
priority it deserves.

The same can be said with regard to the measures
taken so far to implement the reform agenda set out
at the London Conference, including those relating to
accountability and countering corruption. The rate of
translating these reforms into concrete results has made
and will make clear the level of commitment of the
Government. Once again, I wish to repeat the fact that
President Ghani and the National Unity Government
enjoy Spain's full support in this process, which will
continue to be led and owned by Afghans themselves.

We also welcome with cautious satisfaction the
positive information provided by Mr. Fedotov with
regard to poppy production and crop eradication, as
well as his positive assessments of the efforts made by
the Afghan Government. We also share his concern
and the concern of the Afghan authorities about the
serious problem represented by the cultivation and
consumption of narcotics in Afghanistan. Without a
doubt, this is not an exclusively Afghan problem, but its
serious impact on the country requires our maximum
attention and support to the actions being taken by the
Afghan Government.

We are concerned by the stalemate in the peace
and reconciliation process in Afghanistan in the face
of the promising prospects that emerged following the
meeting held on 7 July in Pakistan, prospects which
the Security Council immediately welcomed in a press
statement (SC/11967). Since then, there has been the
frustrating cancellation of a second round of contacts.
We urge that the path that has been undertaken be
continued as soon as possible. The support, solidarity
and consultation with neighbouring countries is vital
and should be made a priority. From this Chamber, we
make an urgent appeal for this. We are also especially
concerned that, as was pointed out by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2015/684), the attacks continue
to grow in both intensity and geographic scope,
and an increase in indiscriminate attacks in Kabul
and other urban areas has been observed in recent
months. Violence and terror, particularly when they
are executed indiscriminately against the defenceless
civilian population, are not, and never will be, the way
forward.

We would like to express once again our support
for the work and sacrifices being made by the Afghan
National Security Forces in the face of the attacks by
insurgents who are seeking to weaken the Government.
I would like also to reiterate Spain's commitment to
supporting the Afghan security forces and agencies,
which is shown through our participation in the
Resolute Support Mission, which provides security
training, advisers and assistance.

In the area of women and peace and security, we
welcome the submission by President Ghani, on 30 June,
of a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000)

for 2015-2022. The plan enshrines the Government's
pledges with regard to the increasing role that Afghan
women are being called upon to play in the areas of
participation, protection, prevention, and relief and
recovery - the four pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). It
is crucial to continue working in that area to achieve the
full implementation of the provisions and to continue to
promote and protect the rights of women and girls.
We also welcome the commendable steps taken by
the Government to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children by the national armed forces, such as
the signing of the National Action Plan of 2011 and the
adoption of the road map. Nevertheless, much remains
to be done. Children remain the most affected by the
conflict in Afghanistan and continue to be recruited,
detained and deprived of their rights to education and
medical care. It is vital that we continue to demand
accountability from those who are responsible for those
and other violations against children, without forgetting
those instances that, unfortunately, are still occurring
within the Afghan National Police and local police
forces. It is also necessary to establish child protection
units in all police recruitment centres, end the illegal
detention of children, and develop reintegration and
rehabilitation programmes.

Lastly - and this is particularly relevant for Spain
as penholder - we welcome the completion of the work
of the Tripartite Review Commission - comprised of
representatives of the Afghan Government, UNAMA,
United Nations agencies and programmes, and
donors - which, pursuant to resolution 2210 (2015),
has been working in Kabul over the past several months.
We welcome the comprehensive nature of the work that
has been achieved and the commitment that has been
demonstrated by all parties, under Afghan leadership.
As the Security Council has requested, that analysis
has allowed a better and great harmonization of United
Nations actions and structures in Afghanistan and the
activities of donors, taking into account the priorities
established by the Government itself. The Commission's
conclusions will feed the Council's reflections and
work when the time comes to consider the extension of
the UNAMA mandate.

I cannot close without expressing my deepest
appreciation to Ambassador Tanin for the excellent
work that he has undertaken in recent years
representing his country and working for the benefit
of the Organization. For Spain, it is a privilege to be
the penholder on Afghanistan, and I am very pleased
that he will continue working with us within the United
Nations system. We wish him our very best.

