Mr. Dilja (Albania): Allow me to extend my
delegation's appreciation, Sir, for your presence here
today, and in particular for your presiding over this
very important meeting. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Guehenno for his very comprehensive briefing.

Let me state here at the very beginning that the
Albanian Government fully supports the operational
plan entitled "Standards for Kosovo" presented this
month and welcomes its endorsement by this body.

That plan comprises an important step forward
towards the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It gives new momentum to the
implementation of the "standards before status" policy
already designed for Kosovo; it demonstrates the
political will of the international community to find a
final and timely solution to the Kosovo issue; and it
accelerates the positive processes that Kosovo is
already going through.

The eight standards, namely: functioning
democratic institutions, rule of law, freedom of
movement, returns and reintegration, economy,
property rights, dialogue with Belgrade and the Kosovo
Protection Corps, all constitute a clear cut agenda of
work for the Kosovo Provisional Institutions, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and Kosovars in general. Hard work
needs to be done, progress needs to be marked and
standards need to be met.

The Albanian Government will encourage the
Provisional Institutions and the people of Kosovo in
this very crucial endeavour. We reaffirm our support to
UNMIK and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, in this new phase of
their mission in Kosovo and we support and urge
broader cooperation and confidence between them
both, and all others concerned.

Albania is of the opinion that the comprehensive
review of the "Standards for Kosovo", set to occur in
mid-2005, and the advancement towards a process to
determine the final status of Kosovo will contribute to
this very important dimension, as well as boost the
confidence of the international community in local
Kosovar institutions.

We urge the people of Kosovo, their institutions
and political parties to reflect the awareness, as they
already have done, that all the eight standards together
and each of them separately are of great importance for
the building of a democratic Kosovo where all people,
regardless of ethnic background, or race or religion, are
free to live, work, and travel; and where the rule of
law, justice, peace and tolerance prevail.

The people of Kosovo should be equally aware
that each of those standards is a big challenge to be
faced and to be met successfully. My delegation would
like to articulate our confidence that hard work, change
and constant progress will be the trend; that democratic
institutions and the rule of law will function better with
each passing day; that the process of returns and
reintegration, based on the current progress, will
successfully continue; and that dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade - which we have supported and
continue to strongly support - on practical issues of
mutual interest, will proceed constructively.

We base our confidence on the current
achievements in Kosovo, which, as Mr. Holkeri
recently stated, "has made enormous progress over the
last four years".

In the meantime, we call upon all of the interested
parties in the region to be part of and positive
contributors to solutions and progress there. Violent
acts, as the most recent one in the northern part of
Mitrovica, involving the World Bank Board of
Governors and Kosovo Prime Minister Rexhepi, and
the establishment of parallel structures in Northern
Kosovo, only aggravate the polarization of the society
there and, what is more, run counter to and directly
contradict the philosophy of the Standards for Kosovo.

I would like to conclude by thanking this Council
for the attention it has placed on this very serious and
important issue, important not only for the Kosovars
but for the region as well. I would also like to reiterate
my Government's full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, who, as mentioned here today, will have a
challenging task ahead and quite a role to play in the
upcoming months.

