Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and to wish the United Kingdom delegation
every success in this important task. We express our
appreciation to your Spanish predecessor for the able
manner in which he guided the work of the Security
Council.

My delegation has aligned itself with the
statement made by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.
Although our concerns are duly reflected in that
statement, I would like to add the following remarks,
given Turkey's special historical and friendly relations
both with the Palestinians and Israel.

We are deeply troubled by the ongoing terrible
events and the cycle of violence in the region. The
recent escalation in the Gaza Strip, which has claimed
the lives of dozens of innocent civilians, including
children, is the most recent tragedy indicative of how
grave the situation has actually become. The
Palestinian population is helpless in the face of this
drive for collective punishment.

Although we recognize the legitimate security
needs of Israel, we are critical of its policies of
demolition, the excessive use of force and targeted
killings. The military operations carried out and the
destruction wrought by Israel, which directly harm
civilians, can have no justifiable basis. It is sad that we
are once again witnessing the fact that Israel's
disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force does
not strengthen the security it seeks.

On the other hand, we believe that the Palestinian
Authority should be steadfast in stepping up its efforts
to remove the terrorist infrastructure. Radical elements
should not be allowed to take control of the future of
the Palestinian people and come to define the just
struggle of the Palestinians. That is one more reason
why the Palestinian Authority should receive our
support. Security for all can be achieved only if an
environment conducive to revitalizing the stalled peace
process is made possible by all the relevant parties of
Palestinian society.

Turkey calls on both parties to exercise the
utmost restraint in order to prevent any escalation that
could destabilize the whole region.

The Palestinian-Israeli conflict lies at the heart of
the Middle East question. It is hampering efforts to
establish a stable and peaceful environment, as desired
by the international community. We strongly urge both
parties to pursue a path of reconciliation, through
direct negotiations, aimed at achieving a just and
viable peace in accordance with the two-State vision
based on the road map. Turkey stands ready to
facilitate any effort towards that lofty goal.

