Mr. Henze (Germany): Let me begin by saying that
Germany fully supports the statement made by the
representative of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union.

 

Comparing the situation in Georgia six months ago
with the one we are facing now, we find that, as far as the
unsolved issue of Abkhazia and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) operations is
concerned, the picture is not encouraging. This is the
impression conveyed by the commendable and thorough
report by the Secretary-General, for which we would like
to thank him. The same point is also made, more strongly,
in President Shevardnadze's letter of 6 July 1996 to the
President of the Security Council, to which Germany
attaches great importance.

It is evident that the contacts between the parties,
assisted by the Secretary-General's Special Envoy and by
the Russian Federation as facilitator, have so far had no
tangible results. It is also worth noting that the
Ambassadors of the group of "Friends of Georgia" carried
out demarches in Tbilisi and Sukhumi on the basis of the
presidential statement of 26 April 1996, and that the
response the Ambassadors received in Sukhumi was
unsatisfactory.

The reason for this impasse in the political process lies
in the uncompromising attitude of the Abkhaz leadership,
which insists on separate statehood for Abkhazia. As early
as several months ago, the Georgian Government made a
substantial, but so far unsuccessful, offer to the Abkhaz
side, amounting to the creation of a federal State with far-
reaching autonomy for Abkhazia. It is urgent now that the
Abkhaz leadership learn to accept that any solution of the
conflict must be based on the principles of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Georgia.

Germany sees the rationale of UNOMIG and of the
German contribution to it as support for an ongoing
political process leading to a durable negotiated solution.
We recognize and welcome the valuable and stabilizing role
UNOMIG is playing, but this role cannot be to support a
mere perpetuation of the political status quo without the
prospect of a negotiated settlement. If the current political
stalemate continues, the Council, in the future, might
therefore be forced to ask itself where a future role for
United Nations engagement in this conflict might lie.

Germany deeply deplores the effects of "ethnic
cleansing" that the conflict in Abkhazia has brought with it,
with the massive expulsion of people, predominantly
Georgians, from their living areas, not to mention the
deaths of a large number of innocent people. These effects
are unacceptable. The Abkhaz side must therefore end
without delay its obstruction of the return of refugees and
displaced persons to the region. Any linkage of this
question with the future status of Abkhazia is
unacceptable.

Against this background, we are encouraged by
indications both by the Secretary-General and by the
Russian Federation as facilitator, of their intention to
intensify their political and diplomatic efforts.

I would now like to stress a second major point. My
Government continues to be very concerned by the
deteriorated security situation which has brought
patrolling by UNOMIG virtually to an end. We expect the
parties to take forceful measures against the laying of
mines, which is a danger not only to UNOMIG personnel
and the CIS peacekeeping forces, but also, and most
notably, to the local population, as well as to refugees and
displaced persons returning to the region. This should
include better surveillance of the cease-fire lines and
prosecution of those responsible.
Germany welcomes the steps taken so far by the
Secretary-General to cope with this threat. We trust that
the Secretary-General will do everything in his power to
minimize the risk for the United Nations personnel on the
ground, and stress the need for continued and close
cooperation and coordination between UNOMIG and the
CIS peace-keeping forces in the fulfilment of their
respective mandates. Here also, we tend to think that if no
improvement is foreseen, there might be reason to take a
fresh look at the tasks UNOMIG has been mandated to
accomplish.

Let me end by commending the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, Ambassador Brunner, and his
resident Deputy, Mr. Bota, for their diplomatic skill and
tenacity. The personnel of UNOMIG deserve our full
support and all our thanks for their efforts, made under
extremely difficult conditions.

