Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me also to express our delegation's thanks for the
briefings by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Central Africa and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa Abou
Moussa. Similarly, I wish to express our thanks for the
briefings by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union and the Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States. I also welcome
the presence in the Chamber of the representatives of
South Sudan and the Central African Republic.
Colombia is deeply concerned about the
hostilities of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
against the populations of the affected countries - the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Sudan and Uganda. They show that
group's brutality and utter disregard for the most
fundamental human rights standards and for
international humanitarian law. Despite the reduced
number of soldiers in the Army, the impact and
magnitude of its Violent attacks on the civilian
population continue to be gravely troubling and
threaten the security of the affected countries in the
Central African region.

Colombia therefore believes it greatly important
to continue developing strategies to respond in a
coherent way to the challenges posed by that armed
group's activities. Those strategies must be based on
the principle that the fundamental responsibility to
protect civilians falls to the States affected by the
presence of the Lord's Resistance Army. The
international community's response must therefore be
aimed at building national capacities, strengthening
institutions and improving the logistical and
operational capacities of national security forces. We
must also support regional and subregional initiatives
to combat this scourge.

At the same time, there is a need for efforts not to
be limited to military operations. An effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is essential, as is as a coordinated strategy on
assistance to victims. We must implement concrete
steps to improve the quality of life for populations in
affected areas through economic and social
development.

We stress the importance of developing joint
plans and operations based on coordinated cooperation
among the security forces of affected States. The
international community should promote and
encourage a common acknowledgement of the impact
of this armed group on the security and well-being of
populations as part of an effort to build upon the
progress made against the Lord's Resistance Army in
all areas affected by its presence. The initiatives
adopted by the African Union also deserve our
acknowledgment. The broad vision and concrete
proposals to establish a regional intervention force, the
Joint Information Operations Centre and a joint
coordination mechanism provide a framework for
coordinating effective regional efforts, which would be
greatly bolstered by the African Union's naming of a
special envoy for the LRA-affected areas.

Moreover, through the United Nations Office to
the African Union, the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, United Nations missions in the
affected countries and the country teams, the United

Nations plays a very important role in developing and
implementing efforts to fight the Lord's Resistance
Army. Thy should have the necessary logistical and
financial means to carry out their assigned tasks. Under
the leadership of the States affected, it is essential that
the international community make it possible for the
legitimate authorities of those States to strengthen the
exercise of their sovereignty and gain full control over
their territories, in keeping with the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence
and non-interference the domestic affairs of States.

Moreover, the role of justice in resolving the
conflict is another factor we should not lose sight of. In
that regard, all States should lend their cooperation in
bringing to justice those guilty of the heinous crimes
committed by the Lord's Resistance Army and support
the officials of affected States and of the International
Criminal Court with regard to the cases brought
forward against the leaders of the group.

Lastly, we support the draft presidential
statement, as we believe that it addresses all of these
issues.

