Ms. Banga-Bothy (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January 2014. I also
take this opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor
for his personal involvement in the process aimed at
resolving the crisis in the Central African Republic. I
would also like to express my best wishes for a happy
new year to all Security Council members.

In his statement to the General Assembly on
26 September 2013, the Transitional Prime Minister of
Central African Republic, His Excellency Mr. Nicolas
Tiangaye, sounded the alarm regarding the possible
chaos that could descend on the Central African
Republic given the already extreme deterioration of
the security and humanitarian situation in the country
at that time (see A/68/PV.13). Given that horrifying
prospect and the imminent sectarian war brewing
among the beleaguered population, the prompt response
of the international community - with the adoption of
resolution 2121 (2013), which was to pave the way for
international action, the re-establishment of peace and
the provision of assistance to people at the mercy of
armed groups and militias of all types - provided a
glimmer of hope to the Central African Republic.

Unfortunately, as the Security Council was
preparing to adopt resolution 2127 (2013), on
5 December 2013, the enemies of the Central African
people, who perceived that resolution authorizing
the application of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations as a threat to their bloody, diabolical
undertaking, chose to make themselves heard with
weapons and attacked Bangui at dawn, causing the
deaths of several hundred people. Although a robust
reaction by defence and security forces was able to
halt the attackers and limit the damage inflicted by
the 5 December attack, the overall deterioration in the
security situation, the resumption of violence and the
subsequent senseless killing considerably worsened the
humanitarian situation in the capital.

Like those who have spoken before me, I too can
confirm that 300,000 people have had to flee their
homes for camps because of the violence of those
armed groups. Those men, women and children are
living in dire conditions and are exposed to all sorts of
violence, disease and famine. It appears that there is a
real risk oflarge-scale outbreaks ofinfectious diseases,
in particular cholera. For instance, the fact that people
have huddled on the grounds of the Bangui M'Poko
International Airport means that they are not only
exposed to the scourges I have just mentioned, but also
that their very security is threatened - as are airport
facilities themselves.

Foreign persons of the Muslim faith have not been
spared either. We would like to take this opportunity
to express the official apologies of the Central African
Republic to the States whose nationals have been
submitted to abuse during these events.

Despite the efforts of non-governmental and
humanitarian organizations and the agencies of the
United Nations to provide people with the necessary
assistance, the situation is only deteriorating further.
Attention is entirely focused on Bangui, the scene
of the most recent violence. The rest of the people
in the hinterlands appear to be left to their sad fate.
This shows the scope and seriousness of the situation,
which requires additional efforts on the part of the
international community.

Considerable efforts have been deployed on the
security front, with a call for a cessation of hostilities
and the beginning of negotiations with anti-Balaka
self-defence groups - as evidenced repeatedly by our
Head of State in extending the hand of friendship in
the course of his addresses to the nation. Unfortunately,
those irregular and unidentified forces have not
shown any desire to engage in negotiations with the
Government. Instead, they have continued to carry
out senseless attacks against civilians, the bases of
ex-Seleka elements and even contingents of the African-
led International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA).

Given the situation, religious authorities, both
Christian and Muslim, have undertaken commendable
efforts to try to bring together the leaders of the various
communities in order to pursue a policy of national
reconciliation. It must be acknowledged, however, that
such work will be long-term in nature and require both
patience and determination.

Moreover, with respect to the transitional bodies,
it should be noted that all of the bodies provided for
under the Transitional Charter have been established.
The exception in that regard is the High Council for
Communication, whose process is under way. The
composition of the National Electoral Authority has
just been voted upon, and that institution will soon
become operational if the security situation in the
country becomes stable.

The transitional authorities have also reaffirmed
their commitment not to stand in the elections. They
want the elections to be credible and transparent so
as to lead to a final end to the repeated crises in the
Central African Republic. That is why the elections
must not be organized hastily, but rather on the basis
of regular procedures, going through the various stages
and in accordance with the various agreements signed
in the context of the transition in the Central African
Republic.

With regard to security, as I have already
mentioned, the 5 December attack was a fatal blow to
the efforts carried out until then. Despite the helpful
actions of the French Operation Sangaris to initiate the
disarmament of armed groups and the cantonment of
most Seleka elements, the anti-Balaka militia and some
elements answering to ex-Sele'ka leaders continue to
sow terror in the various neighborhoods of Bangui,
thereby preventing those who have sought refuge in the
sites for displaced people to return to their homes and
resume their normal lives.

Since the transition from the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX) to MISCA on 19 November, a remarkable
job has been done with the support of Operation
Sangaris in the field. This has given some hope for the
re-establishment of peace and security in the Central
African Republic. The Mission, which is carried
out pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), should in our
view be accompanied by the action of the transitional
authorities themselves, which will require the Central
African defence and security forces to work side by
side with those of the international community to bring
peace to the country.

As that noble task is carried out, we regret the loss of
life of brave French soldiers in the context of Operation
Sagaris and of Congolese and Chadian soldiers in the
context of the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic. Those men gave their
lives to bring peace to the Central African Republic.
We pay them a well-deserved tribute on behalf of the
Head of State of the Transitional Government and of
the people of the Central African Republic. I wish to
pay my respects to the families of the disappeared and
to their Goverments and countrymen.
Given the extreme nature of the crisis in the
Central African Republic and the considerable means
that will be necessary to end it, we ask the international
community to increase the financial and logistic
resources going to the forces on the ground in the
Central African Republic. As provided for in resolution
2127 (2013), a United Nations peacekeeping operation
in the current situation in the Central African Republic
could, should conditions allow, provide considerable
support for the efforts undertaken by the African Union,
France and the other countries that are providing troops
or resources.

The Central African Republic Government
commends the African Union's commitment to
increasing the number of MISCA personnel to 10,000
men within six months. I trust that, at this strength,
MISCA will be able to cover the entire country of the
Central African Republic and carry out its mission
adequately. The assessment of MISCA's performance in
this period will make it possible, if necessary, to adjust
the approach and take appropriate action.

We also call for the strengthening of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic, with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General playing an extremely important
role in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
in human rights and peacebuilding; and in the
forthcoming organization of the elections in the near
future.

While it is evident that, despite the extreme gravity
of the situation in the Central African Republic, the
people have bravely survived the chaos to date, it is
to a large extent thanks to the tireless international
solidarity provided to our people during the course of
three decades of political and military violence. I thank
all African States that have provided additional troops
to MISCA in support of endeavours to re-establish
peace and security in my country. I call for the timely
organization of the donors conference desired not just
by the African Union, but also by the authorities of the
Central African Republic.

My thanks also go to the European Union and the
United States of America for providing financial and
logistical support and equipment to the stabilization
efforts in the Central African Union.

