Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting on the
situation in East Timor. We listened with great interest
to the comments made on Friday by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, President-elect Gusmao and Chief
Minister Alkatiri, We join with others in noting that the
leadership of the President-elect and the Chief Minister
will shape East Timor's future. Their leadership will be
crucial in building on progress made over the past two
years towards establishing a properly functioning,
democratic and independent country. New Zealand
expresses both to East Timor's leaders and to its people
our warmest congratulations and the renewed assurance
of our continued support for East Timor as a regional
neighbour and friend.

The Secretary-General's proposal for the
establishment of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) represents a
watershed for East Timor and its relationship with the
international community. On 20 May, New Zealand,
together with the rest of the United Nations family, will
celebrate East Timor's independence in Dili. It will be
a joyful and historic occasion. In recognition of the
importance of that event, New Zealand will be
represented by our Prime Minister. We hope that
shortly after independence, we will welcome East
Timor as the newest State Member of the United
Nations.

The proposal for UNMISET signals both a
beginning and an end. For the past two years, the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and his team have worked in
partnership with the East Timorese people to bring East
Timor from a post-conflict situation to the eve of
independence. The staff and leadership of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) have earned our respect and admiration,
and we thank them for the commitment and hard work.

The job, of course, is not yet finished. The
transition to a stable, just and secure East Timorese
society requires a continued role for the United
Nations. We welcome and endorse the Secretary-
General's comprehensive proposal for the
establishment of UNMISET to assist the East Timorese
people and leadership. The Secretary-General's
proposals provide a clear exit strategy for the peace
support component of United Nations presence.

The downsizing proposals for military, police and
civilian elements of UNMISET are based on realistic
needs assessments and follow the concept endorsed by
the Council last October. The proposals reflect the fact
that East Timor is entering a new phase in its transition
to a fully functioning sovereign nation. We look
forward to the normalization of development assistance
based on close coordination with the new Government
of East Timor by United Nations agencies and other
multilateral, regional and bilateral donors.

Like the United Nations, New Zealand's focus
will move from peacekeeping to development
assistance. At the end of this year, we will withdraw
our battalion and helicopter support as part of the
United Nations exit strategy. New Zealand's
contribution to UNTAET has involved a substantial
component of our defence forces. We will continue to
support other United Nations missions through the
provision of troops. Our police, customs and
corrections personnel have already left East Timor, but
we will continue to provide training and development
assistance in these areas.

New Zealand looks forward to a maturing
bilateral relationship with East Timor based on an
agreed development framework and common regional
interests. We join other speakers from last week in
noting with concern the difficulties in the justice
sector, including prisons, and endorse the appeal for
progress in resolving these problems. There are major
tasks ahead in these areas in particular, and New
Zealand stands ready to assist.

The Security Council has played a Vital part in
supporting East Timor since the post-ballot crisis in
1999. UNMISET represents the final phase in that role,
with a specific downsizing plan linked to achieving
specific milestones. The Secretary-General's proposal
details a sound, realistic and focused mission. We
encourage the Council to endorse its establishment, and
in doing so, to entrench what has been achieved while
acknowledging what remains to be done.

