Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ambassadors Raimonda Murmokaite of Lithuania, Oh
Joon of the Republic of Korea and Gary Quinlan of
Australia for their statements.

Ambassador Benedicte Frankinet will mention
this in her statement, but I would also like to take this
opportunity to strongly condemn the terrorist attack on
the Jewish Museum in Brussels on Saturday. We offer
our deep condolences to the families of the victims
and to the people and Government of the Kingdom of
Belgium. Terrorism is a cowardly act that targets the
most vulnerable. It can hit anywhere at any time. We
must therefore remain vigilant.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Committees for their commitment to enforcing
measures for maintaining and restoring international
peace and security, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. We understand the need for the
objective use of sanctions as an important instrument
for enforcing Council decisions without resorting
to force. On that basis we welcome the opportunity
presented by these biannual briefings on the work of
the three United Nations subsidiary bodies designed
to fight terrorism and non-proliferation, including by
overseeing the implementation of sanctions imposed
on individuals and entities and by monitoring their
violations.

Rwanda believes that Al-Qaida and its affiliates
still pose a serious threat to international peace and
security. Though it is believed that Al-Qaida has had
no central command since the death of its former
leader, his absence, or the absence of that central
command, has not discouraged religious radicalization,
kidnappings and terrorist attacks in various parts of
the world. However, we should remember that these
extremist groups do not manufacture weapons or other
military logistical supplies, and they do not operate
in isolation. They receive arms supplies clandestinely
through individuals, entities and even Member States.

We are very concerned about the branching out of
Al-Qaida into almost every corner of Africa, creating
affiliated groups such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb in the North, Al-Shabaab in the East and Boko
Haram in Western and Central Africa. The persistent
conflicts and instability, lack of solid institutions and
the supply of uncontrolled weapons could make for
fertile ground for incubating terrorism across Africa
if concerted efforts are not made to address the root
causes of conflicts, to provide a sustainable solution to
crises and to neutralize terrorist organizations on the
continent.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
inclusion of Boko Haram on the list of entities subject
to targeted financial sanctions and arms embargoes,
as laid out in resolution 2083 (2012). On Monday, this
group - which, as we all know, is responsible for
the abduction of more than 200 young girls from a
school in northern Nigeria 4 also attacked a Nigerian
military base and police barracks in the town of Buni
Yadi, killing 31 security personnel. It is important to
support the Governments of Nigeria and its neighbours
at this time in their efforts to eradicate this terrorist
organization.

In accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), Member
States are obliged to prevent and criminalize incitement
and to strengthen international cooperation and border
control. However, porous borders, inadequate financial
means and lack of technical capacity of some Member
States facilitate terrorist movements across borders
without hindrance, especially in the Middle East,

North Africa and the Sahel region. On that note we
reiterate our appeal to the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to support Member States in building their
national counter-terrorism capacities and to foster
international cooperation among the United Nations
system, States and other governmental bodies.

As time has gone on, terrorism has benefited from
technical advances and the power of the Internet,
and from religious radicalization, poverty and lack
of education. Although the masterminds of terrorism
are political extremists and religious radicals, its
proliferation, especially among young people, is
amplified by poverty and a lack of education. While
it is therefore critical to continue the fight against
terrorist networks, we should at the same time invest
heavily in education and povery eradication if we want
to curb this scourge in the long term.

Rwanda supports the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
appreciates the efforts of Ambassador Oh Joon,
particularly in improving outreach programmes
and visibility for the Committee. In fulfilling the
Committee's mandate, the outreach events around the
world have raised global awareness and facilitated
information-sharing on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and discussion of identification
of possible needs for assistance and any future steps
that Member States should undertake in support of the
resolution's implementation.

We thank the Republic of Korea for its organization
on 7 May of an open debate on non-proliferation (see S/PV.7169), which was presided over by His Excellency
Mr. Yun Byung-se, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Korea. During that debate the
Security Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) marking the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of this landmark resolution, in which it
expressed grave concern about the threat of terrorism
and the risk of non-State actors acquiring, developing,
trafficking in or using nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, given the rapid advances in science and
technology. It is on that note that the 1540 Committee
has strongly urged that we map out key areas requiring
focus, so the resolution can be fully achieved by 2021.

We believe that overcoming new proliferation
challenges requires new approaches to evolving
situations and a consensus on the international security
order that effectively addresses genuine proliferation
concerns. Success in the fight against terrorism goes
hand in hand with progress in strengthening counter-
terrorism cooperation and the exchange of information
at the international, regional and subregional levels.
In our joint efforts, the fundamental issue should be
that of enhancing consistency and cooperation among
the various counter-terrorism committees, as well as
addressing the root causes of terrorism. In that regard,
we are confident that increased partnership among the
sanctions committees will contribute to a significant
decrease in terrorism.

