Mr. ngowe (Botswana): My delegation was deeply
disturbed by the resumption of fighting in Liberia on 6
April 1996, which reversed in the cruellest and most brutal
manner the gains of a promising peace process. The
senseless bloodletting that has been visited upon Monrovia,
which had been a safe haven for most of the six years of
civil war, brought despair where there had been hope for a
peaceful future.

The Liberian faction leaders and parties bear ultimate
responsibility for leading their country and their people
down a path of merciless killings and wanton destruction of
property. It is incomprehensible that people who aspire to
the leadership of their country can at the same time reduce
it to a wasteland and its capital to a ghost town.

What kind of country do they want to rule - a
country that has been reduced to rubble? The resumption of
hostilities has revealed the faction leaders as power-hungry,
self-seeking men with no love for country and people. They
should endeavour to change this image if they are to be
taken seriously and be worthy of the assistance of the
international community.

There is no doubt that the current fighting was a grave
mistake, a terrible military rniscalculation which resulted in
a stalemate. It should not have been attempted in the first
place. It is clear that no faction leader can now hope to
impose his will on the others. In other words, the faction
leaders have no choice but to resume negotiations aimed at
the peaceful resolution of the Liberian national crisis.

The most painful aspect of the tragedy in Liberia is
that it was predictable. The international community was
fully aware from the time the Abuja Agreement was signed
that the success of the peace process depended on the
speedy disengagement, disarmament and demobilization of
the combatants. There was ample information on the
financial and material resources necessary to get the job
done. Yet the appeals of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
for financial and logistical support did not elicit a sufficient
and effective response from the international community.
These African States have made tremendous sacrifices for
the cause of peace in Liberia. They have fully understood
that so long as the sore that is Liberia continues to fester,
none of them can enjoy good health.

 

We applaud and commend the commitment and
tenacity of purpose of the ECOWAS member States
participating in ECOMOG. It is unfortunate that signs of
"Liberia fatigue" are starting to manifest themselves
among them. They are doing an exemplary job in regional
peace-keeping, one worth emulating elsewhere in Africa
and other parts of the world. Our wish is that they stay
the course. They should persevere and transcend the
present difficulties. We are fully alive to the immense
financial and logistical problems with which they have to
contend, but we are also aware that they have been so
close to success that nothing new is likely to match their
experience or their staying capacity. History will pass a
better judgment on their unswerving determination to
secure peace in Liberia than the world is currently doing.
The people of Liberia will never forget their sterling
efforts and sacrifices.

We appeal to the rest of the ECOWAS member
States to join their brothers in the search for peace in
Liberia. The Liberian peace dividend would be shared
among all West African States, and it is imperative that
all States in the subregion should participate in its
attainment. They should do whatever it takes to get
involved, and they should not allow any obstacle to stand
in their way. We believe the crisis in Liberia would be
more amenable to a solution with a determined, collective
and united approach by all countries of the subregion.

The United Nations cannot afford to allow the
efforts of ECOMOG to fail. ECOMOG'S failure would
have far-reaching implications for future cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations in
peace-keeping operations. In this connection, it is worth
noting that there are already questions about what would
happen in post-ECOMOG peace-keeping in Liberia; that
is, what would happen in Liberia should ECOMOG fail.
This thought is probably born out of the fact that the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
has no independent existence; it is in Liberia because
ECOMOG is there.

It is, however, important to recognize that the
regional arrangement in Liberia is no substitute for the
responsibilities of the United Nations. The United Nations
remains the premier organization for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and in this regard, it is
clear that the withdrawal of ECOMOG from Liberia
would lead to the immediate reassumption by the United
Nations of its responsibilities in that country.
My delegation looked forward to the results of the
meeting of the ECOWAS Committee of Nine, which was
held on 7 and 8 May 1996. The decisions made at that
meeting have the full support of my delegation, and we

 

call upon the faction leaders to implement them
expeditiously. In this regard, we wish to reiterate our appeal
to the international community to render assistance to
ECOMOG so that it can carry out its tasks more
effectively. The events of the past few weeks have clearly
shown not only that ECOMOG needs the financial and
logistical resources to carry out its mandate, but also that its
troop strength needs to be substantially increased to enable
it to serve as a credible deterrent to the marauding factional
fighters. It is important that concerted efforts be made to
assist ECOMOG to become a robust peace-keeping force
capable of defending itself and the civilian population as
necessary. The provision of sufficient resources would
enable more West African States and other countries in the
region and beyond to participate in the peace-keeping
efforts in Liberia. It is obvious that under the present
circumstances, African States cannot sustain their troops in
Liberia for any reasonable length of time.

We are fully aware that the situation in Liberia does
not lend itself to easy solutions. The resumption of
hostilities in that country on 6 April put the clock back
several months. The situation in Liberia is, however, far
from hopeless. It requires only that all concerned do their
part. In this respect, we are aware of the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity in the search for a solution
to the crisis in Liberia. The situation in Liberia calls for a
creative collective response by the international community.
The United Nations, the European Union and the
Organization of African Unity should intensify their
cooperation to find practical ways to bring the crisis in
Liberia to an end. ECOMOG is so far the only vehicle we
have in the field for the attainment of that goal.

According to a BBC report this morning, ECOMOG
should have succeeded in deploying its forces throughout
Monrovia by the end of this week. This would be a great
achievement towards gaining the support of the
international community. It is time the international
community fully recognized the important role being played
by ECOMOG in Liberia and gave it all the support it
needs. Failure to support the efforts of ECOMOG in Liberia
could result in a catastrophe of unimaginable proportions,
and we do not believe this is the path the international
community would like Liberia to follow.

