The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bahrain, Chile, Cuba, Denmark,
Egypt, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Pakistan,
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Sudan, Tunisia and
Yemen, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jacob
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Buallay (Bahrain), Mr. Maquieira (Chile),
Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba), Ms. Laj
(Denmark), Mr. Aboul Atta (Egypt), Mr. Nambiar
(India), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Fadaifard
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq),
Mr. Motomura (Japan), Prince Zeid Rand Zeid
Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Akram (Pakistan),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Manis (Sudan), Mr. Ayari (Tunisia)
and Mr. Al-Saidi (Yemen) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 24 July 2002
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2002/830
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Wednesday, 24 July 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 24 July 2002
from the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In conformity with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Acting Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, Mr. Bruno Rodriguez Parrilla, to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 24 July 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document 8/2002/831 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request the Security
Council to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to participate in the meeting of
the Council to be held on Wednesday, 24 July
2002, on the situation on the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations to participate in the
meeting, in accordance with the rules of procedure and
with previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 23 July 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, which is contained in document
S/2002/828.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the
floor.


