Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to express my gratitude to your delegation,
Sir, for having convened this open debate and for the
concept paper drawn up by the Mexican Mission to
facilitate this debate (S/2010/322). My country attaches
the greatest importance to strengthening the rule of law
as a basic requirement for achieving peace and
security, both within States and at the international
level. The latter includes the actions of the Security
Council.

The concept paper identifies three aspects of
strengthening the rule of law around which it proposes
an exercise to evaluate the situation since the open
debate held by the Security Council in 2006: the
promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of sanctions regimes.

With regard to conflict and post-conflict
situations, my country believes that, when establishing
mandates, we must first address with due priority the
capacity of conflict-affected societies to ensure the rule
of law, in particular through the strengthening of
national judicial and police systems. This objective is
directly related to the work of the Security Council and
has been increasingly integrated in the mandates
approved by this body.

At the same time, with regard to situations of
armed conflict, respect for international humanitarian
law is essential to ensuring the protection of civilians
by the parties to the conflict and by United Nations
forces. Parties to a conflict are subject to the basic rule,
established long before the founding of this
Organization, that civilians must be protected from the
effects of armed conflict. My country is firmly of the
view that provisions for the protection of civilians must
be included in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

At the same time, it is of vital importance to
ensure that the perpetrators of serious human rights
violations face justice. Fortunately, the international
community has overcome the justice-versus-peace
paradigm in conflict and post-conflict situations, by
which political agreements used to set aside the pursuit
of justice in favour of de jure or de facto amnesties.
The current paradigm is one in which peace and justice
are not only compatible but also complementary
objectives.

In that regard, I would like to underscore the
conclusions of the exercise on stocktaking of
international criminal justice, which was undertaken in
the framework of the Review Conference of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court that took
place in Kampala, Uganda, less than a month ago. The
main conclusion of the segment on peace and justice
was that even though in practice tensions arise between
peace and justice, there is now a positive relationship
between them. That is to say, peace efforts are not
feasible without duly incorporating the need for
ensuring justice in cases of human rights violations.

With regard to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, I would like to
emphasize that this is an issue where it is essential that
the role of the General Assembly also be taken into
account. Every year, the General Assembly addresses
the rule of law within the framework of the Sixth
Committee. At its sixty-fourth session, the General
Assembly considered an agenda item entitled "The rule
of law at the national and international levels", which
is an issue that is directly related to international
justice and the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the pillars of
today's international community. In the outline
provided by the Charter, the International Court of
Justice plays a central role 4 inherited from the
Permanent Court of International Justice - as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations.

But in the settlement of international disputes
there are also other methods, to which the Charter also
refers. In that regard, Argentina believes it relevant to
highlight the need for parties to a dispute to comply in
good faith with calls for negotiation made with a view
to peaceful resolution by the organs of the
Organization, including, of course, by the General
Assembly. Among the means at the disposal of the
Organization, we must also highlight the good offices
role that the organs of the Organization can request -

10-4285]
and in fact do recommend - the Secretary-General to
undertake. The political will and good faith of the
parties to a dispute are also required for the successful
fulfilment of a good-offices mission of the Secretary-
General, and therefore also for success in resolving a
dispute.

In addition to the jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice in contentious cases, I would also like
to highlight the Court's consultative jurisdiction, as
done by the paper prepared by the delegation of
Mexico, which can be activated by the organs of the
United Nations.

In addition to the Court, we should also highlight
the role of other tribunals specialized in specific fields
of international law. Among those, my country would
like to point to the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea, which is a judicial body established by the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as
part of its specific regime for the settlement of
controversies. My country is one of the 29 parties to
the Convention that has accepted the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal. I would also like to highlight the fundamental
role of the International Law Commission in the
codification and continuing development of
international law.

With regard to combating impunity, the
international community is experiencing remarkable
evolution in international criminal justice. That
process, which has its roots in Nuremberg and Tokyo,
moved forward with the establishment of the ad hoc
Tribunals for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia,
which reflected the Security Council's clear
recognition of the close link between peace and justice.
Since the adoption of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, in 1998, the fight against
impunity has clearly evolved towards a permanent
system of international criminal justice centred on the
Court.

The Court established by the Rome Statute is one
of the most meaningful achievements of the
multilateral system. In 1998, it was not expected that
the Statute would enter into force so soon or, much
less, that the Court would be playing such a central
role in the fight against impunity little more than 10
years following the adoption of the Statute. To date,
there are 111 States parties to the Rome Statute, with
two trials before the Court and a third to begin soon.
Five investigations are currently under way, three of
which were referred to the Court by States parties. One
situation was referred to the Court by the Security
Council, in 2005.

In addition, the recently concluded Rome Statute
Review Conference succeeded in fulfilling a mandate
pending since 1998, namely, adopting a definition of
the crime of aggression and the conditions under which
the Court shall exercise its jurisdiction with regard to
that crime. With regard to the exercise of jurisdiction, a
formula was developed that respects both the role of
the Security Council and the independence of the
Court, in a delicate balance that made consensus
possible. That jurisdiction will have to be activated by
States parties in 2017.

I would like to take this opportunity to call on
States that have not yet signed or ratified the Rome
Statute to ratify or to accede to it as soon as possible,
in order to ensure the complete universality of the
International Criminal Court, and therefore of the
international criminal justice system established by the
Rome Statute. We would also like to reiterate our call
to the Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court. We encourage the
Council to continue to cooperate with the Court with a
View to ending impunity.

The issue of the efficiency and credibility of
sanctions regimes has been dealt with not only by the
Security Council but also by the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and through the work
of the Organization in the framework of the General
Assembly. Continued efforts for ensuring respect for
the rule of law, in particular human rights law, are also
needed with regard to the application of sanctions in
the fight against terrorism.

To that end, it is of paramount importance that
sanctions are clear, precise and specifically directed,
and that due process is ensured for the credibility of
sanctions and for the legitimacy of their application in
domestic law. In that regard, my country has already
highlighted in the Council the positive step represented
by the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009), last
December. The establishment of an Ombudsperson for
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) is a step in the right direction in ensuring that
sanctions regimes conform to the minimum
requirements of due process.
International peace and security are essential for
the international community. Legitimacy, democracy
and justice are the values that must guide the action of
the Security Council in addressing conflict and post-
conflict situations, so as to build and consolidate
lasting peace.

