Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First, I would like to join
others by thanking the Security Council for organizing
this open debate today and by expressing gratitude to
the President of the Council for his continuous efforts
as Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. That is an issue that certainly deserves the
attention of the Security Council, the body with the
primary responsibility for international peace and

security. We also welcome resolution 2068 (2012)
adopted today.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union
earlier today. Allow me also to convey our gratitude
to the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her valuable work, and to welcome
Ms. Leila Zerrougui to her new post. We assure
Ms. Zerrougui of our full support.

Estonia welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/261) on which today's debate primarily
focuses. We believe it is of utmost importance that the
Secretary-General's report continue to be delivered in
its current form, with both annexes.

The rights of the child are one of Estonia's human
rights priorities. The United Nations has an important
role to play in advocating and protecting the global
system of human rights standards, including the rights
of the child. There are a range of tools that the United
Nations system, including its principal organs, has to
either prevent or react to human rights violations - the
Human Rights Council is one of the most important
of them. Estonia is applying for membership to the
Council for the years 2013 to 2015, and looks forward to
advancing the agenda of children's rights as a member
of the Human Rights Council, if elected.

Estonia strongly condemns all kinds of violence
against children and violations of children's rights. We
are very concerned about the reports of children being
tortured and targeted in Syria. According to the Chair
of the independent international commission of inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Paulo Pinheiro, who
presented the Commission's last report only two days
ago in Geneva, "Gross violations of human rights have
grown in number, in pace and in scale. Civilians, many
of them children, are bearing the brunt of the spiraling
Violence". He also pointed out that half ofthe 1.2 million
internally displaced persons are children. Estonia calls
upon all parties involved in the conflict to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
protect children.

Often, perpetrators of grave Violations against
children in situations of armed conflict enjoy impunity.
Currently, 53 parties are listed in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict. We are alarmed that this year the number of
persistent perpetrators has doubled to 32.

However, there is also reason for hope. In addition
to the progress made on signing action plans to end
the recruitment of child soldiers, we welcome the
two milestone verdicts against Thomas Lubanga
and Charles Taylor. Those convictions are important
steps in advancing the rights of children by lending
credence to the international community's commitment
to ending impunity for the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict. Moreover, those verdicts
are a powerful warning signal to perpetrators, having
thus a deterrent effect. Ms. Coomaraswamy stated in
2010, when she gave her testimony as expert witness
before the International Criminal Court (ICC), that the
ICC's prosecution of the crime of child recruitment
encouraged many groups to approach the United Nations
to negotiate action plans for the release of children from
their ranks. That illustrates the important effects that
criminal proceedings against perpetrators of the worst
human rights violations can have. Estonia agrees with
the Secretary-General that amnesties should not be
applied to individuals who recruited or recruit children.

While Mr. Lubanga's conviction is a landmark,
more must be done to address the problem globally. We
call on all States that have not yet done so to join the
Rome Statute ofthe ICC. States should also extend their
full cooperation to the ICC, including by identifying
and locating witnesses, arresting and surrendering
accused persons in their territories, and cooperating in
the implementation of reparations to the victims.

Even in ideal circumstances, international courts
and tribunals can hope to prosecute only a small number
of perpetrators. And while effective investigations
and prosecutions at the national level are potentially
powerful tools to deter future crimes by closing
the impunity gap, they are often stymied by lack of
resources, willingness and capacity. We must therefore
strengthen national judicial systems to investigate
and prosecute grave Violations, including those
against children. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to States to enact appropriate national
legislation to criminalize grave violations against
children in that respect. We call upon the international
donor community, United Nations agencies and other
partners to support Member States in developing and
strengthening national capacity for those purposes.

We also welcome Ambassador De la Sabliere's
action-oriented report on the Security Council
engagement on the protection of children in armed
conflict and strongly support his recommendation that
the Security Council pursue a complementary approach
with the ICC, which would exert strong pressure on
certain individuals and entities. We are pleased to be
able to note that the basis for increased cooperation
between the Court and the United Nations was created
by testimony of the former Special Representative in
the Lubanga trial.

Raising awareness at the local level concerning
the association of children with armed groups is of the
utmost importance. We cannot achieve tangible success
if children's rights are not considered to be universal
norms globally. The role of civil society and local
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) cannot be
underestimated in this context. The local community
plays a key role in collecting information on possible
violations. NGOs ought not to be impeded in their work
or be instrumentalized by States.

In disseminating information on children's rights
and especially on the issue of children in armed
conflict, social media and modern information and
communication technology should be used more
broadly. A good example of that is the children and armed
conflict smart phone application, which was launched
today by the Mission of Liechtenstein in cooperation
with Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

I would like to finish with the quote of the former
Sierra Leonean child soldier and author of the published
memoir, A Long Way Gone: Memoirs ofa Boy Soldier,
Ishmael Beah:

"We as human beings, as nations, as the
international community, have the capacity to
end the use of children in war. We must not waste
another minute...".

