Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): I wish to express
Nigeria's appreciation to you, Sir, for having convened
this open debate under the item "Strengthening
international law: rule of law and maintenance of
international peace and security". I am, of course,
aware that this is a follow-up to the Council's 2004
debate on the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
societies (see S/PV.5052).
The crucial role of the rule of law in society
cannot be overemphasized. Without the rule of law
there can be no order, and without order there can be

no sustainable peace, stability or social and economic
development. It is for that reason that the holding of
this debate is of the utmost importance in the global
quest for durable international peace and security.

Nigeria shares the view of the Secretary-General
that the restoration and consolidation of the rule of law
in conflict or post-conflict societies entails, inter alia,
the strengthening of the rule of law and transitional
justice in the wake of conflict; the articulation of a
common language of justice for the United Nations; the
provision of assistance based on international norms
and standards; the identification of the role of United
Nations peace operations with particular reference to
the restoration of the rule of law; the assessment of
national needs and capacities; support for domestic
reform and constituencies; the recognition of the
political context of the conflict; embracing integrated
and complementary approaches; filling the rule-of-law
vacuum; the development of national justice systems;
the application of lessons learned from ad hoc criminal
tribunals; and support for the role of the International
Criminal Court.

Nigeria also supports the continued use of truth
commissions and the vetting of public services to
ensure that those associated with past abuses are
punished appropriately. We further support the
payment of reparations to victims of human rights
abuses and the building up of a roster of experts in the
field of assisting conflict and post-conflict societies to
establish transitional justice processes, as well as the
restoration of shattered justice systems and the
rebuilding of the rule of law.

With regard to the ad hoc tribunals, Nigeria
recognizes their importance in the administration of
transitional justice and the entrenchment of the rule of
law, particularly in preventing impunity and punishing
crimes against humanity. Regrettably, tribunals such as
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda are - understandably - very costly to
maintain. In addition, such bodies are temporary in
nature and are located in various parts of the world.
There is therefore an urgent need for the international
community to embrace and utilize the services of the
permanent International Criminal Court. That will not
only enhance the rapid codification of jurisprudence in
the areas of international humanitarian law,
international human rights law, international refugee
law and, of course, international criminal law, but also

06-4010]
ensure certainty in terms of the availability of such
institutions, as well as preserving their legacies.
Accordingly, Nigeria calls on those States Members of
the United Nations that have not yet done so to accede
to the Rome Statute.

On enhancing the efficiency and credibility of
United Nations sanctions regimes, Nigeria holds the
view that sanctions should be applied only as a last
resort. In that regard, sanctions should always be
targeted and time-bound, and should be lifted once the
objective has been achieved. Furthermore, sanctions
should be applied in accordance with Article 50 of the
Charter. The impact of sanctions both on the target and
on third States, particularly the most vulnerable in
society, should be assessed and remedied. Above all,
the listing and delisting of individuals and entities on
sanctions lists should follow due process. To that end,
we stress the need for due consultation with Member
States whose citizens or entities within their territories
are to be included on a list. Member States should also
be informed and consulted before persons or entities in
their territories are included on a list. We wish to
emphasize that a situation in which persons or entities
are included on a list before the affected States are
informed is against both the peremptory norms of fair
trial and the principle of the rule of law. Nigeria is
therefore opposed to any breach of those peremptory
norms.

Nigeria also wishes to underscore the need for
close collaboration among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council in the crucial task of facilitating the restoration
and consolidation of the rule of law in conflict and
post-conflict societies. In particular, we wish to stress
the importance of close cooperation among the newly
established Peacebuilding Commission, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and relevant
United Nations agencies and civil society entities in
post-conflict reconstruction efforts. The proper
synchronization of all such efforts would ensure peace
and stability in post-conflict situations. There is also a
need to work closely with relevant regional and
subregional bodies.

Finally, the restoration of the rule of law in the
context of cultural and traditional settings in post-war
situations is of the utmost importance. In order to
achieve this, there is a need to avoid the imposition of
externally imposed models and mandates. There is also
a need for proper funding and an assessment of

06-4010]

national judicial, economic and social requirements. In
order to enhance the process, there is also a need for
meaningful participation by the national Government,
civil society and key national constituencies with a
view to determining and identifying strategies to
enhance the course of transitional justice and the
restoration of the rule of law.

In this connection, Nigeria agrees with the view
expressed by the Secretary-General in the summary of
his report contained in document S/2004/616 that

"Justice, peace and democracy are not
mutually exclusive objectives, but rather
mutually reinforcing imperatives. Advancing all
three in fragile post-conflict settings requires
strategic planning, careful integration and
sensible sequencing of activities. Approaches
focusing only on one or another institution, or
ignoring civil society or victims, will not be
effective. Our approach to the justice sector must
be comprehensive in its attention to all of its
interdependent institutions, sensitive to the needs
of key groups and mindful of the need for
complementarity between transitional justice
mechanisms. Our main role is not to build
international substitutes for national structures,
but to help build domestic justice capacities".

