Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the Secretary-General of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Dato Lim Jock Hoi, for their informative briefings on cooperation between ASEAN and the United Nations in maintaining international peace and security. We also appreciate the initiative of our colleagues from Viet Nam to convene this thematic meeting of the Security Council on the subject of cooperation between the United Nations and regional organizations, in this case ASEAN. We consider ASEAN to be one of the most successful integrative associations. It plays an important role in ensuring peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. We have consistently called for the strengthening of the central role of its 10 member States in regional affairs. We commend their contribution to the work of United Nations peacekeeping operations. This year marks the twenty-fourth anniversary of the ASEAN-Russian Federation Dialogue Partnership. Within that period, we have achieved impressive progress in every area of our cooperation. A robust treaty and legal basis for cooperation has been established, which can now be described as a strategic partnership. We have launched effective joint mechanisms and our trade, economic and humanitarian ties are steadily developing. We have laid the foundation for closercoordination of steps at key multilateral platforms, foremost among which is the United Nations. We have had meaningful dialogue in the area of policy and security, focused on establishing an equal, balanced and transparent system of inter-State relations in the Asia-Pacific region. The 2016 Russia-ASEAN Summit, held in Sochi, was the first high-level meeting to be convened in Russia in the history of our relations. The Summit resulted in the adoption of the Sochi Declaration and the 2016-2020 Comprehensive Plan of Action to Promote Cooperation between ASEAN and the Russian Federation. Russia and ASEAN are like-minded on issues such as establishing an open and balanced security architecture in the Asia-Pacific region, based on the principles of the rule of international law, non-interference in internal affairs, the non-use or threat of use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. We are united in our aspirations to prevent the emergence in the region of new dividing lines, as well as the undermining of equality and consensus in the work of inter-State associations built around ASEAN. Recently, however, including at today's meeting, we have heard much about a rules-based order that, as far as we can judge, is based on a selective approach to international law and the concept of so-called Indo- Pacific region - a concept that has emerged seemingly out of nowhere. When we look at geographical maps and ask the authors of that concept what the difference is between the Indo-Pacific strategies and cooperation within the Asia-Pacific region, they say that Indo-Pacific strategies are ostensibly more open and democratic. At the same time, they do not include East Africa or the Persian Gulf as part of the Indo-Pacific region. Naturally, China does not fall within that region either. That raises the question of what the added value is of a format that divides rather than unites. Such dubious novelties in no way promote regional cooperation or a unifying agenda. Alongside other dialogue partners of ASEAN, Russia is helping the organization to build its capacities in addressing new threats and challenges, such as terrorism, transnational crime and illegal drug trafficking. We are especially focused on the consistent implementation of the Statement of ASEAN and the Russian Federation on Cooperation in the Field of Security of and in the Use of Information and Communication Technologies, which was adopted at the 2018 ASEAN-Russia Summit held in Singapore. We are taking steps aimed at harmonizing the various integration associations and undertakings with the involvement of the East Asia Economic Caucus, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and ASEAN. These efforts have laid the foundation for the creation in Eurasia of an innovative centre free from barriers and based on the principles of international law and the norms of the World Trade Organization, as well as respect for different development models and the rights of peoples to themselves determine which path they want to take forward. That philosophy lies at the heart of the Greater Eurasian Partnership initiative, which was advanced by Russian President Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin at the ASEAN-Russia Summit. We deem it important to build dialogue and practical partnership between the SCO and ASEAN given that both organizations work to resolve the same security and sustainable development issues in Asia. Based on the positive experience of cooperation between the United Nations and the SCO, including the third high-level meeting on the terrorism and organized crime nexus, held in New York in November 2019, we propose that we embark on a process of reflection on expanding the format of such events to include ASEAN. It would also be useful for ASEAN and the SCO Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure to exchange experiences on a well-developed legal and treaty basis and effective mechanisms for inter-State cooperation. In connection with the ideas that have being expressed here about the territorial disputes in the South China Sea, I would like to underscore that our view is that any territorial disputes in that region must be resolved between the States in question on a bilateral basis, in the context of the subject of today's meeting, which is aimed at building cooperation and advancing a unifying agenda in the region. It is unacceptable to impose a particular vision of the resolution and settlement of disputes and of thorny issues on the basis of narrow national interests, especially if this is being done by States that are located many thousands of kilometres from the region. We also do not see any added value in raising the subject of Myanmar here in the Security Council. The problem of the return of the Rohingya refugees should be resolved through bilateral consultations betweenthe parties involved. We welcome the mediating role played by ASEAN and China in resolving the situation in Myanmar. We note the fact that ASEAN recently conducted an assessment mission on the needs of refugees. We believe that the people of a region always have all of the information they need about the state of affairs on the ground and are best aware of the regional specifics. In January, Hanoi became the President of ASEAN. We share Viet Nam's priorities in the Association, including the focus on increasing its contribution to the maintenance of peace and stability in the region. We are convinced that our partners and ASEAN have all the necessary experience, the tools they need and the requisite goodwill. We stand ready to support and develop our cooperation.
