Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): 1 should
like to begin by thanking Mr. Keating, Mr. Madeira and,
in particular, Ms. Dirie for their detailed briefings. I
also welcome the presence in the Chamber of Mr. Omer,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Investment Promotion
of the Federal Republic of Somalia.

Allow me first to vigorously condemn the suicide
attack perpetrated by the Al-Shabaab terrorist group
that took place at the Dayah Hotel in Mogadishu this
past Wednesday and resulted in dozens of deaths.

At the dawn of a new beginning for Somalia,
Uruguay welcomes the establishment of the new
Federal Parliament in December 2016 and the election
of the Presidents of their respective house. We hope
that the process will come to a successful conclusion
on 8 February with the election of the new President
of Somalia. Uruguay urges that all the necessary
measures be taken to ensure a review of the provisional
Federal Constitution, which we consider vital for
Somalia to become a true constitutional democracy.
The support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM) and the financial assistance of
the international community are vital for the timely
adoption of the permanent Constitution.

Uruguay recognizes the efforts made to reach
the target of 30 per cent of the seats in Parliament
for women. Although this time the goal was not
achieved, the result has shown a transformation in the
representation and political participation of women in
Somalia. With such an important precedent, efforts
must be redoubled to achieve that goal in 2020, as well
as effectively implement the democratic principle of
one-person, one-vote.

Security sector reform, in particular the rapid
and effective development of the Somali National
Army, is vital so that Government security forces,
including the police, can assume greater responsibility
for peacekeeping and the security and protection of
Somali citizens.

Uruguay is very concerned about the reported
increase in human rights violations in Somalia. Despite
the Somali authorities' important commitment to protect
children over the past several years, the detention of
children for alleged links to Al-Shabaab continues to
be a reason for concern, as does their murder and other
violations of their rights, such as their recruitment by
various parties, sexual violence, kidnapping, as well as
attacks against schools and hospitals. Uruguay urges
the Government of Somalia to ensure that children are
treated first as victims and that its guiding principles
are in the best interests of children and in accordance
with international protection norms. The death
sentences that were imposed on children in Puntland
are unacceptable.

As a sponsor of resolution 2286 (2016), we note
with concern that the most recent report (S/2016/1098)
of the Secretary-General on children in armed conflict
in Somalia indicates that from 2012 to 2016 there
were 40 attacks against hospitals in that country. Such
attacks, no matter whence they come, are war crimes.

In conclusion, once again, Uruguay recognizes
the important work of United Nations Support Office
in Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia and
considers them fundamental in building the Somali
State and making progress in the consolidation of peace
and lasting stability in the Horn of Africa.

