Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First of all, I would
like to express our gratitude for the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone,
Mrs. Bangura, and to thank the Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, and Ambassador McNee of Canada for their
briefings.

The recent outbreak of violence revealed once
again that Sierra Leone continues to suffer from its
historical legacy and that the situation remains fragile.
But the events are also a warning signal for
peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone. They have
shown that there is still a major challenge for the new
and innovative approach the United Nations took in
Sierra Leone with the establishment of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL). None the less, in our view, the "one
voice" approach of the United Nations has contributed
positively to the determined manner with which Sierra
Leone can overcome this crisis. In this context, let me
also commend the personal contribution of
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg.
The violent incidents of March could have easily
jeopardized the progress achieved so far in Sierra
Leone. We share the Secretary-General's positive
assessment of the prudent response by President
Koroma and the political leaders of Government and
opposition parties, which led to the signing of the joint
communique of 2 April. We hope that the communique
will provide the necessary impetus to foster the
dialogue so needed between the two main parties. We
also hope the recent Government reshuffle will
enhance the work of the Government and help to
further improve the quality of governance.

Ambassador McKee of Canada, the new Chair of
the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, has welcomed the joint communique,
which represents a significant shared commitment
between the two largest parties towards the
consolidation of democracy and peace. Austria concurs
with him and the country-specific configuration of the
Commission. The communique contains the basis for
building a bipartisan consensus on important national
institutions and policies. The follow-up and
implementation merit our continued attention and
support. Closer cooperation in the spirit of partnership
between the Peacebuilding Commission and UNIPSIL
could also help restore and sustain stability.

The recent clashes between sympathizers of
different political parties have reminded us that
transitional justice and reconciliation processes should
be given high priority. The recommendations of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which also form
the framework for the deliberations in the
Peacebuilding Commission, have been crucial in
providing a road map in this respect. We welcome the
fact that the implementation of the reparations
programme as recommended by the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission has now started. The work
of the Special Court, under the leadership of its
President, Ms. Renate Winter, and the completion of its
work also merit our support. Its activities in the area of
prosecuting individuals for serious crimes will be a
milestone in this regard. The preservation of the
Special Court's legacy domestically, including through
the Human Rights Commission, will be of very great
importance.

Austria notes with satisfaction the consistent
trend towards increased respect for human rights.
However, many challenges remain: female genital
mutilation and other forms of violence against women
are still widespread. Against that background, I would
also like in particular to commend the fact that the
signatories of the joint communique also agreed to
investigate all allegations of rape and sexual violence
against women during the events of 16 March and to
bring to justice anyone who has committed sexual
violence against women. Access to justice needs to be
further improved, especially for women, and the
judicial system needs to be further strengthened. We
call on the Government to redouble its important
efforts to address these challenges, with the support of
the United Nations.

Austria also commends Sierra Leone for its
efforts to maintain macroeconomic stability in spite of
the deteriorating global economic environment.
However, progress could be jeopardized by widespread
poverty, corruption and the high youth unemployment
rate. Continued efforts to integrate young people in the
workforce need to be strengthened. The high numbers
of unemployed youth with only limited or no hope for
a better future, and that hope subject to party
affiliation, continue to be a potential threat to political
stability. In that context, Madam Minister, we are also
very pleased with the contributions that the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization is
making to combat youth unemployment under the very
able leadership of your countryman, Director-General
Kandeh Yumkella.

The steps taken by the Government in combating
drug trafficking are very commendable. We believe
that cross-border organized crime should be addressed
through regional approaches. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) provide the framework for a long-term,
comprehensive and coordinated response to these
challenges.

With regard to the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, I would like to stress the important
contribution of the ECOWAS Convention on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and
Other Related Materials, which was ratified by Sierra
Leone as long ago as 2007.

Concerning the UNODC project proposal on
building institutional capacity to respond to the threat
posed by illicit drug trafficking and organized crime in
Sierra Leone, we welcome the readiness of Sierra
Leone to implement activities to fight trafficking and
corruption. We also consider the project proposal on
drug demand reduction in the context of youth
unemployment particularly useful and hope that it will
be finalized shortly.

Finally, allow me to draw the attention of the
Council to the follow-up of the Praia conference, held
earlier this year, and implementation of the ECOWAS
Action Plan. A draft programme concept of for joint
assistance by the UNODC the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
INTERPOL in post-conflict scenarios, including Sierra
Leone, was launched by the partners in Vienna last
April and was well received. The next launch is
planned in New York in mid-July, parallel to the report
of the Secretary-General on West Africa.

