Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for presenting the ninth report
on the situation in Libya in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011) and for the work she has undertaken with
a view to achieving justice for this brotherly African
country.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, as a State
party to the International Criminal Court (ICC) since
2002, champions the strengthening of the Court's
institutional framework and its efficiency. We therefore
encourage those countries that are not States parties
to the Rome Statute to accede to that instrument
in order to strengthen the rule of law at the national
and international levels. Cooperation is an essential
aspect in achieving the objectives of the Court, which
requires the commitment of States to implementing
its decisions and supporting its work. Strengthening
the international criminal justice system, represented
by the ICC, requires that States parties refrain from
signing immunity agreements with countries that are
not parties to the Rome Statute so as to exclude from
the Court's jurisdiction individuals who are possibly
responsible for committing crimes established under
the Statute. This practice undermines the spirit and
purpose of the Statute.

Venezuela is concerned that some trials have been
carried out very quickly owing to political reasons,
as has been the case in Libya. We are also concerned
about the intervention of the Security Council, through
its referral of cases over which the International
Criminal Court has jurisdiction. That highlights the
politicization of decisions on which the international
community should act. It is no secret that there have
been many examples of cases recently that have been
said to fall outside the jurisdiction of the Court, despite
evidence that they fall under the ICC's jurisdiction,
and on which no action has been taken, such as what
happened in Iraq, Libya and Palestine. In this sense,
one could infer that if the ICC continues to act in this
manner, the its autonomy, independence, objectivity
and impartiality - principles that should prevail in the
ICC's work - could be affected. There can be no double
standards for legal issues. In that connection, ICC cases
should not be settled outside the framework of the
Court; they should be resolved within the institutional
structure of the Court with the participation of the
members of the Assembly of States parties to the Rome
Statute.

We are concerned about the deterioration of the
political and security situation in Libya, as referred
to in the report, which clearly describes the complex
situation of displaced persons, attacks on civilians,
illegal detentions, torture, disappearances, killings,
persecution and abuse, as well as the obvious legal
delays and violations of basic human rights evidenced
by the fact that there are approximately 8,000 political
detainees. Those are indications that violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
continue in the country.

That atmosphere of general insecurity has affected
the work of human rights activists, lawyers, judges and
prosecutors, who for security reasons have not been
able to pursue investigations that fall within their remit,
including the prosecutions of SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Since he was captured in
November 2011, Saif Al-Islam has been in the custody
of the Zintan tribe to ensure his physical safety because
of the danger inherent in his transfer to the capital or
to any party claiming to represent the interests of the
Libyan people. These disturbing events underscore the
absence of the rule of law.

The country has not yet regained its institutional
footing and it has not been able to establish new
institutions. Therefore, we cannot speak of the
application of justice in a country where the existing
norms do not guarantee citizens equal treatment under
the law. In this regard, we call on the Libyan authorities
to fully cooperate with the International Criminal
Court and the Office of the Prosecutor by delivering
Saif Al-Islam to the Court so that he may remain in
its custody, thereby guaranteeing his protection and his
right to a fair trial.

We condemn the presence and activities of terrorist
groups, such as Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and associated groups, which have expanded
their presence in Libya owing to the institutional
collapse in the wake of the military intervention and
war in 2011. As a result, those terrorist groups have
focused on carrying out attacks on ethnic and religious
minorities, as evidenced in the executions of Egyptian,
Ethiopian and Eritrean citizens; indiscriminate attacks
on civilians; and kidnappings and disappearances of
those who think differently from these terrorist groups.
The perpetrators of these heinous crimes must be
prosecuted and we hope that the ICC has all the support
it needs to act quicly. Venezuela supports the efforts of
the Office of the Prosecutor to ensure that justice and
accountability prevail in Libya and that the authorities
promote the establishment of a comprehensive and
effective justice system to put an end to the persistent
impunity in this country.

Finally, we believe that an inclusive political
dialogue and the establishment of a national unity
Government are the basis for establishing the rule of
law with strong judicial institutions that ensure the
promotion and respect of human rights, including
international standards of due process, the right to
defence, the presumption of innocence and fundamental
legal guarantees. In this regard, we support the efforts
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bernardino Leon to reach a political solution and
urge all parties concerned work to ensure that peace
returns to this brotherly African country. That is an
indispensable requirement for building the institutional
framework in a country that has been ravaged by war
since 2011.

