Mr. Staur (Denmark): First of all, I would like to
align myself with the statement made by the observer
of the European Union (EU) on behalf of the EU.

At this moment in time, Somalia faces a new
opportunity for progress, to which we must be able to
respond. The debate today is therefore very timely. The
Security Council has just adopted resolution 2036
(2012) on the situation in Somalia, providing the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) with
more troops and powers. Less than two weeks ago, we
completed the successful conference in London, where
we achieved the double objective of putting the plight
of Somalia at the top of the international agenda and of
providing traction in the political process.

This debate coincides with the end of the
monsoon season in the Indian Ocean and the beginning
of the piracy season. As a seafaring nation, Denmark is
deeply concerned by that scourge. Two Danish citizens
have been held hostage by pirates for more than a year.
The Secretary-General has said that piracy is not a
waterborne disease, it is a symptom of conditions on
the ground. I could not agree more.

There can be no impunity for pirates. Pirates must
be prosecuted. We recently have made progress in
bringing pirates to justice and in transferring them to
appropriate prisons in Somalia. It is important that we
continue to work with both the Transitional Federal
12-25146
Government (TFG) and the regional Government in
Hargeisa, and particularly in Garowe, to receive pirates
sentenced by courts in the region. It is essential that the
necessary legislation be adopted all over Somalia.

A lasting solution to the Somali crisis can only be
a political one. Political leadership is what is needed.
All stakeholders, especially the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs), ultimately hold the primary
responsibility for bringing the process forward. Time is
of the essence, and it is now up to the TFIs to deliver
and to ensure that the political transition ends by
August 2012. The strong international message to
Somali leaders should be that they must take the
responsibility upon themselves, show determination
and use the opportunity provided to them by the
international community: basically, get to work.

Many actors are involved in finding a solution to
the crisis in Somalia. Harmonizing all those efforts is
at times complicated and time-consuming. For our
efforts to be efficient and effective, and in order to
limit transaction costs, it is of paramount importance
that coordination happen on the ground, preferably in
Somalia, and that it be led by Somalis in close
cooperation with the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
I would like to commend the United Nations for
expanding its footprint in Somalia under extremely
difficult conditions. However, no one else can lead the
process. I urge the United Nations to expand its
presence to all regions of Somalia.

Let me now raise another very important issue.
We need to do more to ensure that women are included
in the political process. Women have remained the
bread-winners and the backbone of Somali families
during the many years of war. As shown in other
conflict situations, peace processes stand a much better
chance of being sustainable when women are fully
involved. Women can make change happen.

It is of the utmost importance that AMISOM
receive sufficient funding. In that regard, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012). Denmark has
from the very outset been a staunch supporter of the
critical functions that AMISOM. is performing. As a
Sign of Denmark's continued support for AMISOM, my
Government recently approved an additional
unearmarked financial contribution of $5 million to the
AMISOM. Trust Fund. We encourage others to
contribute as well. We are also stepping up our support
12-25146
for the East African Standby Force with a view to
facilitating their contribution to AMISOM.

There is an urgent need to fill the political
vacuum in the areas newly liberated from Al-Shabaab,
thereby strengthening local stability and institution-
building. The new stability fund can become a key
instrument for supporting long-term stabilization and
for consolidating peace in south-central Somalia.
Denmark stands ready to contribute to the new fund.

Our broad-based efforts to create stability are part
of our efforts to address the root causes of terrorism.
Al-Shabaab has shown that it is willing to brutally kill
innocent spectators of a soccer match abroad and
terrorize Somali people at home. Recently, Al-Shabaab
swore its allegiance to Al-Qaida. Obviously, that is
unacceptable. We will continue to fight terrorism and
prevent the travel, financing and recruitment of
terrorists.

Fortunately, the famine in the Horn of Africa is
over. However, 2 million people in Somalia are still
affected by the crisis. Also, rural communities across
the entire region have barely recovered from the last
drought and continue to live at the edge of their means.
We need to strengthen the resilience of those
communities across the region. We need a stronger,
more coordinated and longer-term response.

I would like to conclude my statement by
underlining Denmark's continued commitment to our
common endeavours to seek a peaceful and stable
Somalia.

