Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea is grateful for the
convening of this meeting and for the useful briefings
by Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin, which
illustrate the current alarming and tragic situation
throughout Syria.
The conflict in Syria continues to present us
with alarming statistics. The Idlib region has without
any doubt become one of the northern governorates
hardest hit by the war, as Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Sirkin
just described. We are facing a true nightmare, the
horror of which is only increasing, as are the current
humanitarian challenges. The increase in violence that
we have observed in recent weeks in various parts of
Syria, especially in the de-escalation zones agreed by
the Astana guarantors, reflects the negative trend in
Syria and concretely illustrates the extreme volatility
of the situation in the country.

We are witnessing some of the deadliest attacks
in civilian areas since the beginning of the military
escalation almost three months ago. Rockets are now
raining down on Idlib, which, as was underlined, have
killed more than 450 people, including children, and
more than 500,000 people have had to leave their
homes owing to the intensification of air strikes. For
those who are familiar with the Italian city of Venice,
that would be the equivalent of emptying that city of its
population twice over.

We are seeing the situation taking on worrisome
proportions, and an increasing number of voices have
begun in no uncertain terms to point to the failure
of international diplomacy and the world's most
powerful nations. That belief, shared by many of the
world's citizens, calls into question the noble work and
the very purpose of international organizations and
decision-making bodies such as the Security Council.

It is not surprising that a few days ago, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Michelle Bachelet emphasized in a statement the
"collective shrug" as a response to the great number
of civilian casualties, while stressing at the same time
the persistent failure of the permanent members of
the Security Council to agree to use their power and
influence to stop the fighting and killing once and for
all. That has always been the position ofthe Government
of Equatorial Guinea, and we hope that this umpteenth
call to action and for ending international indifference
might achieve the outcome we so long for while halting
the current military campaign and bringing the parties
to the political negotiating table.

In such an environment of persistent insecurity,
we once again call on the warring parties to safeguard
civilian lives and basic infrastructure facilities such as
schools and hospitals. Moreover, health-care facilities
are becoming all the more crucial as military offensives
are causing increasing numbers of deaths and injuries.

In the south of Idlib and throughout the region,
as has been stressed, the main operational hospital is
Maarat Al-Numan. It is unacceptable that it continues
to be subject to regular attacks by any of the parties.
There are many humanitarian organizations that spare
no effort to support the operation of vital health services,
so we cannot allow all international humanitarian
action deployed in this area to collapse.

Our position is that respect for medical facilities
and their personnel and equipment is essential. We once
again echo the call of the Secretary-General in strongly
condemning the ongoing air strikes on and shelling of
health facilities and medical personnel, despite the fact
that we are still struggling to find the words to use to
condemn the violence against the civilian population
and the use of those civilians as pawns in the fighting
between the various groups involved in the conflict.

We believe that even in the fight against terrorism,
respect for international humanitarian law must always
be guaranteed. In relation to the protection of health
facilities and their staff in Idlib, we stress that the
parties' allies must step up their involvement to prevent
the situation from boiling over, and urge them to do so.

I wish to conclude my statement by expressing the
hope that the upcoming meetings on 1 and 2 August
in Nursultan between the guarantors of the Astana
process will contribute to reducing the escalation and
swiftly reactivating the ceasefire that was agreed upon
in September 2018.

