I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Matters. We are grateful for the opportunity of this debate and believe it to be a crucial discussion in which Member States can provide input on ways to improve and support the work of the Security Council, in terms of both the transparency and the efficiency of this body, in view of the unprecedented experience that we are facing. Since mid-March, we have witnessed how the Council has been adapting to new working formats under the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) measures. We appreciate the efforts made by China and the Dominican Republic as Presidents during the months of March and April, respectively, as well as by your country, Sir, which holds the presidency in May, for having recognized our concerns about maintaining the working methods achieved prior to the pandemic, which has made it possible to implement a set of measures designed to ensure that the Council holds as many meetings as possible in a transparent and participatory manner. Chile has been very attentive to this process. We have therefore supported the initiatives presented by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, to which we belong, through letters to the presidency requesting the use of all possible tools to maintain standards of transparency. We support the letter circulated by Switzerland in its capacity as Chair of the group, in which, due to the importance of the topic, the open transmission of the Security Council meeting held in April at which the Secretary-General reported on the impact of COVID-19 was requested, although in the end it was closed. Our emphasis on transparency seeks to help the Security Council in the legitimization of its work and is essential to meeting the demands for multilateral responses to new threats and unprecedented situations in carrying out its work. In that context, we would like to make four points. As a member of the ACT group, Chile will continue to support the promotion of transparency, as well as accountability, in the Security Council's decision- making. We believe that the achievements and progress made in matters of Council reform should be reflected more than ever in the use of new technologies to facilitate decision-making, especially during global crises/pandemics, which prevent the face- to-face operation of meetings, altering conventional working methods. In relation to the open debates, it has been a good advance to send the presidential statements for circulation as a Security Council document, but we also believe that it has already been demonstrated that we are technologically capable of allowing representatives interested in speaking directly to be heard, and we encourage the members of the Security Council to continue exploring this option. We note that during the Security Council open debate on youth, peace and security (see S/2020/346), held in April, representatives of civil society were included to share their experiences with the Council. We hope that will set a precedent for future discussions of this kind while face-to-face meetings are restricted due to COVID-19. We are confident that Security Council members will be able to adopt a draft resolution on COVID-19 and its impact on all sensitive areas of international peace and security. A consensus document of the Security Council would be a sign that there is the multilateral will to deal with this challenge by underlining that this process, in addition to the importance of transparency in the Security Council's decision-making on key issues, would be one of the most concrete ways to strengthen and revitalize the United Nations as a whole. For Chile, the defence and strengthening of multilateralism will continue to be a priority, for which the reform of the Council is fundamental to legitimizing not only decisions on international peace and security, but also on the capacity of the United Nations to be present on the ground in time for the effective protection of those who need us most in the most challenging times.
