Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Sir,
it is an honour to take the floor under your presidency.
I should like to convey Algeria's congratulations to the
delegation of Togo on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February, and
I would ask you to kindly convey our thanks to His
Excellency President Faure Gnassingbe for having
provided us with this timely opportunity to discuss a
matter that is of great importance and relevance given
what is at stake for the countries of the region,
including Algeria.

The situation in the Sahel and West Africa region
is conducive to the further development of existing
regional hotbeds of tension, radicalization and terrorist
violence. They are operating in conjunction with the
many organized-crime networks in the area that engage
in illicit trafficking in drugs, weapons and human
beings. The worrisome regional situation, which is
conducive to the proliferation of weapons, including
weapons of war, has in recent months fuelled a
resurgence of violence and terrorist attacks, as well as
the recruitment of new terrorists.

Algeria, in agreement with the Sahel countries,
has consistently advocated an approach that is geared
towards targeted and efficient action based on
ownership by the countries of the region - Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger - aimed at combating
terrorism and cross-border criminality while assuming
responsibility for security and stability on their
territories, in keeping with their international
obligations.

Thus action was taken jointly with the partner
countries of the subregion to establish mechanisms
specifically geared to that undertaking. That involved
the creation, in April 2010 in Tamanrasset, Algeria, of
a Committee of Joint Chiefs that includes the armed
forces of Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger, and
the establishment in Algiers of the Unite de fusion et
de liaison, to enable information exchange. Those
mechanisms are part and parcel of the process that was
begun in March 2010 and reaffirmed by the Bamako
ministerial meeting held in May 2011, and serve as a
complement to traditional forms of cooperation among
the police, customs and border guards.

The conference held in Algiers on 7 and
8 September 2011 with the participation of the core
countries - Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger- and extra-regional partners reached a clear
consensus and made a firm commitment to combat the
scourges affecting the region by means of an integrated
approach focusing on security and development
objectives, in particular in the most underprivileged
areas of the region.

The conference, while stressing the principle of
ownership, also emphasized the need for cooperation
among the core countries and extra-regional State and
institutional partners. A productive process to follow
up the consultations held with extra-regional partners,
including the United States and the European Union,
spearheaded by the core countries and held at the
ministerial level, began in November 2011 and is
ongoing.

Algeria welcomes the strong support provided by
the Security Council, in its statement to the press
(SC/10535) of 31 January 2012, for the countries of the
affected region and for the initiative of our core
countries, which is reflected in the partnership and
structures already set up by those countries. Algeria
attaches particular importance to United Nations action
in the region, which is being carried out by the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa.
The work of the United Nations is made more effective
by close cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, particularly the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. Those
efforts are being undertaken with primary
responsibility falling to the countries of the region and
with contributions from other States, which are
complementary and involve no duplication whatsoever
in terms of the activities focused on the West Africa
and Sahel region.

In the spirit of that effective and integrated
approach taken jointly with extra-regional partners,
Algeria attaches particular importance to the approach
taken by the Global Counterterrorism Forum, launched
in September 2011 in New York, to the Sahel region
and to Africa in general.

The regional Working Group tasked with
strengthening the Sahel's capacities, co-chaired by
Algeria and Canada, held its first meeting on 16 and
17 November last in Algiers. That meeting yielded
concrete results, including the adoption of an action
plan and several programmes aimed at enhancing
cross-border security, legal and judicial cooperation
and cooperation among police services, combating the
funding of terrorism and reaching out to civil society.

Algeria wishes to convey to its Forum partners,
including Canada, its satisfaction at the constructive
efforts they have undertaken for the region.

Algeria has tirelessly expanded its efforts to
combat the financing of terrorism and to raise
awareness of the criminal practice of kidnapping
hostages for ransom. That practice poses a challenge
that remains of great concern because it provides
financing and enables the recruitment of new terrorists,
particularly worrisome given its links with organized
crime and illegal trafficking of all kinds.

Many challenges remain in West Africa and the
Sahel, and they are often exacerbated by alarming
events. The links that Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
is trying to forge with armed terrorist groups active in
other subregions, such as the Boko Haram group,
whose criminal activities have increased alarmingly,
and Al-Shabaab in Somalia encourage us to redouble
our vigilance and intensify our efforts to take swift
action.

To conclude, I would like to note that, in that
spirit, the most recent ministerial meeting, held on
23 and 24 January 2012 in Nouakchott - in which
Nigeria participated, in addition to the countries of the
region - is an excellent example of the adapting of
cooperation efforts to the challenges on the ground.

