Mr. Kubis: In the past reporting period, the heroic
people of Iraq have been steadily gaining ground
against the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), which is gradually losing its appeal to
the disenfranchised population. The liberation and
holding of Beiji, Sinjar and, most of all, Ramadi, and the
continuing clearance of the surrounding areas of ISIL
fighters, have instilled in the people of Iraq the hope
that the country can and will be liberated from ISIL.
It has also documented how important it is to rely on
local and tribal fighters from areas under ISIL control
to participate in the liberation and take responsibility
for the security of their cities and provinces.

This success also demonstrates the increasingly
resolute and effective support provided to Iraq by the
Global Coalition to Counter ISIL in its fight against ISIL
and provides lessons for preparations for the liberation
of the remaining territories, most notably of Mosul. It
serves as an encouragement to other members of the
international community to assist Iraq in combating
ISIL.

The terrorist organization ISIL, with its radical
ideology and policies ofsectarianism, Violent extremism
and terrorism, constitutes a global and unprecedented
threat to international peace and security. Combating
ISIL by all means is a priority of the whole international
community, and Member States are called upon to
redouble and coordinate their efforts.

Following the 18 December 2015 meeting of
the Security Council (see S/PV.7589), bilateral and
diplomatic efforts, assisted by international partners
and the United Nations, continue to resolve the issues
of the presence of Turkish forces in Camp Bashiqa, so
far without mutually acceptable results. I reiterate the
calls made by the Secretary-General for a solution in
line with the Charter of the United Nations and in full
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq. I also urge both sides to take steps that will enable
the deepening of cooperation in the field of security and
continuous support to Iraq in fighting ISIL, based on
consultations with and full consent of the Government
of Iraq.

Regardless of those successes, ISIL remains a
formidable and determined enemy that constantly
adjusts its tactics and attack patterns, taking into
account also the developments in Syria. ISIL cannot be
defeated by military means alone without addressing
the root causes of violence and the underlying ideology;
otherwise their effect will not be sustainable and lasting.
Military victories need to be complemented by massive
stabilization and rehabilitation efforts that prioritize and
allow for the safe return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) to their towns of origin. Simultaneously, Iraqis
must prioritize political and community reconciliation.

The lack of progress in implementing the national
political agreement reflects the absence of political
consensus and the continued pursuit of partisan
interests. The stability, security and unity of Iraq
hinge on an effective and inclusive political system
and equality in decision-making at the federal and
local levels. Tangible solutions to prevent political and
sectarian exclusion have to include amendments to or
the adoption of priority legislation, followed by swift
implementation, such as the justice and accountability
law, the national guard law and the general amnesty
law. Efforts by Sunni political forces and their leaders
to unify their stance on national reconciliation,
effective federalization and decentralization, and
how to more successfully counter ISIL are equally
necessary. I welcome such steps provided they add to
internal consolidation and not divisions, while urging
Sunni leaders and forces to continue such activities in
the most inclusive manner possible.

In early January, lethal attacks in Baghdad and
in Muqdadiya, in Diyala governorate, perpetrated by
ISIL and revenge violence by rogue militia elements
and criminal groups prompted concern that the nation
was again continuing down a spiralling trajectory of
sectarian violence, compounded by internal political
divisions along sectarian lines, as well as regional
tensions and context. Those attacks were an attempt
to further stoke sectarian tensions and political
polarization in Iraq and weaken the unity of Iraq and
its people. They also highlighted the urgent need to
reach progress in intercommunal relations and swiftly
restore State and local authority, the rule of law, good
governance, justice and the provision of services to
the newly liberated areas and exert firm control over
all fighters and weapons. Security sector reform
addressing the issue of uncontrolled armed groups and
their presence in cities, notably in liberated areas, is a
priority.

Stabilization in liberated areas and the safe return
of IDPs are of enormous political importance. I am
happy to report that the stabilization phase of Tikrit is
almost complete. Overall, the Government has given
very high priority to returns and so far, more than
500,000 displaced Iraqis have returned to their home
communities. The Government expects that up to
900,000 will return in 2016.

There are, however, a number of complicated
factors impacting the pace of returns. These include
a huge number of improvised explosive devices that
have been laid by ISIL and that must be removed before
populations can return home, as well as devastating
destruction to infrastructure and homes. We are seeing
this right now in Ramadi. I call on Iraq's regional and
international partners to enhance their support to the
Government of Iraq's efforts to hold and stabilize areas
retaken from ISIL. Those efforts also ought to focus on
building the capacity of local security and police forces
through training and material support.

Persistent political polarization and divisions
continue to hamper Prime Minister Al Abadi's
ability to advance the reform agenda, including in
decentralization and fighting corruption. The Prime
Minister's recent announcement aimed at establishing
a more professional Cabinet with members selected on
merit, and not on sectarian or political quotas, should
be accompanied by an accelerated implementation
of a genuine political, security and economic reform
package. The complex and deepening set of challenges
before the country and its people requires that the
political blocks finally work together in support of
comprehensive and profound reforms, as they did when
adopting the budget for 2016.

Iraq's persistent and rapidly deepening fiscal crisis
and growing budget deficit, compounded by the security
and humanitarian situation and drastic decline in global
oil prices, has almost halved the State's planned income
since then, and the Kurdistan region faces at least a
situation as grave as that of Baghdad. Fiscal challenges
are also likely to impact the fight against ISIL, as a
significant number of fighters, notably the Peshmerga,
have not received salaries for several months.

I am mindful that, if left unaddressed, such an
unsustainable situation may seriously undermine
the renewed morale of pro-Government forces and
the confidence of the people - including youth,
communities, minorities and IDPs - that they can
have a future in Iraq. And while the Governments in
Baghdad and Erbil must rapidly prioritize and take full
ownership over the State finances and reforms, Iurge the
international community to assist Iraq in overcoming
those difficulties through increased technical support
and funding, including through lending by international
and regional financial institutions. Genuine economic
reforms by the governments in Baghdad and Erbil could
pave the way for such financial and budgetary support.

The severe economic crisis is having a sobering
effect on the relationship between Baghdad and Erbil,
with both sides showing renewed will to work together,
militarily and economically, including on reforms. I
am therefore hopeful that realism and pragmatism will
prevail and help boost efforts in ensuring the stability
and prosperity of Iraq, including the Kurdistan region,
needed to continue jointly the existential fight against
ISIL.
The humanitarian crisis in Iraq is highly complex
and is expected to widen and worsen this year. Today,
not only 3.3 million IDPs, but altogether some 10 million
Iraqis - almost one-third of the population - urgently
require some form of humanitarian assistance. Let
us not forget that without the necessary support,
today's IDPs will become tomorrow's refugees. The
humanitarian needs are now so great they far outstrip
national capacities. The Government of Iraq and the
Kurdistan Regional Government simply do not have the
resources to keep providing assistance, not because of
a lack of will or a reluctance to assume responsibility,
but because of the grave economic and fiscal situation.

On 31 January, the United Nations, jointly with the
Government of Iraq, launched a humanitarian appeal
requesting $861 million to help ensure that the most
vulnerable people receive the assistance they need.
On top of that, a potential catastrophe from the Mosul
developmentam adds new grave challenges and pressures
and requires urgent action by both the Government of
Iraq and the international community, including the
United Nations, as well as public awareness campaigns
and disaster-response plans, including the evacuation
of the affected population in case of such catastrophe.

Allow me to turn now to the ninth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/87) on the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. As
part of the Government of Iraq's reform programme,
the Council of Ministers agreed on the distribution of
the files formerly under the mandate of the Ministry
of Human Rights, deciding to transfer the technical
overview of the missing Kuwaiti persons file to the
Ministry of Defence. While this is a positive step, the
Government of Iraq must now implement the decision
and allocate the financial resources needed to ensure
that the work continues unabated.

Cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait continues
to reach new heights. In December, during the fifth
session ofthe Iraq-Kuwait Joint Ministerial Committee,
the parties signed agreements covering several fields,
including youth and sports, inspection and control, and
communications. Nonetheless, the Government of Iraq
continues to be under its international obligation to
ensure progress.

The United Nations continues to operate in difficult
and often dangerous conditions in Iraq. It is with
deep regret that I have to inform the members of the
Security Council that yesterday we received the news
that the staff member of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq who was abducted in Diyala in April
2015, Mr. Al-Kaissy, has been found dead. I am deeply
shocked and saddened by this news. I strongly urge the
Iraqi authorities to conduct a thorough and transparent
investigation into this abduction and murder
immediately and to hold the perpetrators accountable.
I would like to remind the Government of Iraq that the
national authorities bear full responsibility for serving
justice in this case, just as they do for safeguarding and
protecting all United Nations personnel serving in the
country.

