Mr. Blazey (Australia): Thank you for convening
this open meeting on an issue of deep interest to
Australia. I thank Ambassador Sharma for his
comprehensive and valuable briefing on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
first six months in operation. I also would like to
record Australia's pleasure at seeing Timor-Leste,
represented by Ambassador Guterres, participate in this
important meeting.
Timor-Leste's participation today as an
independent State symbolizes the important fact that
this is, ultimately, Timor-Leste's own issue. Our task is
simply to assess how well UNMISET has been
assisting Timor-Leste strengthen its institutions and
make the transition to self-reliant statehood and a more
traditional relationship with the donor community.

By all accounts, UNMISET has acquitted itself
extremely well. It is largely on track to fulfil its
mandate. This has been assisted by the good
cooperation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, which
is detailed in the Secretary-General's report. Good-
neighbourly relations are the bedrock of security in the
region. We are gratified to see progress on bilateral
dialogue to resolve border demarcation and the
constructive first meeting last month of the Indonesia-
East Timor Joint Ministerial Commission. We also
welcome continuing progress on the refugee issue.
Resolving that promptly will mark a very important
milestone and will contribute to the long-term stability
of Timor-Leste and to its sound relations with
Indonesia.

Timor-Leste's establishment of diplomatic
relations with nearly all of its neighbours of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), its
participation in ASEAN meetings as an invited
observer and in Pacific Island Forum meetings as a
special observer augur well for its longer-term
relationships in the region.

Consistent with a generally improving security
environment, the peacekeeping force is on track to
meeting its downsizing targets. That is welcome. The
drawdown timetable and associated milestones
recommended by the Secretary-General and endorsed
by the Council are based on sound planning and
assessments.

That said, it is also true that trends in the security
environment are not linear, and the situation is
inherently dynamic. We welcome the recognition in the
Secretary-General's report and in Ambassador
Sharma's comments that terrorism is an issue that
needs careful attention. Following the devastating
bomb attack in Bali, this point does not need to be
belaboured. But let me underline that, as the region as a
whole redoubles its efforts to combat terror,
UNMISET, too, must examine carefully how it can
assist Timor-Leste to address this international scourge.

In the longer term, the United Nations, including
through the Counter-Terrorism Committee of the
Security Council, needs to consider how best to
coordinate and support donor efforts to strengthen and
develop Timor Leste's indigenous counter-terrorism
capabilities. In this context, I should like to record
Australia's appreciation for the professionalism and
cooperation we have received in recent times from
UNMISET, the Timor-Leste Police Service and the
Government of Timor-Leste, in responding to possible
terrorist threats.

We consider that assistance, with the
development of an effective general policing capability,
should be a high priority for UNMISET. We welcome
recent efforts in that area by UNMISET. The
appointment of a training adviser for the United
Nations civilian police and the Timor-Leste Police
Service and the planned joint needs assessment mission
should help encourage a more strategic and coordinated
approach to strengthening the police. This is crucial,
and it will have Australia's support.

Closely related to the strengthening of the police
is the development of effective border controls.
Building capacity in this area goes directly to
UNMISET's core security mandate. A porous border
could exacerbate internal security problems and
undermine regional and global efforts against terrorism
and other transborder security challenges.

The need for greater attention to the justice sector
is widely acknowledged. I will not go through the
details, which are clearly set out in the Secretary-
General's report. Suffice it to say that more effort is
required to foster efficient and professionally
functioning courts and a prison system. Practical
solutions will be important. In that context, we also
note the importance of the United Nations supporting
the work of the Serious Crimes Unit.

Capacity limitations in the justice sector are only
one of many that Timor-Leste's administration faces.
Building up Timor-Leste's administrative and
governance capabilities presents a substantial ongoing
challenge and underlines the wisdom of the decision in
resolution 1410 (2002) to help Timor-Leste in those
areas. Such assistance is, of course, not simply the
responsibility of UNMISET. Bilateral and multilateral
support remains vital. Australia encourages that,
including through donors meeting their pledges in a
timely way.

Let me conclude by congratulating Ambassador
Sharma and UNMISET on the excellent start they have
made in partnership with the Government of Timor-
Leste. It is true, as Australia has often said, that the
United Nations involvement in Timor-Leste has shown
the Organization at its best. Australia, for its part,
remains committed to assisting Timor-Leste, including
through UNMISET, as best it can.

