Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the Russian
Federation for calling for this meeting. We are once
again very grateful to Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for his briefing. We reiterate our appreciation
to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
for continuing to provide assistance to millions of
Syrians in difficult circumstances. We welcome the
fact that the United Nations was able to conduct its
first humanitarian assessment mission in Raqqa on
1 April, after the defeat of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.

As mentioned by the Under-Secretary-General, the
destruction of infrastructure, in addition to very limited
public services, such as electricity and the sewage
system, continue to be the major challenging features
of the city. Moreover, the prevalence of land mines and
explosives, which have continued to cause the deaths
and injuries of civilians, poses a significant concern.
That makes a safe return to the city a major challenge,
although civilians continue to return. Demining efforts
should be further strengthened and restoring normal
life in the city should be the priority.

In that regard, we are encouraged that the United
Nations is now preparing to deliver aid, and we hope
that the returnees will receive humanitarian assistance
in complement to the aid programmes. It is also
imperative to deliver aid to all parts of the country. As
the humanitarian crisis in Syria remains a source of
deep concern, we reiterate that it is vital to ensure safe,
unhindered and regular humanitarian access to allow
the United Nations and its partners to reach those in
need of life-saving assistance throughout Syria.

In that regard, we underscorethe importance of the
full implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), which
the Council adopted unanimously. We believe that to
contribute to the alleviation of the ongoing suffering of
the people of Syria, the Council should restore its unity
through genuine and productive dialogue.

Finally, we fully endorse what the Ambassador of
Equatorial Guinea stated with regard to the statement
issued by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the situation in Syria.

