Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
would like to thank Lord Ashdown and Minister Colak
for their briefings to the Council.

We welcome the many positive developments that
have occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The creation
of the War Crimes Chamber is a significant step
forward in strengthening the rule of law. The return of
the one-millionth refugee and the near completion of
the implementation of property law mark important
milestones in the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Accords. Progress towards implementing a single
indirect tax administration and value added tax
throughout the country will have significant economic
benefits. Additional progress in defence reform has
brought membership in NATO's Partnership for Peace
closer. Importantly, in all of those areas, the State and
entity governments are taking on greater responsibility
and ownership, allowing the international community
to scale back its involvement.

In the 10 years since the end of the war, the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have accomplished
a great deal - more than most would have dared to
predict in 1995. Few would have imagined 10 years
ago, however, that so many years after the war, the
obligations to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) would still be unmet.

The first steps towards cooperation by the
authorities in Republika Srpska are welcome. The
voluntary surrender of indictees from Republika Srpska
marks the first time authorities there have cooperated
in bringing to justice an ICTY indictee. Much more,
however, is required. As called for in numerous
Security Council resolutions, all persons indicted by
the ICTY must be arrested and surrendered to the court
in The Hague, particularly Radovan Karadzic, Ratko
Mladic and Ante Gotovina.

Close to 10 years after the end of the war, it is
time to resolve that issue and put the past to rest.
Former United States Secretary of State John Foster
Dulles once said, "The measure of success is not
whether you have a tough problem to deal with, but
whether it is the same problem you had last year".
Bosnia and Herzegovina has faced this problem year
after year. It is not a problem that will go away, but one
that will exact a higher and higher cost the longer it
remains unaddressed.

We commend the High Representative for his
actions to identify and penalize individuals and
organizations supporting war criminals. The political
leaders of Republika Srpska are obliged to take action
to arrest persons indicted for war crimes, as are all
leaders in the region. It should not fall to the High
Representative to compel action, but in the absence of
sufficient action by Republika Srpska's leaders, and in
the light of the damage their inaction causes ordinary
citizens, he is left with little choice.

Hard work and difficult decisions have brought
Bosnia and Herzegovina close to realizing its twin
goals of membership in the NATO Partnership for
Peace and membership in the European Union. Only by
meeting the ICTY obligations, however, including the
apprehension of Radovan Karadzic and other fugitives,
can those goals be realized. We welcome the steps
taken by the leaders of Republika Srpska towards
meeting ICTY obligations and encourage them to
finish the job.

I would also like to commend NATO and the
European Union for the successful handover from
NATO's Stabilization Force (SFOR) to the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) in December
of last year. That successful transfer and the efficient
current operations of EUFOR and the new NATO
headquarters in Sarajevo are commendable.

Finally, in June 2004 the Security Council issued
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2004/22) calling on
all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that
the police certification decisions made by the United
Nations International Police Task Force during its
mandate in Bosnia and Herzegovina are fully and
effectively implemented. So far that action has not
been taken. We call on the relevant authorities to
complete that task and expect them to do so.

