Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian): At the very beginning of our work in the
Council on this matter, we started with the need to
ensure that international inspectors be sent to Iraq as
soon as possible, responding to the clearly stated
consent by Baghdad to the inspection and monitoring
activities of UNMOVIC and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq, without preconditions.

Sharing the concern of all members of the
Security Council and the heads of UNMOVIC and
IAEA to ensure the most effective inspection activity
possible, our delegation participated constructively in
work on additional procedures for inspections that
would ensure there would be no resumption of Iraqi
programmes for weapons of mass destruction and at the
same time would create the conditions for a
comprehensive settlement of the situation around Iraq,
including the lifting of sanctions.

At all stages of this work, we were guided by the
need to direct the process of a settlement onto a
diplomatic and political path and not to allow a
military scenario. As a result of intensive negotiations,
the resolution just adopted contains no provisions for
the automatic use of force. It is important that the
resolution's sponsors today officially confirmed in the
Security Council that that is their understanding and
that they provided an assurance that the resolution's
objective is the implementation of existing Security
Council decisions concerning Iraq through inspections
by the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That is
an objective shared by all members of the Council.

In that connection, it is of fundamental
importance that the resolution clearly confirms that all
Members of the United Nations respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq and of all other States in
the region. It is also confirms the need for full
implementation of resolution 1382 (2001), whereby
members of the Security Council undertook to seek a
comprehensive settlement of the Iraq problem, which
assumes the lifting of sanctions.

In addition, we note that the new resolution
contains strengthened inspection procedures, which are
necessary only to hasten attainment of the goal of non-
resumption of Iraqi programmes relating to weapons of
mass destruction. Those procedures will be
implemented by the heads of UNMOVIC and of the
IAEA, fully mindful of their responsibility, which
requires professionalism, objectivity and impartiality.

The resolution's wording is not ideal - a fact
that the sponsors themselves acknowledge - but that
reflects the very complicated nature of the compromise
that was reached. The Russian Federation made a
choice based on principle to support the resolution,
guided by its special responsibility, as a permanent
member of the Security Council, for the maintenance
of international peace and security. What is most
important is that the resolution deflects the direct threat
of war and that it opens the road towards further work
in the interests of a political diplomatic settlement.

It is particularly important that - as many of my
colleagues have said today - in the event of any kind
of disagreement over disarmament matters, it is the
heads of UNMOVIC and of the IAEA who will report
that to the Security Council, and that it is the Council
that will consider the situation that has developed. That
is the sequence set forth clearly in paragraphs 4, 11 and
12 of the resolution.

We also note the following clarifying points,
presented by the sponsors when they introduced the
resolution and confirmed by the heads of UNMOVIC
and of the IAEA.

First of all, with regard to paragraph 3, more than
30 days will probably be needed for Iraq to submit
information on non-military programmes in the
chemical and biological areas. However, any delay
there will not constitute a violation.

Concerning paragraph 7, nothing in the resolution
affects the status of UNMOVIC, of the IAEA or of
members of their staff, as independent international
personnel. The cooperation of Member States with
UNMOVIC and with the IAEA will be carried out fully
in accordance with the status and mandates of those
organizations.

Paragraph 8 refers to personnel of the United
Nations, to those of the IAEA and to any other
personnel whom Members of the United Nations may
provide to UNMOVIC or to the IAEA on the request of
those organizations.

Like all other members of the Security Council,
we join in the appeal made today by the Secretary-
General on the need for Iraq to comply with all of its
disarmament commitments and to cooperate fully with
the inspectors of UNMOVIC and of the IAEA, on the
basis of the resolution adopted today and Baghdad's
declared willingness to cooperate. We note the
important role that has been played and continues to be
played by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
by the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
and by members of the League in ensuring a
comprehensive political settlement of the situation
concerning Iraq.
Implementation of the resolution will require
goodwill on the part of all those involved in the
process of seeking a settlement of the Iraq question.
They must have the willingness to concentrate on
moving forward towards the declared common goals,
not yielding to the temptation of unilateral
interpretation of the resolution's provisions and
preserving the consensus and unity of all members of
the Security Council.

