Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to resolutely condemn the attacks
against the United Nations that took place this morning
in Mogadishu. On behaf of my country, I wish to convey
our deepest sympathies to those affected by the attacks
and to their families.

Referring to natural resources as a curse may seem
paradoxical and even cynical. But there is no denying
the fact that the Earth's greatest natural wealth is often
found side by side with great human misery. The fight
over natural resources is often the trigger for and a cause
of conflicts, while the exploitation of natural resources
is a source of funds that can prolong conflicts. I would
therefore like to thank the United Kingdom's presidency
of the Security Council for this important debate.

We agree with those who say that the legal,
transparent and sustainable management of natural
resources is essential to preventing conflict and
safeguarding human rights. Furthermore, the equitable
distribution of revenue from the exploitation of and
trade in natural resources can contribute sustainably to
human well-being, stability and peacebuilding.

The main responsibility in that respect lies with
those States on whose territory natural resources are
being extracted. But the United Nations and donors
can also play a role by assisting the States concerned,
at their request, on the basis of full respect for their
sovereignty. Such support can take various forms, from
strengthening governmental capacities and institutions
to consolidating the rule of law in fragile States and in
post-conflict situations.

A significant number of missions mandated by
the Security Council, along with country teams, are
operating in countries where extractive industries play
a major economic role. It is therefore essential that such
United Nations mandates take due account of the link
between conflict and natural resources and facilitate
our efforts to help national Governments to manage
their extractive industries. Given its composition, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission seems to
us to be an institution ideally suited to promoting a
management of natural resources that takes due account
of conflicts.

It is just as important that private-sector actors,
particularly multinational companies involved in
large-scale projects in fragile environments, adopt
approaches that take account of conflict and human
rights. All stakeholders - the Governments of the host
countries and of countries where mining companies
are headquartered, international organizations, private
enterprise and civil society - must bear their share
of responsibility. Switzerland expects that those
international companies that are headquartered there
will comply with the legal provisions currently in force,
meet their human rights due-diligence obligations and
refrain from contributing to conflicts. That applies in
particular to complex environments where the rule of
law remains insufficiently developed and to conflict
zones.

To that end, Switzerland is committed to the
promotion of United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights. It is an active participant
in international initiatives and certification processes,
such as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, of which Switzerland is a Board member, the
Kimberley Process, and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development Due Diligence Guidance
for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals from
Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas.

Switzerland is convinced that partnerships among
the various stakeholders - Governments, the private
sector and civil society - are pivotal and calls on those
countries that do not yet participate in such partnerships
to join them.

Switzerland currently holds the chairmanship of
the initiative on Voluntary Principles on Security and
Human Rights, aimed at companies that are active
in the extractive and energy sectors, and is working
to strengthen its implementation. We believe that the
Voluntary Principles can play a key role in preventing
conflicts linked to the exploitation of natural resources
by encouraging companies to analyse risks and enter
into a genuine dialogue with communities, local
authorities, and public and private security forces.

We encourage the Council to continue its
deliberations on the available instruments for the
sustainable management of natural resources by
focusing on the issues of transparency and compliance
with human rights in the exploitation of and trade in
natural resources.

