Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Let me say at the outset
that Japan would like to express its deepest concern
over the violence that erupted last month in Kosovo. To
aid us in understanding why this occurred once again,
despite all the international efforts that have been made
to create stability and bring life there back to normal,
we hope that, in his next report, the Secretary-General
will provide us with a comprehensive evaluation of the
incidents and an assessment of measures taken by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) during the violence, perhaps
building upon today's substantial briefing by
Mr. Guehenno.

Japan wishes to make two points about the
violence in Kosovo, which, it believes, should be
seriously considered by all members of the
international community.

First, the most important lesson we learned from
the violence is the need for redoubled efforts towards
the establishment of a multi-ethnic society; there is no
alternative to the implementation of the Kosovo
standards in reaching this goal. We express our support
for UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in the implementation of its standards and
appeal to the international community to express its
support for the recently publicized Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan.

Secondly, the violence demonstrated the
increased need for security in Kosovo. My Government
expresses support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Harri Holkeri, UNMIK and KFOR
in their strengthened efforts to stabilize the situation
immediately after the violence. At the same time, on
the basis of the assessment of the measures taken by
UNMIK before the violence, we need to give serious
thought to how we can improve the security situation in
a sustainable manner. One of the most immediate tasks
should be upgrading the Kosovo security organizations,
including the training of police officers. Japan has been
cooperating with the United Nations Development
Programme through the Illicit Small Arms Control
Programme and the Trust Fund for Human Security and
calls on all Member States to join us in similar efforts.

On 5 April, Japan hosted in Tokyo the Ministerial
Conference on Peace Consolidation and Economic
Development of the Western Balkans. Kosovo was one
of the most important issues discussed. Many of the
participants condemned the recent violence, urged that
steps be taken to prevent ethnically-motivated violence
and expressed support for the restoration of the security
situation by UNMIK and KFOR and for the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan. These remarks were
reflected in the Joint Conclusions of the Conference.

For its part, my Government intends to adhere to
its commitment to achieving stability and prosperity in
South-Eastern Europe, in cooperation with the rest of
the international community. It is our firm belief that
stabilizing the situation in Kosovo is essential to the
stability of the entire region.

