Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): As
this is my first formal opportunity to do so, Sir, I wish
you every success in the presidency and promise you
the full support of the United Kingdom. Like previous
speakers, I am very grateful for the briefings that we
have received.

We very much welcome the decision to convene
this meeting. The need to do so was reinforced for
those members of the Security Council who saw the
substantial and courageous work being done in Kabul
last week to get rid of the scourge of landmines in
Afghanistan. Today's speakers have eloquently
demonstrated that mine action plays a key role in
underpinning peace processes and in assisting countries
emerging from conflict by overcoming a serious and
truly substantial risk to the whole process of post-
conflict reconstruction.

The political, economic and psychological
impacts of buried mines are very substantial. But, with
approximately 15,000 to 20,000 landmine casualties
each year, we clearly have a collective responsibility to
take action and achieve effective, durable results. So it
is reassuring to note today that there has been
significant progress since the Council last considered
this issue, in 1996. In particular, we have the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) and a mine
action policy which outlines the key principles of
United Nations mine action - principles which have
become the United Nations Mine Action Strategy for
2001-2005. In addition, thanks to our Canadian friends,
the Ottawa Convention was a major step forward. And
there have been other significant innovations, including
the establishment of the Information Management
System for Mine Action, which we heard about earlier;
the United Nations operational framework for rapid
response; and the Mine Action Guidelines for Ceasefire
and Peace Agreements, as well as the work of the New
York-based Mine Action Support Group, under the
dedicated leadership of Germany, aimed at improving
coordination of donor mine action activity.

We welcome - and indeed support - all those
developments. They have helped to create a more
strategic, systematic and coordinated response to mine
action issues at the national and global levels. But
those strategic developments must crucially relate to
activities on the ground, and it is very welcome that
mine action is being effectively integrated, or
mainstreamed, as part of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and mandates. As Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno recognized, peacekeeping and confidence-
building are benefiting from mine action.

To give a few examples, the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea was the first occasion
on which a mine-action coordination centre was
established as an integral component of a United
Nations peacekeeping mission. We were pleased to
contribute towards that effort by training Kenyan
peacekeeping troops to conduct demining activities to
International Mine Action Standards. Again, as the
Under-Secretary-General pointed out, that training is
basic to empowering peacekeepers,

The establishment of a United Nations mine-
action coordination centre within the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), helped facilitate
the effective cooperation and collaboration between the
Lebanese national demining office and United Nations
agencies, including UNIFIL. The result: dramatic
progress, with over 33,000 anti-personnel mines
cleared ahead of schedule.

The emphasis placed by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on clearing key strategic areas to increase
the capability of the United Nations has resulted in the
clearing of roads, airfields and civic areas, which has
benefited the local population.

Those examples demonstrate the benefits that
mine action can bring as part of a peacekeeping
operation, especially in terms of peace-building and
post-conflict recovery and reconstruction. Those
benefits include improved safety and security of United
Nations workers, peacekeepers and affected
populations, improved delivery of humanitarian
assistance and access to vulnerable populations. Such
action improves the environment for the safe return of
refugees and improves opportunities through the
availability of mine-risk education, thus enabling
populations to better cope with the risks and to assist
those that fall victim to mines. It should also bring
improved employment and income opportunities
through the restoration of land for productive use.
Improved economic development and opportunity to
progress will contribute towards the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. Underpinning that is
the psychological gain of removing an uncertain but
real humanitarian threat to the population.

The wide range of benefits to be gained from
mine action in the context of peacekeeping operations
and the wide range of stakeholders involved in the
process highlight the need for effective coordination at
all levels. The United Nations Mine Action Service is
uniquely placed to perform that task, which is why the
United Kingdom is committed to supporting its
coordination role. We currently provide $16 million of
annual funding in support of mine-action activities,
most of which is channelled through the United
Nations. I think that $1.5 million of that goes to
support the important work of the Geneva Centre,
about which we heard earlier.

Finally, the United Kingdom looks forward to the
completion of an agreed presidential statement, which
is under preparation at the moment. It will be important
in terms of highlighting the key issues associated with
mine action for peacekeeping operations, assessing the
progress we have made so far and identifying the way
in which we can work together to move this agenda
forward and tackle the large number of problems that
remain.

