Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the convening of this debate
at a decisive moment for the future of the Government
and people of Haiti and for the definition of the United
Nations presence in the country. Ten years following
the establishment of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and four after the
devastating earthquake that had tragic humanitarian,
political and economic consequences in Haiti, we now
see important advances in security, stability, political
dialogue and the rule of law. This progress could not
have been achieved without the presence MINUSTAH
and the support of the United Nations and other
international organizations. It is clear that the strategy
of addressing the challenges of security, development
and human rights on parallel tracks, as has been
pursued since 2004, has been decisive in the restoration
of stability and reconstruction of Haiti.

The Government of Mexico welcomes the positive
assessment of the political process offered in the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2014/162), arising
from the adoption of the electoral law and the beginning
of direct dialogue between the executive branch,
Parliament and the political parties. These agreements
are essential to the ongoing creation of an enabling
environment for the elections this year and presidential
elections in 2015. A peaceful transition of power as a
result of free elections, coupled with the institutional
strengthening of the Haitian Government, would be
important to consolidating democracy in the country. It
is crucial to maintain the support Haiti will need in this
period so as to bring to fruition the efforts being made
by the Haitians and the international community.

My country has supported Haiti in strengthening
and professionalizing its electoral institutions. At the
request of the Electoral Council , the Mexican Federal
Electoral Institute has provided technical assistance in
various areas, and in the coming months will dispatch
a mission to develop, jointly with the authorities of
that country. a collaborative programme on electoral
matters.

Although the Secretary-General reports significant
progress on the humanitarian front over the past year,
we are concerned about the persistence of the high
number of cases of cholera; this crisis has already
claimed the lives of 8,500 persons. Mexico hopes that
the implementation of the humanitarian action plan for
Haiti in 2014 and the National Plan for the Elimination
of Cholera in Haiti, with the support of the United
Nations system and other international partners, will
help to address the needs related to the epidemic and
to reduced rates of infection. We are convinced that
these efforts should be part ofa strategy that addresses
poverty and development challenges simultaneously
and strengthens food security, nutrition and disaster
preparedness. Mexico is commited to that task. We
will continue to promote actions in the priority areas of
development cooperation, established with the Haitian
Government, in agriculture, education, socioeconomic
development, the environment, health and democracy.

The distance covered in the past decade by Haiti and
the international community reflects the progress made
in the priority areas of stabilization, the MINUSTAH
consolidation plan, and the professionalization of the
Haitian National Police. As the Secretary-General
notes, challenges remain to be addressed in order to
ensure that the national authorities can progressively
assume greater responsibility in establishing the rule
of law and the preparation of the coming elections. It
is essential that MINUSTAH enjoy the resources to
address these challenges.

Mexico hopes that the MINUSTAH consolidation
plan will lead to a successful transition process, with
the ultimate departure of the Mission once it has
met its objectives of maintaining stability and long-
term development in Haiti. It is essential to sustain a
gradual and planned approach to the reconfiguration
of MINUSTAH in 2016, pursuant to resolution 2119
(2013). An abrupt, unplanned withdrawal of the Mission
could generate a recurrence of the crisis and political
instability of incalculable consequences.

On behalf of my delegation, I recognize the efforts
of the men and women deployed in MINUSTAH, who, in
cooperation with the Haitian Government, are working
to lay the foundations for a prosperous and peaceful
Haiti. The legacy of the MINUSTAH is tangible. The
country today is not what it was between 2004 to 2010.
Let us bring our common efforts to fruition and make
Haiti another success story for the Council, for the
Organization and particularly for the Haitian people.

