Mrs. Haley (United States of America): First,
I would like to thank our new colleague from cote
d'lvoire. We are very excited to have Ambassador
Adorn with us and look forward to working with him.
We welcome him.

I take the floor before the vote because we have
reached a critical moment. The people of South Sudan
have endured unimaginable suffering and unspeakable
atrocities. Their leaders have failed them. They are
desperate to get the most basic food, medicine and
shelter, but above all, they just want the Violence to
stop. Anyone who has been to South Sudan knows that.
The stories of the victims haunt us. One 14-year-old
girl from Leer county in South Sudan recently put it
like this:

"All the violence I have witnessed is something I
can never forget. How can I forget the sight of an
old man whose throat was slit with a knife before
being set on fire? How can I forget the smell of
those decomposed bodies of old men and children
peeked and eaten by birds? How can I forget those
women who were hanged and died up in the tree?"

This girl is 14-years-old. She will never forget the
atrocities she witnessed, and neither can we.
We can do more than just sit here and listen to these
horror stories. We can do more than just express our
sympathy with empty words. We can take action.

Today, the United States has introduced a draft
resolution (S/2018/69l) that would impose an arms
embargo and new sanctions against some of the people
responsible for the violence. The goal of the draft
resolution is simple. If we are going to help the people
of South Sudan, we need the violence to stop, and to
stop the violence we need to stop the flow of weapons
that armed groups are using to fight each other and
terrorize the people. We must stop the weapons and stop
the violence. This is a draft resolution that everyone on
the Security Council should support.

Sadly, the idea of an arms embargo for South Sudan
is not a new one. In 2016, the United States proposed
it. We certainly should have imposed the embargo at
that time and probably a lot earlier, but the proposal
failed. We can only imagine how many weapons have
made their way to parties in South Sudan since then and
how many more people have had to die. These are the
weapons that armed groups use to shoot fathers in front
of their wives and children, to hold up convoys of food
aid or to assault women and girls. The Security Council
had an opportunity to help put a stop to this, but we
failed. We carry that burden with us.

The United States is determined that we will not
turn our backs on people of South Sudan again. We
have tried everything to achieve a real ceasefire in
South Sudan. We have given the parties many chances
to change their behaviour, and it is impossible to keep
track. We have waited and waited for negotiations to
make a difference. Time passes but the fighting in
South Sudan never stops.

The United Nations recently came out with a report
that looked at the violence in just one state of South
Sudan in the briefperiod from 16 April to 24 May ofthis
year. Over those six weeks, the United Nations found
that armed forces had attacked 40 villages; 120 women
and girls were raped or gang-raped; 232 civilians were
killed, including 35 children; 25 people were killed by
hanging; 63 children, elderly persons and people with
disabilities were burned alive. Armed groups in South
Sudan are literally burning people alive and hanging
them from trees. This is barbaric, and again all of this
violence happened over a period of just six weeks in
one state.
The irony in this context is that all of this fighting
took place after the parties signed the cessation of
hostilities agreement in December. Every few months,
it seems, we see announcements that the parties have
agreed to a new ceasefire. Sometimes they even call
these ceasefires "permanent". These ceasefires have
never held. The only certainty about a ceasefire in
South Sudan is that the parties will violate them in a
few hours.

So the issue before us today is quite simple. Why
would we possibly want to give the people responsible
for this madness more weapons? Why would we give
the parties more opportunities to attack the people of
South Sudan? How do we explain to the people of South
Sudan that we are willing to let their tormentors get
new weapons? More arms for South Sudan cannot be
the answer.

We have heard the argument that an arms embargo
might undermine the peace process. To be clear, the
United States supports the peace process in South
Sudan. We want nothing more than to see this dialogue
work out. The arms embargo is a measure to protect
civilians and help stop the violence. For negotiations to
work, we must end the cycle of broken promises to stick
to the ceasefire. Peace in South Sudan will not come
by letting the parties get their hands on more weapons.
The opposite is true. Supporting an arms embargo will
show the parties that we are fed up with the delays and
the stalling. It will show our resolve to make life better
for the people of South Sudan.

For too long, the Security Council has failed these
people. We failed to impose an arms embargo years ago
when we could have helped prevent so much suffering.
We have failed to stop the fighting. We have failed to
hold South Sudan's leaders accountable for the misery
they have caused. But today we can and we must defy
this history. We can come together to show South
Sudan that the era of impunity is over. We can show
the world that the Security Council will live up to its
responsibility to help maintain international peace and
security. Above all, we can send a small signal of hope
to the people of South Sudan. By adopting the draft
resolution, we can stand in solidarity with them and at
long last show that we are able to help.

The United States urges all members of the
Security Council to do what is right for the people of
South Sudan. We urge them to vote in favour of this
draft resolution.

