Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to extend my condolences to
the Afghan people on the passing ofFirst Vice-President
Mohammed Qasim Fahim, an exemplary Afghan leader
who was known for his conciliatory approach and
bridge-building capabilities.

Afghanistan stands at a crucial crossroads, with
key political, security and economic transformation
processes under way. The coming months, especially
after the 5 April presidential and provincial elections,
will have an enormous impact on the way in which the
next decade will unfold.

Resolution 2145 (2014), on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), arrives
at a timely moment, when change and uncertainty
dominate the Afghanistan agenda. Maintaining
the comprehensive UNAMA mandate will provide
tangible assurance of the United Nations continued
assistance to the Afghan Government and people.
We believe that Afghanistan's future should be based
on a conscious strategy drawing strength from local
ownership and seeking to pull together various efforts
into a meaningful whole. That understanding is fully
reflected in the resolution.

Despite significant improvements in health,
education, development, infrastructure and human
rights, Afghanistan will continue to need the support
of the international community for many years to come.

Security, accessibility and inclusiveness will be
the three grave challenges of the upcoming elections.
Following the elections, security threats are likely to
continue and even increase in the short run. Meanwhile,
good governance, aid transparency and combating
corruption will need to be prioritized, in line with
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, while
agreements on legal frameworks to define the nature of
the international community's military assistance will
need to be drawn up. The tasks that the newly elected
Government will face are daunting in nature.

At this vital juncture, the international community
should continue investing in positive scenarios for
the future of the country. In the short run, that entails
the successful conduct of the April elections and the
preservation of the current level of security. More
crucially, perceptions of a power vacuum that could
be filled by terrorist or organized crime groups must
be broken. International support to capacity-building
and good governance must continue. In addition, we
must continue to support responses to the humanitarian
challenges faced.

We fully support the human rights mandate of
UNAMA. Addressing matters involving grave human
rights violations, particularly violence against women
and girls, and the issue of civilian casualties should
be prioritized, in both the short- and the long-term.
Local ownership of human rights matters is essential to
ensuring durable solutions in that area.

As the fifty-eighth session of the Commission on
the Status of Women took place last week, I would like
to extend my great appreciation to the Afghan officials
and human rights defenders who face daily threats and
challenges in their work to enhance the human rights of
Afghan women and girls.

There is heightened awareness of Afghanistan's
problems among its regional partners, as well as
increased ownership. The Istanbul Process maintains
a comprehensive regional approach on integrating
Afghanistan into the region and facing regional
challenges as a whole, and therefore reflects that spirit.
We look forward to the next Istanbul Process ministerial
meeting in China. We also continue to support all
trilateral, quadrilateral and multilateral initiatives
aimed at the well-being of the Afghan people. In that
context, the most recent trilateral dialogue among
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey that took place on
12 and 13 February, in Ankara, has been useful and
successful.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong support
of the crucial role that the United Nations will continue
to play during and post transition. Our commitment to
the needs of the United Nations regarding Afghanistan
will serve as insurance in protecting the achievements
of the past 13 years on the ground.

I would particularly like to commend the valuable
efforts of the United Nations and of UNAMA, which
should be supported with sufficient means and
resources.

I would like to take this opportunity to extend my
heartfelt condolences to the families and colleagues of
all victims of the heinous terrorist attack in Kabul in
January, among which there were UNAMA personnel
who lost their lives working for peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

Turkey will remain in solidarity with the Afghan
people and will continue to contribute to a safe, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan, as we have done for many
decades.

