Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea):
Mr. President, allow me first to convey my delegation's
appreciation to you for holding today's open debate on
the important issue of small arms and light weapons. I
would also like to join other delegations in
commending the Secretary-General for his efforts to
address this issue. My delegation fully supports the
recommendations contained in his report, and the
Republic of Korea is committed to their
implementation.

The first Review Conference of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects will be held in June this year. The Conference
will be an important opportunity to look back on what
has been achieved since the adoption of the Programme
of Action in 2001 and to look closely into what
remains to be done.

There have been some important
accomplishments, including the adoption of the
International Instrument on the marking and tracing of
small arms and light weapons and the entry into force
of the United Nations Firearms Protocol. Those steps,
however, must be seen as a good beginning to a long
journey. It is time for us to renew our commitment to
fighting the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, which brings tremendous suffering to
millions of innocent civilians while undermining
peace, safety, security and development throughout the
world.

With this in mind, I would like to address some
of the issues raised by the report of the Secretary-
General.

First, my delegation believes that the Security
Council should play a more active role in our concerted
efforts to curb the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. To date, the Council has shown a steady
determination to deal with this issue, and we are
pleased to note the Council's progress in reflecting the
Secretary-General's recommendations in its
deliberations and decisions. We believe that the
Security Council can make further efforts to strengthen
the monitoring systems for its arms embargoes.

Another key area to be emphasized is the
continuing incorporation of comprehensive
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes into peacekeeping operations. We support
the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
Security Council explicitly articulate a DDR plan in
the mandate of each peacekeeping operation. We
expect that the new Peacebuilding Commission will
play an important part in this endeavour.

Secondly, particular attention should be paid to
illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons,
which continues to undermine compliance with the
Security Council's arms embargoes. As the Secretary-
General rightly points out in his report, regarding
recommendation 4, international efforts to control
illicit brokering should be strengthened. My delegation
fully supports a broader and more effective approach to
prevent illicit brokering and welcomes the
establishment of a group of governmental experts to
review this issue. My delegation is also pleased to note
that the Government of the Republic of Korea added
clauses to its Defence Acquisition Program Act in
January 2006 to regulate arms brokering.

Thirdly, the establishment of effective legal systems
and relevant administrative measures at the State level is
critical. These should include the use of authenticated
end-user certificates, with a view to ensuring effective
control over the production and trade of small arms and
light weapons. For our part, the Republic of Korea has
established and implemented legislative and
administrative measures to control the military and
non-military use of small arms and light weapons in
every phase of their existence, from manufacturing to
storage, management, transfer and dismantlement.

Fourthly, transparency is indispensable if States
are to work together in a spirit of cooperation and trust
in order to overcome the challenge of the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons. We therefore call
upon those States that have not participated in the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms and the
United Nations Standardized Instrument for Reporting
Military Expenditures to do so without delay. We
believe that the Secretary-General's suggestion to
expand the Register to include international transfers
of small arms and light weapons deserves positive
consideration.

Lastly, my delegation believes that progress on
the issue of small arms and light weapons can be
significantly enhanced through increased public
awareness. Combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons requires the collective will not just
of States and the international community, but also of
individual citizens. Public understanding of what is at
stake can help to create the political will necessary for
success. Similarly, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and civil society have an important role to
play in dealing with this issue. My delegation therefore
hopes that the review conference will give due
attention to heightening public awareness and
enhancing collaborative efforts with NGOs and civil
society.

