Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank Special Envoy Ismail Ould Sheikh Ahmed and
Director John Ging for their briefings. I wish especially
to thank Special Envoy Ahmed for the unrelenting
efforts he has made over the past three years to
facilitate the political process in Yemen. He has been
fulfilling a daunting task in difficult circumstances and
his efforts have been apparent to everyone. We note our
highest regard for him and wish him every success in
his future endeavours.

The situation in Yemen further deteriorated of
late. The political process is stalled, military conflict
continues, and the humanitarian crisis has deepened.
China finds the current situation disturbing and calls
on the international community to step up mediation
efforts, encourage the parties to agree on a ceasefire,
return to the political track and achieve peace, security
and stability at an early date.

China welcomed the Council's unanimous adoption
yesterday of resolution 2402 (2018), renewing the
mandate of the Yemen sanctions regime and its Panel
of Experts for another year, which should facilitate the
international community's efforts to promote peace,
and which is consonant with the interests of Yemen and
the other countries of the region. China has consistently
held an objective and impartial position on Yemen,
with no self-interested motives. We support Yemen's
unity, sovereignty, security and territorial integrity,
and we believe that a political settlement is the only
way for it to achieve lasting peace. We call on the
parties to support the mediation efforts of the United
Nations and - based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its implementation mechanism, and the outcome
documents of the National Dialogue Conference - to
find an inclusive solution as soon as possible through
dialogue and negotiations.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin
Griffiths as the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and hope that all the parties will support his
mediation work and step up their efforts to promote
peace talks. We urge them to break the political
stalemate as soon as possible and to return to dialogue
and negotiations to resolve their differences. The
international community and the countries of the region
should provide constructive assistance in that regard.

China has noted the gravity of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. With the ongoing cholera outbreak
and millions of Yemenis facing the imminent threat of
a serious famine, we fear for the country's suffering
people. The international community should increase
its humanitarian assistance with a view to alleviating
the suffering on the ground. We will continue to
provide the Yemeni people with aid to the extent we are
able, through both bilateral and multilateral channels.
Ensuring unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
will be crucial to alleviating the situation on the ground.
The parties concerned should make concerted efforts
to provide safe, secure and unhindered humanitarian
access in order to help create the conditions needed to
ease the humanitarian situation on the ground.

