Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia, as well as Moldova, align
themselves with this declaration.

First of all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. The European Union
commends the Security Council mission to
Timor-Leste, led by Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo,
and welcomes the comprehensive report on its
findings. We believe that the mission was successful in
identifying the various unresolved challenges that
Timor-Leste needs to address in order to achieve
stability and prosperity.

We are also pleased that the mission had the
opportunity to hear the views of the main political
interlocutors - namely, the President, the Prime Minister,
Government officials and opposition leaders - as well as
representatives of civil society, including the church and
non-governmental organizations, of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and of
other United Nations agencies on the ground. We
appreciate the valuable work of UNMIT and, in
particular, of Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste.

The European Union welcomes the progress
achieved in recent months. The successfully conducted
presidential and parliamentary elections held in April,
May and June of this year with high voter participation
were a significant step in the process of strengthening
democratic institutions in Timor-Leste.

However, as the report of the mission to Timor-
Leste acknowledges, some of the root causes of the
2006 crisis and its consequences have not yet been
solved. The European Union recognizes critical
political, security, socio-economic and humanitarian
challenges that need to be tackled.

At the political level, the European Union
encourages the current Government and the opposition
leaders to pursue political dialogue in order to rebuild
mutual confidence and achieve national reconciliation
in Timor-Leste. Furthermore, it is essential to solve the
Petitioners' issue in a peaceful manner and to bring to
justice the group of former military who deserted the
National Defense Force.

The European Union also emphasizes the need to
restore confidence in the national defense and security
institutions, as well as in the judicial system, and
encourages the Government to implement the security
sector reform programme.

The humanitarian situation is another element of
concern for the European Union, because it threatens
the political and social stability of Timor-Leste. We
call on the Government to create, as its highest priority,
conditions for the return, resettlement and reintegration
of the internally displaced persons in their local
communities.
Additionally, the socio-economic challenges, like
poverty and unemployment, particularly among youth,
remain some of the major causes of instability
throughout the country.

As the report has highlighted, the European
Union recognizes that the future of the country lies in
the hands of the people and the Government of Timor-
Leste. Indeed, the efforts carried out in the country will
only be successful if the Timorese take measures and
find the solutions to their own challenges. Nonetheless,
the Government needs continued and sustained
assistance to overcome capacity shortcomings and
governance difficulties.

The European Union reiterates that the
involvement of the United Nations is vital for the
country's further stabilization and for helping the
Government to address the many unresolved questions
identified during the Security Council mission to
Timor-Leste. In this context, we support continued
United Nations engagement in Timor-Leste and a
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste beyond February
2008.

The European Union and its member States
remain fully committed to the consolidation of peace
and democracy in Timor-Leste. As an example, the
President of the European Commission, Jose Manuel
Barroso, visited Timor-Leste last month and announced
an additional €63 million aid package to assist projects
related to institutional capacity-building, including
support to the judiciary and the parliament, and to
health and rural development. The opening of a
European Community delegation in Dili in 2008 also
shows the continued support of the European Union for
the people of Timor-Leste.

The European Union is willing to continue to
cooperate closely with the United Nations and the
bilateral and multilateral donors on the ground, in
order to further consolidate peace and democracy in
Timor-Leste and to help the country to achieve
self-reliance.

Lastly, I would like to express that the European
Union is confident that the Government of
Timor-Leste, with the support of the United Nations
and the international community, will be able to
overcome the numerous challenges that it still faces.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hill
(Australia) took a seat at the Council table.
