Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the presidency of the Council for initiating
today's debate and for focusing the Security Council's
attention on the serious threat posed to international
peace and security by transnational crime. I am also
grateful to Mr. Costa for his informative and insightful
briefing this morning.

I want to focus on three points. First, the threat
posed by drug trafficking is real and it is global. The
United Kingdom, along with all other Member States,
has a responsibility to support work which reduces
both the demand for and the supply of drugs that are
doing so much harm to our families, communities and
societies. But the scale of the challenge means that we
require a coordinated response from the international
community, and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) is playing a vital role in this
regard.

I would like to highlight in particular UNODC's
important work in Afghanistan. The annual survey
released last year confirmed a 22 per cent reduction in
poppy cultivation in 2009. We agree with UNODC's
recent analysis that poppy cultivation is likely to
remain stable in 2010. This shows that effective global
and regional action to counter the threat of drug
trafficking is possible. But it also shows that there is no
room for complacency.

Secondly, the threat posed by drug trafficking is
one part of a broader challenge posed by international
crime. The United Kingdom deplores the growing
number of kidnappings and hostage-takings aimed at
raising funds or gaining political advantage, whether in
South Asia, Africa or Latin America. Last year, the
Economic and Social Council called for kidnappers to
be denied the benefit of substantive concessions. We
urge all Member States to heed this call, not to pay
ransoms, and thus deprive criminals and terrorists of a
Vital source of funding and political leverage. As many
colleagues have said this morning, the linkage of
conflict and terrorism to drugs and international crime
is clear.
We also need to see stronger national and
international action against the scourge of corruption.
The United Nations Convention against Corruption has
a Vital role to play. We encourage all States parties to
work together to ensure that the review mechanism
agreed in Doha last year is as effective as possible.

Thirdly, it is clear from our discussions today that
criminals and terrorists undermine stability and
security, as well as democratic institutions, in fragile
parts of the world. Countries in regions where the rule
of law is weak and where there is an underdeveloped
criminal justice system are particularly vulnerable to
these transnational threats. This underlines the
importance of coordinated international engagement,
often with a strong peacebuilding focus, to build
capacity in countries and regions most at risk. Time
and again, as we look at situations of recurring
conflict, we see that weak judicial systems and lack of
effective policing capacity are a big part of the
problem.

These are sensitive issues for all Governments.
There are no easy answers, but if transnational
criminals are agile and inventive, so must be the
response of the international community. We strongly
support the call in today's draft presidential statement
for the Secretary-General to consider these threats
when he is analyzing conflict situations and submitting
recommendations to the Security Council. I look
forward to further discussion of these issues in the
future in the Council.

