Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I would like to express my appreciation to
France for initiating this ministerial meeting of the
Security Council on counter-terrorism. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
statement. My thanks go also to Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing on the work of the Security
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Since
the attacks of 11 September 2001 positive results have
been achieved in the international fight against
terrorism. The CTC has made some progress in helping
States formulate anti-terrorism legislation and cut off
financial support to terrorists.

At the same time, the root causes of terrorism are
far from being eliminated. The terrorist acts carried out
last year on the Indonesian island of Bali, at a theatre
in Moscow and in Mombasa, Kenya, demonstrate that
much hard work remains to be done in the international
fight against terrorism. We must take stock of past
experiences in the fight against terrorism with a view
to maintaining momentum in strengthening
international cooperation to combat terrorism. For this
purpose, it is incumbent on the international
community to formulate a systematic counter-terrorism
strategy. In that connection, the Chinese Government
wishes to share with the Council the following views.

First, we must ensure that the central objective in
the fight against terrorism is the maintenance of peace
and security for mankind. It is imperative to foster a
new security concept that emphasizes mutual trust,
mutual benefit, equality and cooperation so as to create
a favourable broad environment in the fight against
terrorism. Solving hot-spot issues and easing tensions
in places such as the Middle East and Iraq will promote
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
All the measures, ways and means employed by the
international community must be conducive to the
relaxation of tensions on both the regional and the
international levels.

Secondly, we should conduct our counter-
terrorism campaign on the basis of promoting universal
development and prosperity for all. Only when we
succeed in achieving common development by helping
one another's economies can we eradicate once and for
all the root causes of terrorism. Only when we narrow
the gap between the rich and the poor and achieve
social justice can we remove the breeding ground of
terrorism. Only when we truly attain a global
development strategy that allows all to coexist and to
gain and share the benefits of prosperity can we deny
terrorism its last sanctuary. In this respect the early
attainment of all the development goals set forth in the
Millennium Declaration will be indispensable and
significant for promoting international cooperation on
counter-terrorism.

Thirdly, we should further enhance understanding
and integration among civilizations to guarantee the
broadest possible fight against terrorism. Terrorism is a
common enemy of all civilizations, ethnic groups and
religions. The fight against terrorism should provide
civilizations with a new opportunity to learn from one
another through mutual exchanges, a new starting point
for their dialogue and integration and a new engine for
their common progress and prosperity, rather than be a
cause of greater ethnic hatred, racial conflict, clashes
of civilizations or rifts between peoples. All countries
should strive to strengthen understanding and tolerance
among all civilizations and cultures.

Fourthly, we should promote further exchanges
and closer cooperation among nations, which is a key
to success in the fight against terrorism. Success in the
international campaign against terrorism requires
solidarity, cooperation and common action among
countries. There exists huge potential for the
international community to strengthen cooperation to
ensure safe aviation, safe maritime transportation and
network security. The success of this campaign also
depends on the leading role of the United Nations, with
the principles and purposes of the Charter and
universally recognized norms of international law as its
guidelines. We hope that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee will adopt more forceful measures in
helping developing countries enhance capacity-
building in countering terrorism and will support such
endeavours.

China attaches great importance to the fight
against terrorism. At the recent sixteenth National
Congress of the Communist Party of China, President
Jiang Zemin made an important statement that stressed
the importance of stronger international cooperation in
order to address both the symptoms and causes of
terrorism; guard against and crack down hard on
terrorist activities; and eliminate the roots of terrorism
through stepped-up efforts.

China has actively participated in the
international fight against terrorism. It has signed and
ratified almost all of the international conventions
against terrorism and cooperated with the countries
concerned.

China itself has been the victim of terrorism. East
Turkestan terror organizations have perpetrated
numerous terrorist attacks in China's Xinjiang region
and in neighbouring regions of Central Asia, posing a
serious threat to peace and security in those areas. In
September last year, the Security Council placed the
East Turkestan Islamic Movement on the list of
terrorist organizations. The Chinese Government is
ready to join all parties in continuing resolutely and
effectively to fight against the East Turkestan terrorist
forces, safeguard peace and security for Chinese people
of all nationalities, and maintain regional peace and
stability.

