Archbishop Warda: The current protests in Iraq
demonstrate the rejection by the majority of the Iraqi
people of the post-2003 structure and Government
of the country. It is a rejection of a sectarian-based
Constitution, which has divided Iraq and prevented
it from becoming a unified and functioning country.
Instead of bringing hope and prosperity, the current
Government structure has brought continued corruption
and despair, especially for Iraq's youth. It is very
significant that young Iraqis have been the leaders in
the protests. Those young people have made it clear that
they want Iraq to be independent of foreign interference,
and to be a place where all can live together as equal
citizens in a country of legitimate pluralism and respect
for all.

It is important to understand that Christians have
not only sided with the protesters openly, but also that
the Christians and other minorities, including Yazidis,
have been welcomed into the protest movement by Iraqi
Muslims. In a real sense, the protests have demonstrated
the true richness of the historical Iraq. This opening
of reconciliation among all Iraqis demonstrates real
hope for positive changes in which a new Government
in Iraq, if there is a new Government, will be much
more positive towards a genuinely multi-religious Iraq,
with full citizenship for all and an end to the sectarian
disease that has so violently harmed and degraded
us all.

In contrast, the non-violence of the protesters must
not be overlooked by the international community.
Those courageous protestors have been committed to
non-violence from the very beginning of the movement,
even though there have been daily instances of extreme
violence directed towards the protesters from militia
forces, which have continually attempted to provoke
confrontation. Over 400 innocent protesters have now
been murdered, and many thousands seriously injured.
Yet the protesters still remain non-violent.

What is at stake? At stake is whether Iraq will
finally emerge from the trauma of Saddam and the
past 16 years to become a legitimate, independent
and functioning country, or whether it will become
a permanently lawless region, open to proxy wars
between other countries and movements, and a servant
to the sectarian demands of those outside Iraq.

If, God willing, the protest movement is successful
in creating a new Government, with a new civil
constitution, respecting the diversity of its religions,
ethnicities and cultures - one based not on Sharia
but on the fundamental concepts of freedom for all
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, written by this Organization where we meet
today - then a time of hope can still exist for the long-
suffering Iraqi people.

Despite everything, the Iraqi people love their
country, and they want it back. If the protest movement
is not successful, ifthe international community stands
by and allows the murder of innocents to continue,
Iraq will likely soon fall into civil war, the result of
which will send millions of young Iraqis, including
most Christians and Yazidis, into the diaspora. In
the crisis and the genocide of 2014, over 4 million
Iraqis - Muslims, Yazidis and Christians - fled to
the Kurdistan region seeking refuge from the evil of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, but remained within
the country. In another major conflict, we are likely to
see the people flee from Iraq for good. We are indeed
perhaps confronting the last chance for our country.

What can and should the international community
do to help? The international community must not be
satisfied with false changes in leadership that do not
represent real change. It is clear that the ruling power
groups do not intend to give up control, and that they will
make every effort to fundamentally keep the existing
power structures in place. The international community
must clearly understand that the protesters will not

accept this, and the international community must not
take part in supporting any type of false change. That
is not to say that certain groups do not have legitimate
concerns regarding their proper representation in
any new Government. However, such concerns must
be addressed in a way that reflects the reality of the
current broken nature of Iraq's Government, and its
fundamental need for change and replacement.

The first step must be the initiation of early
elections. The protesters insist on this, and the
international community must fully support it. Unlike
the very limited participation of past elections, these
elections must involve the country's youth - those
who have stood up so courageously against corruption
during the protests over the past weeks.

In the period before and during the elections, the
press, both Iraqi and international, must be completely
free to report on and discuss all the issues that need
to be addressed by the elections. For that to happen,
the current blocking of news reporting, the Internet and
social media must end immediately.

Finally, elections must be fully monitored by the
United Nations and observed by all major parties in
Iraq so that the elections are legitimate, free and fair.
Only in that way can a new Government set a course for
the future of an Iraq that is free of corruption and where
there is full citizenship and opportunity for all.

The young Christians of Iraq have participated in
the protests every day. They have been there because the
protests have given them hope for a future - a future
in which they belong as equal contributors and Iraqi
citizens. Along with the millions of other marginalized
Iraqis, they look now to the international community
for action and support. Iraq, a country so often harmed,
now looks to all those in the international community
for help. We hold all in the international community
accountable for that. We believe we have a future.
We ask the international community not to turn away
from us.

