I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), which I am pleased to do in accordance with paragraph 56 of resolution 2255 (2015). I am also thankful to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah Lyons and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their support for the work of the 1988 Sanctions Committee and their continual assistance to the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. As this will be my last briefing to the Council as the Chair of the Committee, please also allow me to also thank my 1988 Committee colleagues, the Monitoring Team and the Secretariat for their excellent cooperation as well as their invaluable support over the past two years. As the Council is aware, the 1988 Committee's main goal is to deter the Taliban from continuing to support Al-Qaida and its affiliates and to deter Taliban attacks against the Government of Afghanistan through the use of its sanction measures. Concurrently, the 1988 sanctions regime is intended to support the peace and reconciliation process, including by enabling listed persons to engage in peace and reconciliation negotiations. The ongoing Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha are encouraging, and it is our hope that the work of the 1988 Committee can support the creation of an environment conducive to a lasting and sustainable peace in Afghanistan. That said, let me once again refer to resolution 2513 (2020), in which the Council expresses its readiness to consider the start of the review of the status of designations of individuals, groups, undertakings and entities on the 1988 list in order to support the peace process, and at the same time urges all States to conduct without any delay national reviews, mindful that Taliban action, or the lack thereof, to further reduce violence, make sustained efforts to advance intra-Afghan negotiations and otherwise cease to engage in or support activities that threaten the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan will affect the review. In its latest report (see S/2020/415), of May 2020, the Monitoring Team noted that relations between the Taliban, especially the Haqqani Network, and Al-Qaida remain close. It was further stressed that the challenge would be to secure the counter-terrorism gains to which the Taliban have committed, which would require them to deny groups, including Al-Qaida, the use of Afghan territory as a source of international threats. The report also stated that the Taliban's ongoing profiting from narcotics would continue to present a challenge, as the scale of the problem remained huge and had been further complicated by a boom in methamphetamine production and trafficking. The report also noted that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) had suffered severe setbacks in 2019 and early 2020, being nearly eradicated from its main Afghan base in Nangarhar province in November 2019, and then incurring further losses in its new refuge in neighbouring Kunar in early 2020. The report acknowledged that Taliban forces played a significant part in inflicting those defeats, as did the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces and their international allies. While such reporting by the Monitoring Team is encouraging, attacks throughout the year in Afghanistan's provinces, as well as the most recent heinous attacks reportedly perpetrated by ISIL-K against Kabul University and the Green Zone, are stark reminders that ISIL-K remains a threat to the peace and stability of Afghanistan and beyond. On top of such vicious terrorist attacks, the people of Afghanistan must also still endure an active and deadly military campaign by the Taliban, as highlighted by the recent fighting in Helmand province. The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions measures relies heavily on close coordination with the Government of Afghanistan and Member States of the region. In early 2020, the Monitoring Team travelled to Afghanistan and the region to meet with its interlocutors on the ground to discuss the implementation of 1988 sanction measures, as well as to conduct threat assessments. Similarly, and in view of the coronavirus disease travel restrictions, the Monitoring Team virtually met with the National Security Advisor of Afghanistan, Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, this past November to discuss matters pertinent to the 1988 Committee mandate. The Committee looks forward to a continuous fruitful and cooperative relationship with the Government of Afghanistan. Please allow me once again to reiterate that the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and its Monitoring Team seek to support the peace process in Afghanistan. Similarly, the Committee looks forward to continued close engagement with UNAMA and other relevant stakeholders in 2021 to ensure the full implementation of the 1988 sanctions regime along with supporting the ongoing Afghanistan peace negotiations.
