Mr. Van 00sterom (Netherlands): Allow me
to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for
his comprehensive briefing. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands fully supports the Special Coordinator
in his efforts to prevent a catastrophe in Gaza, and
we thank him for his tireless efforts for peace aimed
at bringing the parties closer together, despite all
obvious obstacles.

Allow me to also thank Mr. El-Ad for his views on
the situation as a guest of the Council, and I would like
to underline the point made by our British colleague in
that regard. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a long-
standing donor to B'Tselem and we are proud of our
cooperation with that non-governmental organization.
The presence of a strong and vibrant civil society,
including human rights organizations like B'Tselem
that speak truth to power, is crucial for a democratic
and pluralistic society.

I align myself with the statement to be made later
by the observer of the European Union (EU). In my
statement today, I will focus on three key issues: the
West Bank, Gaza and the importance of a renewal of
the peace process.

My first point concerns the West Bank. Listening
to Mr. Mladenov and Mr. El-Ad, it struck me that
their briefings were packed with the latest troubling
developments on the West Bank. Those developments
raise concerns that the region is on a slippery slope,
sliding towards a one-State reality. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands reiterates its opposition to Israel's
settlement policy and to actions taken in that vein,
including demolitions and confiscations of EU-
funded projects, evictions and the forced transfer of
local communities.

We are greatly concerned about the decision taken
on Sunday by the Israeli authorities to advance plans
to expand settlements in Hebron. Such settlements are
illegal under international law, constitute an obstacle
to peace, and threaten a two-State solution. The Israeli
settlement policy and the denial of opportunities for
Palestinian development in Area C make peace more
difficult. Khan Al-Ahmar, as others have said, is a case
in point. We are concerned that the planned demolition
and forced transfer of its inhabitants will undermine
confidence in a negotiated two-State solution. It will
also clear the way for further settlement expansion.
That is illustrated by the announcement of new houses
for settlements near Khan Al-Ahmar earlier this year
in May.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns the
recent violent attacks in the West Bank, which led to
the loss of Israeli and Palestinian lives. Such attacks
illustrate the need for a sustainable solution that
provides peace and security for Israel and prevents the
resurgence of terrorism. Such a solution must provide
security for Palestinians, respect their rights and
demonstrate that the occupation is over. In short, we
need a two-State solution.

That brings me to my second point, concerning
Gaza, where the situation is a constant source ofconcern.
People in and around Gaza live a daily reality that no
one should have to endure. People there deserve a life
in which peace and security can be taken for granted.
Unfortunately, that is far from the current reality: early
on Wednesday morning, an Israeli family in Beersheba
narrowly escaped when they reached a bomb shelter
seconds before a rocket from Gaza hit their home. We
condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza. In response,
the Israel Defence Forces struck multiple targets in
Gaza, reportedly killing a 25-year-old Palestinian man.
We call on all actors involved to exercise restraint in
order to prevent a further escalation. Closing border
crossings and reducing the fishing zone is not the
answer and will only cause the humanitarian situation
in Gaza to deteriorate further.

We are concerned by the growing violence
during protests at the border and the continued use
of incendiary balloons and kites, as well as tunnel
activity. The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon
all relevant Palestinian parties to ensure that protests
remain peaceful, especially so that children are not
put in harm's way. We also repeat our call on Israel
to ensure that its responses are proportionate and
necessary at all times, in line with Israel's obligations
under international law. An independent and transparent
investigation into the events that led to so many victims
over the past months is needed. We call upon Israel to
finalize its own investigation as soon as possible and
provide full transparency on its findings.

We fully support the efforts of Mr. Mladenov to
improve the humanitarian and economic situation in
Gaza. We call upon all parties to create an environment
in which such plans can be implemented. We join the
calls of others upon the parties concerned to continue
their cooperation with the Special Coordinator and
to make sure that no effort is spared to improve the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The implementation of
his plans will bring sorely needed relief to Gaza.

Ultimately, a sustainable solution is needed
to alleviate living conditions in Gaza. That means
intra-Palestinian reconciliation leading to the return of
the Palestinian Authority to Gaza. We welcome ongoing
Egyptian efforts to make that a reality.

We continue to support the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). The services offered by UNRWA
provide opportunity, hope and dignity for Palestine
refugees. This year, with the help of many old and
new donors from the region and globally, UNRWA
managed to broaden its support base. Together with
other donors, we will continue to work with UNRWA
to close the remaining gap for this year. We encourage
all partners of UNRWA to translate this year's generous
contributions into predictable, multi-annual support.

My third point concerns the renewal of the peace
process. Over the past years, we have noted many
threats to the peace process. I regret that today we
have been forced to discuss many negative steps that
have been taken by all parties to the conflict. Again,
we are only discussing measures needed to manage the
conflict. However, conflict management is not what we
are here for. We, the Council, the United Nations and
both sides of the conflict have the same goal - to end
the conflict. We remain firmly committed to that goal
and call on all parties to combine efforts, return to the
negotiation table and restart a genuine peace process
leading to a two-State solution.

