Mr. Choi: One of the world's most open, free,
fair and transparent elections, which took place in Cote
d'Ivoire on 28 November 2010, has been forfeit to the
greed of the outgoing President, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo.
Thus, an utterly unnecessary post-electoral crisis
erupted and lasted more than four months. Now, with
the taking into custody of Mr. Gbagbo, on 11 April, by
pro-Ouattara forces, we have witnessed the end of a
chapter in the history of Cote d'Ivoire.
Unlike some crises that have required massive
international military intervention, the Ivorian crisis
has been dealt with largely by Ivorians themselves. The
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union and the Security Council have been
providing the necessary framework within which the
Ivorian people themselves have faced their own
destiny. From that perspective, one may say that Cote
d'Ivoire represents a success story of a people
managing their own affairs with international support.
Yet, the major credit for bringing the post-electoral
crisis to an end must go to the Ivorian people. They
succeeded in making the will of the people, as
expressed during the presidential elections, prevail
largely by their own efforts. The date of 11 April must
therefore be remembered as the end of a demagogic
and Orwellian perversion by a regime that tried to cling
to power by military means, bringing about serious
pain and damage to Cote d'Ivoire.

Before I proceed, let me pay tribute to the French
Licorne Force for its most helpful cooperation,
including its crucial protection of the headquarters of
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) at various moments during the crisis, as well
as for its timely restoration of the functioning of the
water distribution system in Abidjan, which relieved
the besieged UNOCI headquarters from 10 days of
water deprivation.

Let me now focus on the challenges that lie ahead
in Cote d'Ivoire. I would count four major challenges
as needing urgent attention from President Ouattara's
Administration, with the assistance of the international
community. They are related to the protection of the
civilian population and national reconstruction.

The first challenge is the restoration of peace and
law and order throughout the country, particularly in
Abidjan. The second is the prevention of any further
human rights abuses and violations, and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, especially in the western part
of the country, where several serious problems have
already been reported. The third challenge is national
reconciliation. On that score, President Ouattara has
taken a very clear stance in favour of reconciliation over
retribution. The fourth, and perhaps most formidable,
challenge awaiting the Ivorian people appears to be
national reconstruction, particularly with regard to the
promotion of education, the creation of youth
employment, addressing the land ownership problem,
poverty eradication and economic development.
11-29790

Among other concrete measures, there are four
that must be taken urgently. The first is the swearing-in
of President Ouattara and the completion of the
organization of his Government. During the crisis,
President Ouattara could nominate only 13 of some 30
ministers. Many important Government posts also need
to be filled urgently.

The second, or perhaps concomitant, urgent task
would be the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the security
sector reform programmes.

The third measure, which is intimately connected
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and the security sector reform programmes, is the
reunification question, including the extension of State
authority to the northern part of the country and the
centralization of the Treasury.

The fourth measure pertains to the organization
of legislative elections which, in a certain sense, would
mark the real end of the post-electoral crisis by
creating a democratic Parliament that would be active
across the country.

With regard to those tasks, UNOCI will do its
utmost to provide its support and assistance to the
Ivorian people and authorities. In the meantime,
UNOCI is currently focusing on helping the efforts to
re-establish a secure environment and prevent a
security vacuum; collecting weapons and disarming
surrendering former pro-Gbagbo forces; securing vital
lifelines and strategic installations, such as the airport,
the seaport, bridges, and the presidential palace and
residence; protecting civilians, including Mr. Gbagbo's
entourage, against reprisals; continuing documentation
of committed human rights violations; and facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.

Yet, in the end, it must be the Ivorian people who
shall forge their destiny. I remain hopeful. The Ivorian
people organized a most impressive election; they
succeeded largely by themselves in resolving the post-
electoral crisis, which allowed for the will of the
people to prevail; and now they will march forward
towards national reconciliation and reconstruction,
with the assistance of the international community.

