Mr. Jallow: Mr. President, I am greatly honoured
to brief you once more on the progress of the completion
strategy of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and to present to you the second
report on the work of the Office of the Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals (S/2013/309, annex II).

For the past six months, our focus at the ICTR has
been on the prosecution and completion of appeals; the
referral of cases to national jurisdictions; the preparation
of Office of the Prosecutor records for archiving and
handover to the International Residual Mechanism; the
completion of legacy, residual and closure issues; and
the provision of support to the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Arusha branch of the Mechanism. That focus
will, with the exception of referrals of cases to national
jurisdictions, continue for the months ahead. The past
six months have also seen the Offices ofthe Prosecutor
of the ICTR and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) spending significant time
attending to the arrangements for the commencement
of The Hague branch of the Mechanism, which is due
to be launched on 1 July 2013.

The appellate workload of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICTR continues to be heavy, following
the conclusion of the trial phase of ICTR cases in
December 2012. Since the beginning of this year, the
Office of the Prosecutor has argued and finalized
the hearing of 10 prosecution and defence appeals in
connection with the Ndahimana and Ndindiliyimana et
al. cases, which were heard in the May 2013 session of
the Appeals Chamber conducted in Arusha, Tanzania.
Those cases are now pending final judgement by the
Appeals Chamber.

Briefing and oral argument are ongoing in 13
other appeals in four remaining cases before the ICTR
Appeals Chamber. With the exception of the Butare
case, which comprises seven defence and prosecution
appeals, judgements in all of those pending cases are
scheduled to be delivered before the end of December
2014. Therefore, absent any changes in the judicial
calendar, all but one of the ICTR's remaining appeals
will be completed within the time frame of the ICTR
completion strategy as set out by the Council.

Last month, the Appeals Chamber also affirmed
the referral of Bernard Munyagishari, a detainee, to
Rwanda for trial. That decision in effect concludes the
ICTR's work on the programme for the referral of cases
to national jurisdictions. My Office has now secured
the referral of a total of eight cases to Rwanda and two
cases to France for trial. As a result of those referrals
and the completion of all trials in the first instance, the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR has no further
trial or fugitive-related workload. The tracking and
arrest of the three top-level fugitives, namely, Kabuga,
Mpiranya and Bizimana, and the monitoring of referred
cases are now being managed by the Mechanism.

The preparation of the reports of Office of the
Prosecutor for archiving by the Mechanism has
progressed well during the past few months. The
preservation of files, which involves the cleaning,
rehousing in acid-free boxes and scanning of Office
of the Prosecutor documents, has been completed in
56 cases, representing 414 linear metres of records.
Similar work is in progress for 22 cases involving 250
linear metres of documents and is due to commence
for the other Office of the Prosecutor documents. The
entire Office ofthe Prosecutor audio collection of2,681
cassettes has now been completely digitized, and the
digitization of the Office of the Prosecutor videotapes
is soon to commence. ICTR records that are ready for
archiving continue to be prepared for a handover to the
mechanism as its archives unit builds up its capacity
to receive the records. The remaining records will
be handed over to the Mechanism when they are no
longer required as working records by the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICTR.

In addition to the archiving of records, work
continues on a number of other important legacy
projects on which the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICTR has been working and which we plan to conclude
before the expiration of the Tribunal's mandate. We
note that with the launch of the joint international ad
hoc Prosecutors' "Compendium of Lessons Learned
and Suggested Practices" on the investigations and
prosecution of international crimes in November 2012
at the Annual Conference and General Meeting of the
International Association of Prosecutors, there has
been renewed interest in the legacy of the Tribunals
by academics, human rights practitioners, lawyers and
national prosecuting as well as judicial authorities.
The Office of the Prosecutor has also concluded
the preparation of a best practices manual on the
tracking and arrest of fugitives. The document will
be available to national and international Prosecutors
in due course. Work on the best practices manual on
the investigation and prosecution of sexual violence is
scheduled for completion this year. Work also has been
ongoing on other subjects, such as the documentation
of the genocide on the basis of adjudicated facts and
the lessons to be drawn from the referral of cases with
particular regard for their relevance to the principle of
complementarity in international criminal justice.

We expect, over the next year until the closure of
the Tribunal, to be actively engaged in a number of
those initiatives aimed at promoting best practices and
lessons to be learned in the struggle against impunity,
especially at the national level. Those legacy products
are aimed at recording the challenges and responses to
the investigation and prosecution ofthese difficult cases
and in assisting national and international prosecuting
authorities in managing the range of challenges that
we may face, as they are the front line in ensuring
accountability for international crimes.

I am pleased to note that the interest in the work of
the ICTR and its potential impact at the national level is
increasing. That is indeed a good sign for the legacy of
international justice, and we hope that Member States
will deepen the impact through national programmes
and appropriate legislative measures.

Permit me now to turn to the operations of the
Residual Mechanism. I am pleased to report that all
the core staff as well as the ad hoc staff necessary to
conduct one upcoming appeal are already in place at
the ICTR branch of the Mechanism in Arusha. That
branch is now fully operational. Recruitment of staff
and other logistical and administrative arrangements
are in progress for the establishment of The Hague
branch of the Mechanism effective from the beginning
of July. We therefore expect some of the core staff of
the Office of the Prosecutor of The Hague branch to be
in place in time for the commencement of the branch.
The support and cooperation of the Registry and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTY has been helpful
in that respect.

The Arusha branch of the Mechanism continues to
track the three top fugitives, namely Kabuga, Mpiranya
and Bizimana. In that regard, the Mechanism is in
the process of launching a number of new initiatives
aimed at increasing public interest and participation
in tracking to supplement the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor and of the national and regional law-
enforcement authorities. We shall continue our contacts
with Kenya, Zimbabwe and other States in the Great
Lakes region concerning tracking of the three top-level
fugitives, and we urge the Council to request all States
to cooperate with the Residual Mechanism in that
respect. We shall also continue to provide support to
the Rwandan tracking group in respect of the cases of
the fugitives that have been referred to thatjurisdiction.
The Arusha branch has attended to 26 requests for
assistance from seven Member States in the past six
months in support of ongoing national investigations
or prosecutions. Those figures are in keeping with
the increasing trend of ongoing investigations within
nationaljurisdictions against persons suspected to have
participated in the Rwandan genocide. Those national
efforts are quite welcome because they will contribute
significantly to closing any gaps in the struggle against
impunity for atrocities committed in Rwanda in 1994.

The monitoring by my Office of cases transferred
to national jurisdictions continues. The two cases of
Munyeshyaka and Bucyibaruta referred to France are
progressing in that jurisdiction. The Jean Uwinkindi
case referred to Rwanda is before the Kigali High Court
for trial. Preliminary proceedings are in progress and
subject to determination of applications made by the
defence; subsequent trial proceedings are anticipated
to be completed expeditiously. With the recent
confirmation of the referral of Bernard Munyagishari
to Rwanda for trial, I have now appointed a monitor to
observe the proceedings in this case.

While the transfer of cases to national jurisdictions
has facilitated the early conclusion of the work of the
ICTR, its work will really be done only when all the
fugitives have been arrested and brought to justice,
whether at the Mechanism or in national courts. In
respect of both, three are under the mandate of the
Mechanism and six continue to be under the mandate
of Rwanda. The Mechanism is committed to supporting
and supplementing Rwandan efforts at tracking the six
fugitives whose cases have been transferred to their
jurisdiction. The cooperation of all Member States is
critical for the struggle and for ensuring accountability.
In that regard, I wish to acknowledge the support
received from the United States Government through
its War Crimes Rewards Program over the years and its
assurances conveyed yesterday by Mr. Stephen Rapp,
Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues, that the
Program will continue to support the tracking of the
remaining fugitives.

I would urge the Security Council to request all
Member States once again to support the Residual
Mechanism and Rwanda in the tracking and arrest of
those fugitives and in ensuring their accountability in
the appropriate jurisdiction.

