Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his excellent
statement on recent developments in Kosovo.

My delegation would like to begin by
congratulating the people of Kosovo on the success of
the elections. The holding of the elections in an
atmosphere of healthy rivalry and fair competition is
encouraging in many ways. The participation by all
parties, including minority ones, and the absence of
violence that characterized the overall process allows
us to be optimistic about the future of Kosovo, and
offers, in our view, a real opportunity for reconciliation
and multi-ethnic peaceful coexistence for all people in
the province. Now it is up to the Kosovars themselves
to seize this opportunity, to translate it into deeds and
to benefit politically, economically and socially from
this new reality.

We think the elections are an important stage in
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). It will also make it possible to set up the
democratic institutions of self-government in
accordance with the provisional constitutional
framework set up, in agreement with the parties, by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

We congratulate the newly elected members of
the legislature in Kosovo, which enjoys Wide,
indisputable legitimacy from the polls. The turnout of
63 per cent shows that the people of Kosovo want to
build a prosperous and multi-ethnic future for all
inhabitants in the province. In this regard, we hope to
see the new chamber work for greater harmony among
the various ethnic groups of the society in Kosovo. The
first role that this assembly must assume is to bring
about a meeting of the minds, reduce differences and
do away with the enclaves that continue to hinder the
process of reconciliation. The participation of the
minorities in the elections, particularly the Serb
minority, should be echoed by the majority and should
allow them to be fully involved in public life in
Kosovo.

My delegation notes with satisfaction - and I am
sure that you, Madam President, are pleased - that 34
women were elected to the legislative assembly. The
presence of women is particularly important in that it
means that women will now be shouldering a important
part of the responsibility for building a better future for
the children of Kosovo.

My delegation welcomes the work done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo in preparing for and holding the elections.
Once again, our Organization has demonstrated that it
is fully capable of managing difficult situations.
Following the United Nations success in organizing
elections in East Timor, it has now demonstrated its
success in holding the elections in Kosovo. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
NATO and other international organizations on the
ground have, for their part, made important efforts to
ensure the success of the operation.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to Mr.
Haekkerup, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of UNMIK, and all of his team for
their excellent work in preparing for the elections and
for the promising results that were obtained.

