Mr. Al-Abadi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this high-level meeting, which
reflects the attention you are giving to the question of
terrorism, and for inviting Iraq to participate. I also
wish to thank you personally for the support you have
provided to Iraq as it strives to confront terrorism.

Iraq stands today in the vanguard of the fight
against terrorism and against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), which has attacked my country
and displaced thousands of our citizens in Mosul, in the
north, occupied our territory, killed hundreds of Iraqi
citizens on sectarian grounds in Tal Afar and other
places, and targeted religious minorities including the
Shabak, Yazidis, Christians and others. Those areas
have suffered from sectarian and religious cleansing
that has changed their demographics and destroyed their
cultural and religious heritage. Moreover, car bombs
are exploding in the streets of Baghdad, Babylon, Tuz
Khurmatu and various other cities and towns in Iraq,
targeting and killing dozens of people every day.

ISIL, which is a combination and mixture of
extremists and the remains of the Al-Ba'ath fascist party,
falsely claims allegiance to Islam. It is actually causing
more damage to Islam by adopting specific sectarian
rhetoric while threatening all sects and religious groups
in Iraq. Furthermore, the organization is not an Iraqi
organization; it is a transnational organization that
derives its strength from the following sources.

First, it exploits Takfiri religious philosophy as
ideological cover that foments hatred for the Other and
takes pleasure in bloodshed and beheadings, Secondly,
financial networks present in several States provide
great financial liquidity, as well as from oil smuggling
networks in Iraq and the cities and territories under its
control. Thirdly, it enjoys the support of recruitment
networks throughout the world that draw in members
and facilitate recruits' entry into Iraq. Fourthly, media
and propaganda networks spread news about the so-
called success of the organization, which helps to recruit
members. Fifthly, it derives strength from the remains
of the Al-Ba'ath fascist party and the supporters of
former president Saddam.

Because the threat posed by the organization is
not limited to Iraq, international support is required to
confront it. We will not allow regional or international
disagreements to affect the priority and primacy of
the threat or to break up the international alliance
against terrorism. I reaffirm that in Iraq our only
allegiance is to Iraq and its people. While we express
our gratitude to all the States that have stood beside
us in the military, humanitarian and political fields,
locally and internationally, we also affirm that the
defeat of terrorism in Iraq is the cornerstone for its
defeat throughout the world. We therefore call on the
Security Council and all peace-loving nations to do the
following.

First, they must provide all forms of support and
assistance, military and security assistance to the
Government of Iraq in order to enable it to defeat
terrorism and protect the unity, independence and
sovereignty of Iraq with respect to its land, air and water,
and, secondly, they must block all sources of financing
and financial networks, including the purchase of oil
from areas under the control of ISIL.

The third goal is stopping extremists from entering
Iraq and putting an end to all forms of logistical
support, including the pursuit of and the dismantling
and criminalization of recruitment networks that bring
in terrorists from throughout the world. Fourthly, they
must prevent ISIL from using technology to promote
its ideology, including through the Internet, and from
spreading its horrifying propaganda throughout the
media.

Fifthly, support is required from the entire world for
refugees and for the reconstruction of cities destroyed
by ISIL, whether through occupation or through the use
of car bombs that explode in cities and neighbourhoods.

Iraq has been successful in halting the progress
of ISIL with the help of our heroic security forces
and our courageous people, who have responded to
the call of the religious and spiritual leaders in Najaf
and the political leadership. Iraq has also succeeded in
achieving a peaceful transition of power and the creation
of a national alliance according to a specific time table;
this is a priority in the combat against terrorism.

Our Government looks forward not only to an
urgent effort to end the terrorist threat but also to
constructive relations with all countries of the world,
especially in the region of Iraq, with the neighbouring
States that stand together with us in this confrontation.
This relationship will be based on political and military
cooperation and common interests.

