Mr. Hasegawa: It is a pleasure for me to address
the Security Council on the progress made during the
five months since the Council last met on this item, in
August 2005. Today, I feel particularly privileged to
address the Council in the presence of His Excellency
President Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao and Foreign
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta, along with Ambassador
Jose Guterres of Timor-Leste.

The past five months have turned out to be a
productive period for the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) in implementing the three
mandated programmes and in preparing for the transfer
of capacity-building functions to United Nations
agencies and other development partners, as called for
in Security Council resolution 1599 (2005).

Let me start with the first component of the
UNOTIL mandate implementation, that is, support to
critical State institutions. Since 2002, international
advisers provided by the United Nations and bilateral
development partners have achieved a great deal of
progress in building the capacity of the Timorese to
administer their public institutions. As a result, the
number of international advisers provided by the
United Nations system has declined from nearly 300
three years ago to about 100 at the end of last year.

I am pleased to note that, during the past five
months, UNOTIL civilian advisers accelerated their
efforts to transfer skills and knowledge, and that their
Timorese counterparts are now demonstrating
increased ability and willingness to carry out their
duties. Yet national capacities in highly technical areas,
such as justice and finance, remain extremely weak,
and it has become evident that international advisory
support, especially in those two areas, will be required
for some years to come.

In the justice sector, eight international judges
have continued to provide training, as well as to
perform line functions in court, including the handling
of serious criminal cases. The presence of international
judges has greatly contributed to the efficient
disposition of the cases and has reduced the time for
completing trials to five months. Nonetheless, it will
take a few more years for the national judges to
become self-sufficient, as they are still undergoing
basic judicial training.

President Gusmao recently expressed his concern
about the capacity of public prosecutors to deal
adequately with as many as 3,000 pending civil and
criminal cases. This situation needs urgent attention
indeed, as all the national prosecutors commenced
specialized training in January and will not be able to
attend to their responsibilities. Additional international
prosecutors are, therefore, required. The recent
inauguration of the law faculty of the National
University of Timor Lorosa'e will provide a long-term
sustainable solution to the lack of adequate national
legal expertise.

In the finance sector, a great deal of progress has
been made in building national expertise. As a result,
the number of United Nations-funded advisers was
dramatically reduced from nearly 70 three and a half
years ago, to less than 10, along with several bilateral
advisers, by the end of last year. Currently, six
UNOTIL civilian advisers are supporting the Ministry
of Planning and Finance. The World Bank has shown
its readiness to implement a technical assistance
programme. However, the Government is requesting
the United Nations to continue providing such advisers
to maintain the critically important financial functions.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2006/24)
indicates, of the 45 adviser positions, several posts will
be taken over by national institutions by 20 May. The
remaining functions will be looked after by the
appropriate United Nations agencies, financial
institutions and other development partners.

Let me now turn to the second UNOTIL mandate:
to provide support for the observance of democratic
governance and human rights. We have assigned
human rights officers to Government ministries and
State institutions, with the aim of strengthening their
capacity to protect and promote human rights. In that
connection, it is commendable that the Office of the
Provedor for Human Rights and Justice has indeed
made great progress in drafting a strategic plan and
establishing a complaint-handling system in
preparation for the opening of the Office to the public
in March 2006. Beyond May, human rights activities
will need continued attention by the international
community. I am pleased to inform the Security
Council that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is fully committed to
providing the necessary assistance and sending a needs
assessment mission next month for the purpose of
clearly identifying post-UNOTIL requirements.

Under the leadership of Foreign Minister Jose
Ramos-Horta, Timor-Leste has demonstrated a
remarkable commitment to establishing a normative
international human rights framework through its early
ratification of the full range of the core human rights
treaties in 2003 and 2004. Timor-Leste is about to
complete its final initial human rights reports under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, with the support of
United Nations agencies and human rights officers.

I am pleased that the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation has just completed its report,
and that the President handed it to the Secretary-
General last Friday. As President Gusmao will report,
the Commission has covered a wide range of issues and
made several specific recommendations that require
careful consideration.

I shall now turn to the third component of
UNOTIL's mandate, namely, support to the national
police, and particularly to the Border Patrol Unit,
through the provision of 60 police and 15 military
training advisers.

UNOTIL police training advisers and their
Timorese counterparts have conducted a joint capacity
assessment of each unit and formulated a strategic plan
for their further development. Military training
advisers have now completed the initial phase of the
transfer of border management skills and entered into
the validation phase, so as to ensure that the Border
Patrol Unit has the capacity to interact with its
Indonesian army counterparts as equal and professional
partners.

However, the need to accelerate the
implementation of those training programmes became
quite evident on 6 January, when an incident took place
during which three people were shot dead at the border
by the Timorese police. I commend the decision made
immediately by the two countries, Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, to undertake a joint investigation into the
incident. The incident has prompted UNOTIL, for our
part, to refocus our attention on the specific need to
enhance the professionalism of the Border Patrol Unit.
In that regard, I have instructed UNOTIL police and
military training advisers to review and redesign the
training programme by placing greater emphasis on the
minimum use of force during arrests and detentions, in
order to avoid the recurrence of incidents of that
nature.

Meanwhile, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General, Timor-Leste's relationship with
Indonesia continues to improve. That improvement has
been characterized by an exchange of visits at the
highest level, by President Gusmao and President
Yudhoyono, as well as by frequent consultations
carried out by Foreign Ministers Ramos-Horta and
Hassan Wirajuda. The bilateral relationship has also
been strengthened by cooperation between the two
sides in many other areas.

In that connection, I would like to commend
Timor-Leste and Indonesia for making significant
progress during the last few weeks towards resolving
technical issues concerning the demarcation of the
common border. I am confident that a final agreement
can be achieved on the remaining 1 per cent, in order
to soon conclude the task of delineating the entire
border.

Timor-Leste's relationship with Australia has also
been strengthened. On 12 January, the Foreign
Ministers of the two countries signed an agreement to
share revenues derived from the Greater Sunrise oil
and natural gas field. Timor-Leste will receive 50 per
cent of the upstream revenues, which will no doubt
facilitate the economic and social development of the
country.

Timor-Leste has made major progress in
peacebuilding, but peace remains fragile. Presidential
and parliamentary elections will take place next year,
for the first time since the restoration of independence.
Remembering what happened in 1975, Timorese
leaders have reminded us that those elections will
constitute a critical test for the nascent democratic
State of Timor-Leste. An electoral needs assessment
mission fielded in November 2005 concluded that, for
the elections to be free and fair, Timor-Leste needs the
assistance of the international community and a strong
political presence. Following the recommendations of
the mission, UNOTIL is already in the process of
recruiting three technical advisers to assist in drafting
electoral laws, planning electoral administrative
processes and establishing a voter database. I invite the
members of the Council to refer to the letter that Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri just sent to the Secretary-
General (S/2006/39, annex), requesting the
establishment of a special political office. I recommend
that the Security Council carefully examine the
Government's request, taking into account the newly
emerging political and security situation.

Finally, I wish to thank President Xanana
Gusmao and other leaders of Timor-Leste for having
maintained close dialogue and consultations with us in
building peace and the capacities of Timorese
institutions, as mandated by the Security Council. For
the last six years, the United Nations has been able to
carry out successful peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations in Timor-Leste thanks in great part to the
determination of the leaders and people of Timor-Leste
to benefit wisely from the assistance that United
Nations missions can provide.

