Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I too want to thank the United Kingdom for preparing this timely and important resolution in such an inclusive and a transparent manner. The United States voted today in favour of resolution 2511 (2020), extending the Council's sanctions against the Houthis and others responsible for the conflict in Yemen. These sanctions support the United Nations efforts to find a political solution to this war and they help us hold spoilers accountable. All Member States have an obligation to implement these sanctions in full. However, the reality is that one Member State continues to blatantly defy its obligations under the sanctions regime. In its recent annual report, the Panel of Experts on Yemen concludes that the Houthis continue to receive weapons that have "characteristics similar to arms manufactured in the Islamic Republic of Iran" (S/2020/70, p.2). That is not a new finding. For years, Yemen Panel, together with the United Nations team monitoring resolution 2231 (2015), has reported on the Houthis launching ballistic missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) that are Iranian designed. The Houthis did not just conjure up the ability to launch advanced weapons hundreds of kilometres into Saudi Arabia and other neighbouring States. Iran has smuggled these weapons to the Houthis and in the process violated the Council's targeted arms embargo on the Houthis as well as the Council's arms embargo on Iran. Moreover, Iran's violations continue. Last week, we discussed how the United States Navy interdicted an additional 358 Iranian-made missiles and other weapons components likely on their way to the Houthis. The shipment was yet another example of attempts to smuggle a new Iranian surface-to-air missile system that the Panel of Experts reports on for the first time in its final report in January. Not only does Iran continue supplying weapons to the Houthis, but it is also increasing the sophistication of these weapons. Iranian weapons are deeply undermining the process for peace and we must call them out for it. This resolution also requests that the Panel of Experts prepare information on commercially available goods that find their way into ballistic missiles, UAVs, explosive boats and other weapons. We hope that this information will help Member States and private companies exercise greater vigilance over the transfer of these items to Yemen. We also call on all Member States to help the Panel in collecting this information, which could ultimately bolster sanctions implementation. The resolution also rightly calls out abuses by the Houthis against the Yemeni people. The Panel of Experts has reported on a horrific campaign of sexual violence against women orchestrated by the Houthis. Today's resolution condemns these crimes. The Council also once again demands that the Houthis stop interfering with the work of the United Nations and other aid organizations, whose work is vital to keeping Yemenis alive. By mixing their own interests with humanitarian aid, the Houthis are putting the lives of the Yemeni people at risk. For the first time, the Council has mentioned the FSO SAFER oil tanker in one of its resolution. This addition reflects the international community's deep concern about the chance that the tanker could rupture,causing an environmental catastrophe in the Red Sea. The United Nations has teams ready to inspect the tanker and help repair it, but the Houthis have not provided access to the vessel. Today's resolution makes clear that the United Nations needs access and needs it now. Finally, the United States stands by the United Nations efforts to provide assistance in Yemen. We encourage relevant entities to utilize the sanctions exemption in the provision as appropriate to ensure that their important work is carried out in compliance with the Security Council's efforts to promote an end to this conflict. The United States therefore once again reiterates our strong support for the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in helping to reach a political solution to the conflict. We call on the parties to exercise restraint and work to de-escalate tensions so we can maintain prospects for peace.
