Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General Mr. Jack Lang
for his report (S/2011/30) and proposals, Assistant
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs Mr. Mathias for his
support for those proposals, and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his statement.

Not only is piracy is a threat to international
peace and security, but, as the report presented to us
today underscores, the phenomenon is growing. The
means of the pirates are becoming increasingly
sophisticated, as Mr. Lang explained, the number of
attacks is increasing, and the geographical area
affected continues to expand.

Faced with that phenomenon, the international
community must act. The Security Council has
facilitated the establishment of a legal framework for
the deployment of a large fleet of vessels at sea.
However, we have seen that the military tool is not
sufficient. Suppression must be complemented by a
legal and judicial arrangement whereby pirates arrested
by vessels at sea can be tried and imprisoned in
appropriate conditions. Today, 9 of 10 pirates are
released owing to the lack of capacity for judicial and
correctional action.

In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/394), drawn up pursuant to
resolution 1918 (2010). That report sets out the various
possible options to find a solution to the legal aspects
of the fight against piracy. It is now time to take a
decision.

In examining those proposals, we have identified
several criteria that we believe to be priority. First, we
must find a solution forthwith. Mr. Lang's report
underscores the urgency of that requirement. Next, we
must find a realistic solution. We must keep in mind
the most cost-effective and beneficial option in the
report. Lastly, we must find a lasting solution that
Somalia can ultimately own and perpetuate.

It is from that perspective that we considered
Mr. Lang's report and all 25 proposals identified
therein. In the legal sphere, the avenues proposed by
the report are clear. To address legal shortcomings, the
report proposes updating Somali legislation on piracy
in order to strengthen the criminalization and
jurisdictional treatment of pirates. To prosecute the
growing number of pirates more quickly, it proposes
the establishment of system based on an extraterritorial
Somali court located in Arusha, Tanzania, and two
specialized courts, one in Somaliland and one in
Puntland. Lastly, to address the glaring lack of
correctional infrastructure, the report suggests building
three prisons in Somaliland and Puntland.

Those proposals respond to the urgency of the
situation. They can be operational in less than a year.
Those proposals are realistic. Their cost is estimated at
$25 million, which is low in relation to the overall cost
of piracy, estimated today at $7 billion. Finally, those
proposals seem to us sustainable because they closely
associate Somalia not only with capacity-building in
the regions of Puntland and Somaliland, but also with
the establishment of a court that, although located in
Tanzania, would be above all a Somali court. The
report is pragmatic because it proposes that those new
avenues complement the jurisdictional and correctional
components already operating in a number of States of
the region and for which international support could be
increased.

The Secretary-General and his Special Adviser
have devoted much time and effort to proposing
options to the Security Council to change the paradigm

in the Indian Ocean. It is now up to the Security
Council to turn those proposals into action. To that end,
France encourages the start of negotiations on a draft
resolution of the Security Council reflecting the most
relevant recommendations in Mr. Lang's report. It is of
capital importance that the implementation of any
decision we may take be followed up. The Lang report
proposes that such follow-up be undertaken by an
experienced figure. In order to ensure the best possible
coordination of action on land and at sea and the
integration of United Nations action in Somalia, we
might consider entrusting the mission to follow up the
proposals to a Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General working with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga.

Lastly, I recall the importance of securing
funding to implement the proposals we recommend.
Mr. Lang stresses that a relevant instrument - the
Trust Fund of the Contact Group on Piracy - already
exists. Its purpose is to strengthen the judicial and
correctional capacities of the countries of the region. It
is up to the international community as a whole, as
well as to private individuals and bodies involved in
the fight against piracy, to contribute to that
instrument. In order to bolster the Trust Fund, France
supports in principle the convening of an international
donors' conference once the Security Council has
finished its work.

