The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Afghanistan to participate in
this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council notes the conclusion
of the voter registration process in Afghanistan
on 18 July, which according to preliminary data
of the Independent Election Commission of
Afghanistan saw more than 8.9 million Afghans
register, including more than 3 million women, in
order to exercise their democratic right to vote at
the upcoming parliamentary and district council
elections on 20 October 2018 and in the 2019
presidential elections.

"The Security Council recalls that the Afghan
Government, political leaders and the Independent
Election Commission and Electoral Complaints
Commission carry the primary responsibility
to create the necessary conditions for credible
elections to take place.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
to address remaining challenges and to accelerate
progress in electoral preparations, which requires
without further delay the completion of outstanding
issues, including the approval of candidates to
fill critical vacancies within the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, the establishment of a central
database of all registered voters that identifies
irregularities, as well as the publication of a final
list of candidates.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of developing sustainable democratic
institutions in Afghanistan based on inclusive,
transparent and credible elections, and stresses the

need to promote the full and safe participation of
women, as well as members of minority groups,
including ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
both as voters and candidates.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan and in this regard underscores its
support to the Afghan electoral process as a fully
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.

"The Security Council calls on all parties
concerned to adhere to the fundamental
requirements laid out by the electoral law and all
other relevant regulations and to uphold the highest
standards of integrity throughout this important
and historic process, so that the final outcome
reflects the will of the people of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council emphasizes the central
role of UNAMA, in cooperation with the wider
United Nations system, and in close consultation
and coordination with the Government of
Afghanistan, in supporting the organization of
elections and the strengthening of electoral reform
efforts by providing technical assistance and
capacity-building and by coordinating international
assistance efforts.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of addressing sexual and gender-based violence
against female voters and candidates.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of a secure environment for conducting elections,
condemns in the strongest terms those who resort to
violence to obstruct the electoral process, including
the Taliban and ISIL (Da'esh) affiliates, and
commends the resiliency, progress and exceptional
courage displayed by the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces in their leading role in securing
their country.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitment by civil society to conduct observation
at every polling station to monitor voting, counting,
tabulating and transmission of results.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need for
appropriate electoral observation missions to be in
place, and welcomes the intention of international
partners to provide support at the request of the

Afghan Government, and calls on all parties to
facilitate and respect the observers' work.
"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the ability of all Afghan citizens
throughout Afghanistan to exercise their civil
and political rights, and reiterates its continued
support for the Afghan Government and people
of Afghanistan in their pursuit of democratic
development, prosperity and durable peace.

"The Security Council expresses the intention
to continue to closely follow the electoral process,
including progress on the electoral preparations,
and in this regard looks forward to the thorough
verification of registered voters following the
completion of the registration process, and requests
UNAMA to provide an update to Council members
on key developments and progress regarding
electoral preparations within one month of the
adoption of this statement."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOlS/lS.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.

