Mr. Pronk: Members of the Council have before
them the report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1547 (2004)
and 1574 (2004), in which the Council asked the
Secretary-General to submit, as soon as possible after
the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
recommendations on the size, structure and mandate of
a United Nations operation that would be established in
support of the implementation of the Agreement.

The parties are to be congratulated on the wisdom
and statesmanship they displayed in reaching the
Agreement and on succeeding in bringing the talks to a
close by the end of the year, in accordance with the
commitments they gave at the historic meeting of the
Security Council in Nairobi, Kenya, held, as the
members of the Council may remember, in November
2004.

The signing of the Agreement marks the start of
the six-month pre-interim period. This six-month pre-
interim period will be followed by a six-year interim
period, in the middle of which, according to the
agreement, national elections will be held. At the end
of the interim period, almost six and a half years from
now, the population of south Sudan will settle the
question of the status of south Sudan in a referendum
to decide between unity and secession.

The Secretary-General recommends that the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan will work for a
further six-month period after the referendum to help
the Government ensure that the results are
implemented. The successful implementation of those
results will mark the exit point for the peace support
operation. Of course, it goes without saying that the
work of the United Nations funds, programmes and
agencies will continue after that point.

While the agreements signed in Nairobi detail the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, some areas
still remain to be agreed. This process will be
completed by the new presidency of the Sudan, which
is to be formed following the acceptance of the new
constitution, which is being drafted at this moment.
The presidency will be composed of President
Al-Bashir and Vice-Presidents Taha and Garang. When
they signed the Agreement in January 2005, the parties
put a few remaining issues, such as the size of the
armies, into the hands of the presidency. This means
that a considerable amount of work remains to be done
in the months ahead.

With the initialling of the agreements on
31 December 2004 and the signature of the Peace
Agreement on 9 January 2005, the parties started the
clock running on a demanding timetable that lays out a
road map to the implementation of the Agreement
according to a number of fixed milestones.

By sticking to their commitment to sign on time,
the parties have created a valuable political momentum
that must be harnessed to keep implementation moving
forward on schedule through the pre-interim period up
to 9 July and into the interim period of the following
six years. All of that means that both the parties and
the international community, which has helped them in
the period up to the Peace Agreement, have to work
very hard in order to sustain the momentum. We are
now almost one month into the six-month pre-interim
period, and, of course, we cannot afford to lose any
time in taking important decisions on implementation.

Moreover, the environment for implementation in
both the pre-interim and interim periods contains risks
and challenges. Some of these were mentioned by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2005/57). The need
to provide political solutions to the problems in Darfur
is one clear example, but there are many more. Those
problems are bound to increase if there is delay or
disappointment in slow implementation.

That is why we have already taken steps to avoid
delay. We have prepared measures to support the
parties in their implementation of the Agreement
through planning and preparations carried out under
the mandate of the United Nations Advance Mission in
the Sudan (UNAMIS). We have had a functional
mission headquarters on the ground for a number of
months; we have developed detailed plans for the
establishment of an institutional framework for the
United Nations in south Sudan; there have been
consultations and briefings with both the Government
of the Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) on those issues since July last year;
and the logistical and operational plan to deploy just
over 10,000 troops for monitoring and verification has
been developed in detail. The core of that consists of
750 military observers. They will have to carry out a
difficult task in a wide area of 1,000 by 1,250
kilometres with very poor communications.
Professional planning requires that they will have to be
assisted by an enabling force of some 5,000 and a
protection force of approximately 4,000, all included in
a total number of 10,000 personnel. In the light of the
circumstances, that is a relatively lean deployment. We
are ready to send them to begin their work on the
ground as soon as we have the necessary status of
forces agreement.

I would like to express, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, our thanks to the countries that
have already committed troops to the intended peace
support operation. That will make it possible for us to
initiate the first phase of deployment as soon as we
have the mandate and a status of forces agreement.
None of the Member States that have responded
positively to the Secretary-General's appeal with
adequate capacities have been excluded.

If solutions are not found to the conflicts in
Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan, any peace support
operation limited to south Sudan would be affected by
the consequences of those conflicts. As has been said
many times, peace in the Sudan is indivisible. Both
President Al-Bashir and Chairman Garang have, time
and again - in particular since the signing of the
Peace Agreement - made clear that they understand
that finding solutions to the conflict in Darfur and
similar conflicts in other parts of the Sudan is now a
clear objective for 2005. That underlines the
importance of the national conference provided for in
the Peace Agreement.

The indivisibility of peace in the Sudan also has
consequences for the United Nations peace support
operation. Resolutions 1556 (2004) and 1564 (2004)
requested the Secretary-General to incorporate into the
mission contingency planning for Darfur. That has
been carried out in accordance with the Council's
welcoming the lead role of the African Union in the
search for political and security solutions to the
conflict in Darfur. It is essential that the mandate for
the future United Nations mission in the Sudan take
account of all these efforts to achieve peace in Darfur
so that we can see progress towards a sustainable
solution through a well-fused and broadly supported
strategy.

Earlier, I mentioned risks. One of them is that
violence could return if the causes of the conflict are
not addressed. To support the peace process and to
render peace sustainable, it will not be enough to
monitor the ceasefire and to help in avoiding breaches
of the Agreement; it will also be necessary to help take
away possible reasons for the parties to the Agreement
to return to violence. And it will be necessary to
remove the incentive for others in the Sudan to seek a
solution to their problems through force. Those others
could be people in other parts of the Sudan who feel
oppressed, marginalized or neglected. That would
apply to, for instance, groups in eastern Sudan, but also
to the very poor and to tribes or other sections of the
population that consider themselves discriminated
against. They may feel that their expectations
following the Peace Agreement are not being met.
They may become frustrated, protest, mobilize
constituencies and resort to violent action.

For all those reasons, it is important that the
peace process be as comprehensive as possible. The
report submitted to the Council by the Secretary-
General therefore refers to, for example, demining so
that farmers can till their land and children can play in
peace. It also refers to the disarmament and
demobilization of combatants and to the reform of the
security sector, which so far consists of both regular
troops and members of paramilitary and militia groups.

The report also refers to the return and
reintegration of displaced persons and refugees -
4 million of them - which must go hand in hand with
the reintegration of demobilized soldiers and the
provision of some kind of support to the local
population that has stayed in the region and must share
its resources - such as land and water - with the
returnees. The reconstruction of destroyed
infrastructure, the recovery of production capacity, the
rehabilitation of social structures, reconciliation
between former opponents, the reduction of poverty,
reassurances that the population's basic needs will be
met from now on: all of that is part of a comprehensive
approach aimed at replacing ad hoc relief from the
outside with sustainable development from within.
That will require good economic and political
governance, predominance of the rule of law, the
reform of State institutions, a new constitution, the
guaranteeing of human rights, further democratization,
an all-inclusive national development policy and the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals,
including for the poorest parts of the country. Not only
peace, but also development, is indivisible. In a
country where one in four children dies before the age
of 5 - in south Sudan - there is not much chance for
survival, let alone for the realization of people's
expectations beyond a ceasefire and a peace agreement.

That is an enormous challenge for a nation that is
rebuilding itself 50 years after having become
independent following a long period of colonial rule.
The people of the Sudan have to do all this, basically,
themselves. It is their nation, their peace and their
future, but they will have to be helped from outside.
That is what they expect and we will have to meet that
expectation.

As I have said, in order to render peace
sustainable, the Government and the people of Sudan
will have to choose a comprehensive approach. That
means addressing all causes of conflict - none
excluded - in a holistic and balanced way, avoiding
new distortions. The peace support operation will have
to follow the same pattern: comprehensive and
balanced. It is not the task of the United Nations to
carry out functions that can better be fulfilled by the
Sudanese themselves. The support operation will have
to be catalytic, not turnkey. That is why we are aiming
at a relatively light footprint.

We intend to regularly reassess and review tasks
and priorities in the light of changing circumstances
through the years. We will have to show a clear
awareness of the impact of all foreign activities on
Sudanese society, boosting those with a positive
impact, such as the use of local resources - including
local manpower and womanpower in combination with
capacity-building and training - while also avoiding
negative consequences such the distortion of the local
economy or the spread of HIV/AIDS.

A comprehensive approach does not require a
completely new structure for the United Nations
mission. On the contrary, many United Nations
institutions, agencies, funds and programmes present in
Sudan have developed a lot of expertise and have built
an impressive capacity that should be used to its fullest
extent, in a unified manner. Here, there must be
common objectives, mutual consultation and
coordination and no overlap of the mission with
activities of the United Nations country team, but
complementarity and cooperation. That is what the
Secretary-General has emphasized in his report: a
comprehensive and unified approach; peace and
development, from the inside and as autochthonous as
possible, that is, only facilitated - not managed -
from the outside.

Let me conclude by citing the central
recommendation of the Secretary-General in his report:
that the Security Council, acting under chapter VI of
the Charter, authorize the deployment of a
multidimensional United Nations peace support
operation with a mandate to assist the parties in
achieving a sustainable peace in Sudan through its
good offices, and in aspects of security, governance,
humanitarian assistance and development.

