Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, for the report before us
(S/2018/465). I would also like to thank the Swedish
presidency for convening such a timely debate and
initiating resolution 2427 (2018) on the protection
of children in conflict zones, which was adopted
today. We are honoured to be a co-sponsor of this
important resolution.

The ever-changing nature of armed conflicts in
today's increasingly complex world poses a serious
challenge to the international community in protecting
the most defenceless civilian victims - children.
As the future of every society, children need to be
protected, nourished, educated and assured of their
fundamental rights. However, today nearly 250 million
children are affected by armed conflicts globally. The
impact of terrorism and violent extremism on children
is devastating. It robs them of their childhood and
such basic rights as good health and education, and
inflicts lasting trauma that hinders their psychological
development. Above all, it undermines their ability
to lead peaceful and dignified lives and the chance to
prosper and realize their aspirations.

Afghanistan has faced externally imposed
conflict for four decades and our people, including our
innocent children, have suffered tremendously from the
resulting violence over this period of time. Tragically,
in the context of our security challenge, children are
among the scores of innocent victims whose precious
lives are taken away by terrorist and extremist groups
imposed on us from abroad to prevent our stability and
development. As a result of this, in the past year alone
3,179 children have been reported killed or maimed
in Afghanistan.

Moreover, in what amounts to one of the gravest
forms of abuse and violation, children have been
recruited and brainwashed in religious schools in our
region to carry out suicide attacks in their teenage or
adult lives. This must be addressed on an urgent basis.
The Afghan Government stands firm in its strong
commitment to safeguarding and advancing the rights
of all children. To that end, we have taken tangible
measures, such as the enactment of national legislation
by which we are implementing commitments under
various international instruments, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. The Government is also implementing various
measures and programmes, in line with our national
and international commitments, aimed at protecting
our children from the horrific effects of armed conflict.

Furthermore, we are dedicated to strengthening
our concerted efforts with the international
community to further the implementation of the joint
action plan, a comprehensive framework aimed at
ensuring the physical and psychological well-being of
Afghan children.

In the past year alone, through the joint action plan
we have taken great strides towards preventing the
recruitment of child soldiers and speedily reintegrating
delinquent juveniles into Afghan society through
vocational training programmes. To preserve these
gains, we will continue to enforce the new penal code
that criminalizes the sexual abuse of children, regulate
juvenile rehabilitation centres, expand the presence of
child protection units in the Afghan National Police
recruitment centres, and continue our campaign to
promote children's rights within the Afghan National
Police. We have had high-level meetings with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and other
partners, which have led to increased coordination of
ourjoint efforts to ensure safe, dignified and prosperous
lives for Afghan children.

For Afghanistan, the protection of children and the
advancement of their rights remain a central focus in
the work of the National Unity Government. We are
working to build on and consolidate recent progress in
the knowledge that children will provide a stable and
prosperous future for our country. We believe that the
rights of children can best be protected and promoted in
an atmosphere of peace.

To meet this end, we have taken new measures aimed
at achieving a lasting settlement to the current conflict
imposed on our country. The three-day ceasefire with

the Taliban enforced last month offered a glimmer of
hope that peace is possible. We are working with regional
and international partners for a successful outcome to
our peace efforts and hope that the coming months will
witness more tangible progress on this front. It is our
sincere hope that, this time around, we can achieve a
sustainable peace for our future generations and create
a society where our children can live in peace, free of
fear and violence.

In conclusion, Afghanistan reiterates its firm
commitment to ensuring the full protection and well-
being of all children worldwide. It is only through our
shared values and objectives that we can alleviate the
suffering of children and build sustainable, peaceful
societies. Let us strive to collectively achieve more
tangible progress on this moral imperative.

