Mr. Skau (Sweden): Like others, I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for requesting this
important meeitng.

Let me start by thanking Emergency Relief
Coordinator O'Brien for undertaking this important
mission and for shining a spotlight on these worsening
humanitarian crises. The present situation in countries
like Yemen and South Sudan, where famine has now
been declared, is utterly appalling and completely
unacceptable. The Council has seen the crisis in the
Lake Chad basin first hand. Immediate action is needed.

We therefore fully support the call of the Secretary-
General for increased financial resources and
improved humanitarian access. Emergency funding
must be scaled up so that the United Nations system
and its partners can deliver lifesaving assistance to
those in need. Sweden has significantly increased its
humanitarian assistance to those countries. We call
on others to do the same. The humanitarian response
must also be allowed to reach those in need; that means
humanitarian access in all contexts. We call on all
parties to respect humanitarian principles and to meet
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

Only political solutions can end the humanitarian
suffering and bring sustainable peace and development.
As we heard from the Deputy Secretary-General (see S/PV.7894), lasting recovery requires investment
in comprehensive approaches that address conflict,
chronic underdevelopment and the effects of climate
change. We need to close the gap between humanitarian
assistance and development interventions, and we need
new ways of working to do so. We can all do better and
we must do better.

Let us now turn to country-specific situations.
I think that all situations discussed today are worth
mentioning but, in the interest of time, I will focus on
Yemen and South Sudan.

The situation in Yemen is both shocking and
utterly intolerable. We cannot look the other way when
we are told that 19 million people lack humanitarian
protection; when we hear that 7 million people do not
know where to find their next meal; that one child dies
every 10 minutes, and perversely, that many of those
who do escape the military conflict or starvation then
risk dying for lack of simple medical interventions.
There is an urgent need to supply additional shrinking
reserves of medicine, food and fuel. All parties have
an obligation to allow unimpeded humanitarian access.
Parties must refrain from bureaucratic constraints to the
delivery of aid, across front lines, facilitate commercial
imports through all ports - especially the life-line that
is Hudaydah - and resume commercial flights.

As we have heard, immediate action is needed to
prevent widespread famine. However, the United Nations
lacks the funding needed to scale up its response. The
humanitarian response plan referred to by the Under-
Secretary-General is currently only 6 per cent funded.
In response, as we have heard today, Switzerland and
Sweden, together with the Secretary-General and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
have taken the initiative to convene a high-level
pledging event for the humanitarian crisis in Yemen
on 25 April in Geneva. We invite all partners to attend
and urge them to pledge generously and to quickly
disburse increased support for the crisis. Humanitarian
aid will never resolve the crisis in Yemen. There is
an urgent need to renew the cessation of hostilities
and to intensify efforts towards reaching a negotiated
political agreement to provide a durable solution to the
unfolding crisis.

In South Sudan, the deteriorating security
situation is contributing directly to the humanitarian
crisis. Only an end to the conflict can lead to a real
improvement in the lives of the South Sudanese people.
An immediate cessation of hostilities and a revitalized
and truly inclusive political process, supported by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union and the United Nations, is
urgently needed. Let me also stress that it is totally
unacceptable that aid workers in South Sudan are
being attacked and killed. Humanitarians continue to
face multiple obstacles, including the denial of access
and bureaucratic impediments. We urge all parties,
including the Government, to meet their obligations
to provide full and unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout South Sudan.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the international
community needs to take immediate action if widespread
famine and death are to be avoided. The human
catastrophe of failing of failing to do is unimaginable.

