Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
informative briefing on the outstanding work of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Allow me to take this opportunity to again pay tribute
to his predecessor, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his exemplary
commitment. I also welcome the presence among us
of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila,
High Counsellor for Post-Conflict.

The attack on 17 January was a shock. At a time
when all Colombians long for lasting peace, that
terrorist act claimed the lives of 20 innocent people
and injured more than 60 people. On behalf of France,
I would like to reiterate our strongest condemnation
of the attack, as expressed by President Macron. The
Colombian people can count on the unfailing friendship
and solidarity of the French people in this trial and in
the face of terrorism. To overcome it, unity must prevail
more than ever, including within the Security Council.

At this time of sadness and suffering, we must
remember the tremendous hope generated by the peace
process between the Colombian Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and that, together,
we have the responsibility to uphold it. Disarmed,
the former FARC-EP guerrillas are now full-fledged
political actors, while the former combatants have
expressed their desire to regain their rightful place in
Colombian society.

More than two years after the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, three points deserve special
attention, in our view. The security situation in former
conflict zones in Colombia is emerging as the absolute
top priority at the start of this year. In the past two
weeks, the murders of at least seven human rights
defenders have been confirmed. Make no mistake, that
phenomenon, which we have pointed out at previous
open Council meetings, is not an accident. It is taking
on such proportions that it is clearly a strategy of terror
and should be combated as such. We are compelled
to conclude that the high level of violence in former
conflict-affected areas, which has not spared former
FARC-EP combatants, is eroding confidence in the
peace process.

We welcome the Colombian Government's
initiatives, in particular the action plan for protecting
civil-society leaders, human rights defenders and
journalists. With departmental and municipal elections
coming up in October, we must redouble our efforts.
The success of that democratic exercise will depend on
the degree of security provided for the women and men
willing to make a political commitment to contributing
to the vitality of Colombian democracy. The two are
inextricably linked.

The economic reintegration of former combatants
is another priority for 2019. France has regularly
encouraged the Colombian authorities to invest in this
process so as to give former combatants a genuine
chance to reintegrate into Colombian society, and that
will unquestionably be the deciding factor in the peace
Agreement's success. In that regard, we hope that long-
term solutions will be found for former combatants
currently residing in regrouping and reintegration
zones. The crucial issue of access to land must not be
ignored in the process of economic reintegration. The
productive projects currently under way demonstrate
the close link between this issue and a sustainable
development policy. We encourage the Colombian
Government to continue its ongoing steps to ensure
the full implementation of the decree adopted in June
last year.

Lastly, particular attention must be paid to the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The Colombian peace
process has established a unique system of transitional
justice based on cooperation with the Jurisdiction by all
the parties to the conflict. Only when they cooperate
and continue to do so will Colombia be able to shed
light on the crimes committed during that period,
including those against women, who are often the first
victims of violence. In addition to the commitment to
cooperation of all parties to the conflict, respect for
decisions having the authority of res judicata will also
be vital to preserving the legitimacy of that pillar of
the peace process. France therefore calls on all political
actors, regardless of their affiliation, to reaffirm the
independence of the Jurisdiction at every opportunity,
as it guarantees legal security for the women and men
who have had the courage to lay down their weapons.

The Colombian peace process deserves our full
admiration and is also a profound source of inspiration
for the United Nations and the Council. The United
Nations stands resolutely with Colombia in urging it
to write a historic new chapter on the establishment of
lasting peace for the entire Colombian people. Colombia
will always have the fraternal support of France in this
decisive period of its history.

