Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Russian Federation for calling for a meeting on the
horrendous situation in eastern Ghouta, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for his briefing. I will now make some brief
remarks on behalf of Sweden and Kuwait.

In seven years of war, the situation in the besieged
area of eastern Ghouta has never been worse. I would
like to thank the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for another briefing reminding
us of the horrific reality for citizens in eastern Ghouta
and of the Council's responsibilities. Yesterday, in
this Chamber, the Secretary-General said that the
400,000 inhabitants of eastern Ghouta live in hell
on earth. His appeal to all of us in the Council was
to act - to immediately suspend all war activities
in eastern Ghouta, allowing for humanitarian aid to
reach all of those in need, allowing for the evacuation
of the hundreds of people that need urgent treatment
and that cannot be provided for and allowing the
possibility for other civilians to be effectively treated.
I want to take this opportunity to remind all parties,
as Mark Lowcock just did, of their obligations under
international law to protect civilians and hospitals and
other medical facilities.

The co-penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, have
put forward a draft resolution to respond to the
constant legitimate calls from the United Nations for
a nationwide cessation of hostilities for 30 days in
order to allow for humanitarian access and emergency
medical evacuations. Our draft resolution also calls for
the lifting of the siege directed against eastern Ghouta.
We plead to all Council members to come together to
support the draft resolution and to urgently adopt it so
that we can halt the incessant attacks against eastern
Ghouta and beyond, and we can avert a situation that is
beyond words in its desperation.

We, Sweden and Kuwait, furthermore urge the
parties to the de-escalation agreement in eastern Ghouta
to comply and implement it. We call upon the Astana
guarantors - Russia, Iran and Turkey - to spare no
effort and bring all their influence to bear on the parties
to that end to avert the human disaster unfolding before
our eyes.

In response to our Russian colleague on our draft
resolution, the United Nations convoys and evacuation
teams are ready to go, subject to standard security
procedures. The draft resolution that we are putting
forward is not a comprehensive peace deal. Its aim is a
much-needed humanitarian pause for an initial period
of 30 days. There are already ceasefire agreements in
force for the areas where fighting has escalated the
most recently. They must be complied with. There are
existing monitoring mechanisms that can be utilized.
The role of the Council, I believe, is to push the parties
to the conflict to comply with the proposed cessation
of hostilities. Compliance is on the shoulders of the
parties. I think that we can make a difference, and I
think that we are tested today - notjust as Ambassadors
representing our countries, but as human beings. That
is a massive responsibility.

