Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): I join others in
thanking Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his succinct
briefing on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We appreciate the valuable work done by the
Committee during the reporting period. In particular,
we note the efforts made to raise awareness of the
obligations of Member States pursuant to Security
Council resolutions on Iran. We assure the Committee
of our strong support for its activities in furtherance of
its mandate.

Nigeria appreciates the role and valuable
contributions of the Panel of Experts to the work of the
Committee. In this connection, we welcome its
outreach activities as well as the final report on its
work. It is essential that the Panel's report be
published, to keep the wider United Nations
membership informed of the activities of the
Committee.

Nigeria reiterates its commitment to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We
regard the NPT as the cornerstone of the global
non-proliferation regime. Given that no country is
immune to the dangers posed by nuclear weapons to
our common security, it is essential that we all remain
committed to the globally agreed ideals contained in
the NPT and other relevant instruments.

We recognize the right of any party to pursue a
peaceful nuclear programme. This must be pursued,
however, within the ambit of the NPT and other
relevant international instruments. We are therefore
concerned about the latest report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which indicates that
Iran has continued its nuclear enrichment programme
and has not fully implemented its Comprehensive
Safeguards Agreement, including the additional
protocols. These actions are unhelpful, as they continue
to fuel doubts about the peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear activities. Iran has an important obligation to
dispel those doubts. It can build trust and restore the
confidence of the international community in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme
by responding positively to all the calls made on the
country by the Council and by the IAEA Board of
Governors. It should further commit to the early
resumption of dialogue with the five permanent
members (P5) of the Council and meaningfully
participate in the talks.

Nigeria remains convinced of the importance of
political and diplomatic efforts in finding a negotiated
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. Notwithstanding
the misgivings of the past meetings between the P5+1
and Iran, we hold the View that further impetus should
be given to the political settlement of the dispute.

