Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I would like to take this opportunity to greet and
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ambassador Honore, as well as to thank her for
the excellent report (S/2014/6l7) that she presented to
the Security Council today and for her efforts and those
of the team at the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) in the field.

For decades, Canada has had a unique partnership
with Haiti. Since 2006 Canada has devoted more than
$1.4 billion for development and humanitarian aid.
Those efforts aim to complement and support the steps
taken and the efforts made by our partners, including
multilateral and regional institutions, in Haiti. Canada

has endeavoured to improve numerous spheres, such as
economic growth, food security, good governance and,
in conformity with the Muskoka Initiative, launched by
Canada in the framework of Group of Eight, maternal,
newborn and child health. However, much still
remains to be done to ensure stability and sustainable
development in the country.
(spoke in English)

Canada is particularly concerned by the continued
delay in holding the senatorial, local and municipal
elections in Haiti. Under the Haitian Constitution,
democratic elections should have taken place three
years ago - in 2011. Holding elections in 2014 is an
essential and necessary step towards maintaining the
legitimacy of State institutions, as well as advancing
and reinforcing democratic stability in Haiti. We call
upon all political actors in the country to move forward
and ensure that credible, fair and inclusive elections
can indeed take place this year.

(spoke in French)

A Government must reflect the will of its people.
In order for the Government of Haiti to reflect that will,
the voice of citizens must be heard. Canada is ready
and willing to support the elections. Canada recently
announced $8.7 million in financing in support of
elections through the United Nations Development
Programme and the National Democratic Institution.
That contribution, added to those of our partners,
will complete the Government of Haiti's funds for the
organization of the elections. Canada also takes note of
the efforts of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti aimed at providing electoral assistance and
logistical support for the elections, and it is grateful to
MINUSTAH for that.

We wish to underline to importance of reinforcing
the status of Haitian institutions, including their
capacity to play an ever increasing role in the future.

(spoke in English)

Transparency, accountability, economic
competitiveness and diversification are essential
to Haiti's sustainable economic growth. Private
sector development will create jobs and establish a
local economy that will create resilience not only in
communities, but across the country, thereby promoting
stability. Stakeholders must prioritise actions that will
improve the business environment, which in turn can
transform Haiti's economic potential into concrete
socioeconomic benefits for the Haitian people. Canada
welcomes the anti-corruption law that was adopted
in May, and we encourage its full implementation.
Addressing the issue of corruption is essential for Haiti
to modernize the business environment in the country
and facilitate national and foreign investments.

(spoke in French)

Canada welcomes the progress made by the
Government of Haiti, with the support of the
international community, in order to continue to reduce
the number of Haitians that live in camps due to the
earthquake of January 2010. But much more needs to
be done to resolve certain problems that exist in Haiti
regarding individual rights. The general weakness in
the justice sector continues to concern us, in addition
to undermining the protection of individual rights. A
large number of Haitians, up to 70 per cent ofthe prison
population, according to certain sources, are detained in
horrific conditions during long periods while awaiting
their trial. It is time to tackle that problem. Canada
welcomes the efforts of MINUSTAH in the framework
of judicial reform. International cooperation and the
efforts of Haitian authorities to strengthen institutions
are essential to improve the current situation in an
effective and long-lasting manner.

(spoke in English)

Canada continues to appreciate and support the
important work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti. For 10 years, MINUSTAH has worked
to improve security conditions and contribute to lasting
stability in the country. It has made considerable
progress. Canada notes MINUSTAH's forward
planning, including the gradual reduction of the United
Nations footprint in Haiti. It is important that such
decisions be based on the situation on the ground, in
particular the capacity of the Haitian State to deliver
security to its people. We should avoid reduction
scenarios that could jeopardize the results achieved to
date, and take into account the role MINUSTAH should
play in contributing to stability and ensuring security
during significant national events, such as the 2015
presidential elections.

The Haitian National Police (HNP) must also
continue to be strengthened. We commend both
the Government of Haiti and the Mission's efforts
towards the reform and developments of the HNP, an
organization that has demonstrated increasing capacity
in recent months. Canada is proud to be among the
top contributing nations in terms of strengthening the
police in Haiti, and we salute our fellow Member States
with whom we are working in that effort. We urge the
Haitian Government to continue that work and further
build upon it, while prioritizing both the police and an
independent and strengthened judicial sector so that the
Haitian people can rely on an accountable Government
and the rule of law.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that in
these large international forums we must never forget
the Haitian people. The women who walk miles on foot
every day to go to the market of Petionville; the tuk-
tuk drivers who transport their passengers on the roads
of Cap-Haitien; the fishermen docked at the island
of Gonave under the blistering rays of the sun - all
they want is to earn their daily bread in a secure and
propitious environment, as well as to give a chance to
their daughters and sons to have a better future and
greater possibilities. The future of the children depends
on the local economy, democratic governance, stability
and security.

I wish to assure everyone that Canada is determined
to achieve such a future and to maintain its commitment
in regard to Haiti.

