Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I agree with Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock's
statement that this has been an extraordinary year for
the Security Council. There are still a few months
remaining, however, during which we may confront the
most important events in the life of our Council.
Consequently, the submission of this report to the
General Assembly is taking place in circumstances in
which the Council is now more than ever before under
intense scrutiny by the international community and
closely watched by Members ofthe United Nations and
international public opinion.

Accordingly, we are pleased that this report is the
outcome of agreement in the Council to improve its
presentation and that it includes, for the first time, an
analytical section that focuses on areas of Council
activity that are of interest to the entire membership of
the United Nations.

We echo the congratulations and support
expressed by some members of the Council to
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, Minister Lee and
their team for their contribution, which has given us
this useful tool, which enables us more accurately to
report on the activities of the Council in the course of
the current year in its work of maintaining international
peace and security.

Intensive deliberations led to the adoption of the
criteria for the preparation of this report. My delegation
participated actively, sharing the vision and approach
of Ambassador Mahbubani and his desire to produce a
substantive document that would truly be useful to the
community of nations.

We congratulate Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock
for the contribution he made to the preparation of the
introduction, which was the subject of a lively
discussion among the membership and which appears
in this report; it is, in fact, the most important
innovation in the report. As Ambassador Levitte ~
who himself was a very important supporter of this
initiative - said, the Council moves forward slowly.
This certainly represents a Victory. But discussions are
ongoing, and agreement has not yet been reached
among all members of the Council. Some members
remain reluctant to move forward along the path that
was set out in the process of preparing the report.

Today we can consider that slow movement
forward as a victory; however, more victories must be
achieved. My delegation is pleased, but not yet
satisfied, with what has been achieved. Mexico hopes
that future developments, particularly in terms of the
analytical section, could include, among other
innovations, the adoption of clear and precise
indicators to measure progress in the Council's work,
as well as a section containing proposals to improve
the working procedures and performance of our
Organization.

Mexico has followed with great interest the work
in the Council as well as the efforts made to turn it into
a body that has closer ties to the rest ofthe membership
of the United Nations. We know that, as an elected
member, we are in the Council only for a short period
of time. For this reason, and for other key reasons, we
want to make a particular and extraordinary effort, in
the same spirit as Ambassador Mahbubani, to ensure
that, when we leave the Security Council, we will have
contributed to bringing it much closer to the rest of the
United Nations community; that its working procedures
will be far more transparent; and that progress will
have been made towards the establishment of
mechanisms aimed at creating linkages among the
decisions taken in the Security Council and those of
other United Nations bodies.
In that connection, we believe that monthly wrap-
up meetings provide an excellent opportunity for an
interactive discussion among members and non-
members. We will continue to support this becoming a
regular practice. However, there are still members with
reservations that must be carefully and respectfully
considered, so that agreements can be reached in the
near future.

Measures have been adopted to improve the
working procedures in the Security Council as a whole.
Some of these are very simple, such as assigning seats
to non-members in our discussions. Others are of
greater importance, such as the publication of the
Secretary-General's reports and the agenda, and the
very important contribution of the fact sheets on items
before the Council.

Given our awareness of what has taken place, we
want to thank the members of the Security Council
secretariat, whose openness to the measures discussed
and proposed here with a View to gradually making the
Security Council far more transparent and more closely
connected to the rest of the Organization. They have
remained receptive to these ideas and they have
facilitated implementation of the measures we have
adopted. They have also been responsive with regard to
the issuance of documents.

We have also worked to strengthen the work of
the Secretariat in connection with the new work of the
Council, such as the field missions of the entire
Security Council as a whole and of the sanctions
committees, in which my country has actively
participated.

We welcome the increasing trend of the Security
Council to hold more meetings open to participation or
attendance by all Members of the United Nations. We
reiterate that we must implement the provisions of rule
48 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
which stipulates the practice of holding open public
meetings. We hope that the resistance to change of
some Council members will diminish, and that there
will be closer links between the members of the
Security Council and those ofthe General Assembly.

We shall continue to work within the informal
working group to achieve those ends. Similarly, the
General Assembly's Open-ended Working Group on
Security Council reform is another area where we are
working to institutionalize our working procedures and
rules of procedure, which paradoxically have remained
provisional for more than 50 years.

Mexico's commitment to the principle of
transparency is unswerving. We want to do away with
the barriers to a more substantive report that reflects
the daily work of the Council. We hope that this
endeavour will succeed. It is one to which my
delegation and others are committed.

