The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like to acknowledge and welcome the presence in
the Council Chamber of the Secretary of State of the
United States of America, Her Excellency
Ms. Condoleezza Rice; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, His Excellency Mr. Sergey
Lavrov; the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, His Excellency the Right
Honourable Mr. David Miliband, MP; and the Vice
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, His Excellency
Mr. He Yafei.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/787, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by the Russian Federation
and the United States of America.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

This meeting comes at the end of an eventful
year, marked by a number of encouraging
developments in the Middle East. Since the beginning
of 2008, we have witnessed the evolution of a
comprehensive, direct and result-oriented Israeli-
Palestinian negotiation process within the framework
set out last year in Annapolis.

We have to recognize that there is a political
momentum to this process, which gives us reason to be
hopeful. Today, the Security Council has the
opportunity to acknowledge these achievements and
express its appreciation and encouragement for the
determined efforts of the parties and its support for the
continuation of the process and the fulfilment of the
Annapolis goals. I am confident that the draft
2
resolution that the Council is about to adopt conveys
that message.

I would also like to reiterate the belief that the
ongoing process provides our best chance for peace.
The parties have set in motion a momentum we cannot
afford to lose; they deserve the full support of the
Security Council on that journey. We have a shared and
a clear goal: to turn into reality the vision of two
States, a democratic and peaceful Palestine, living side
by side with a democratic and secure Israel, and to
advance the momentum towards a just, lasting,
comprehensive peace for the Middle East.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.


