At the outset, we would like to express our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved and to the leadership and people of Palestine on the passing away of the Secretary General of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr. Saeb Erekat. We note his personal contribution to efforts towards a just solution to the Palestinian question in accordance with the established international legal framework, including resolutions of the Security Council and General Assembly. We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. Russia adheres to the time-tested principle that the comprehensive stabilization of the situation in the Middle East is impossible without a lasting solution to the Palestinian question. We maintain constructive and friendly relations with all States in the region, hence why we consider the improvement of Arab-Israeli relations to be beneficial in principle. However, we proceed from the understanding that a just settlement of the Palestinian question based on the international legal framework endorsed by the United Nations, including Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the fundamental principle of a two-State solution, must be an inherent part of any Arab-Israeli settlement. That framework provides for the establishment of an independent, sovereign and territorially contiguous Palestinian State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital and living in peaceful co-existence with Israel. The entire range of final-status issues should be resolved during direct negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. The international community should focus its efforts on resuming the negotiation process. President Mahmoud Abbas reiterated his readiness for dialogue under the auspices of the Middle East Quartet of international mediators. We call upon our Quartet partners - the United Nations, the European Union and the United States - to strengthen cooperation to that end. We are prepared to engage in dialogue with key regional stakeholders. We are convinced that one-sided action will never lead to a breakthrough, and that it will be essential to make joint efforts and fully leverage the potential of collective diplomacy. We view the resumption of contact between the Palestinian and Israeli parties as a first step towards reinstating the dialogue between Palestinians and Israelis. We welcome this step taken by the Palestinian leadership, which is undoubtedly aimed at backing efforts to redress the difficult socioeconomic situation on the Palestinian territories and enhancing the joint response to the coronavirus pandemic, as well as promoting cooperation in the area of security. We call on both parties to uphold their obligations in accordance with earlier agreements. In order to ensure the implementation of those agreements, both parties must abstain from any aggressive or provocative rhetoric or actions. As the Special Coordinator informed us, on 15 November the Israeli authorities opened the bidding process for the construction of more than 1,000 housing units in East Jerusalem. We are concerned by that decision, which runs counter to the international legal framework for a Middle East settlement. The construction of a new block of settlements in the Givat Hamatos area would detach East Jerusalem from Bethlehem and violate the territorial contiguity of the Palestinian State provided for in United Nations Assembly resolutions. We reaffirm our principled position regarding the illegality of the Israeli settlements in the West Bank. We call for the cessation of settlement activity and the policy of demolishing Palestinian property. Annexation plans must also be definitively taken off the table. At the same time, we condemn all violence and missile launches against the Israeli territory. Such actions must stop. There is also an urgent need to join efforts in order to counter the terrorist threat. The task of restoring Palestinian unity remains highly relevant. We will continue our efforts on this front and continue to assist our Egyptian colleagues. Active international measures are necessary in order to improve the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza. We are extremely concerned by the reduction in funding for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The work of UNRWA encompasses both a humanitarian and a political dimension and significantly contributes to stabilizing the situation on the Palestinian territories and across the Middle East region. Russia will continue supporting UNRWA and calls on the international community to do the same.
