Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and Ms. Josephine Mbela for their
statements and information provided.

During the recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which was led jointly by France and
Equatorial Guinea, we had an opportunity to converse
with the Independent National Electoral Commission,
as well as with Government authorities, including
President Kabila Kabange. That allowed both the host
country and the members of the Security Council to
make clear their positions and expectations regarding
the forthcoming elections. We believe, in that context,
that the most propitious thing to do at this stage is to
express full support for the progress and commitment
shown by the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
meet the deadlines established in the electoral calendar,
without prejudice to the implementation of the Saint-
Sylvestre agreement of31 December 2016, in particular
to the confidence-building measures enshrined therein,
which are conducive to the effective realization of
elections and a peaceful transfer of Government. In
order to arrive at consensus on key issues surrounding
the electoral process, and in accordance with the
call made by the Conference e'piscopale nationale du
Congo last October, we call again for its complete and
effective implementation.

Another conclusion that the visit allowed us to
reach is the fact that there is a need for the Government
and the opposition to work together in order to be
able to advance confidence-building measures. With
that understanding, although it is necessary for the
Government to take the initiative and assume leadership
with regard to its implementation, those measures
will not be feasible without the participation of the
opposition. We therefore condemn the call to protests,
which is inflammatory and leads to violence. We urge
the populace to respect the law. We reiterate our call
to all parties to work together and collaborate with a
view to the holding of transparent, credible, peaceful
and inclusive elections, with the full and effective
participation of women and young people at all stages
of the electoral process. We take note of the meeting
held by the Vice-Prime Minister and Minister of the
Interior, Mr. Henri Mova, regarding the participation of
women in the electoral process and his commitment to
improving the security of the candidates. Only the active
participation of women as constituents and elected
officials will ensure an inclusive election process.

On the other hand, we value the work of the
Independent National Electoral Commission, in
particular its willingness to address the concerns of the
presidential candidates regarding the electoral process,
as evidenced by their meeting on 4 October. Likewise,
we commend its commitment to providing support to
political parties for the training of electoral observers
in the use of voting machines, as well as its pursuit of
consensus through a technical committee. Likewise, we
support the sovereign decision to finance the elections
in accordance with the logistical and technical needs
of the Electoral Commission; however, we invite the
Commission to call on MONUSCO should it deem such
action appropriate.

We commend the initiatives and good offices of the
Special Representative and her meetings with various
actors in order to exchange views and establish a
coherent and coordinated approach between the United
Nations and regional actors. Likewise, we welcome
the meetings held with various authorities, political
platforms and civil society groups to discuss the
electoral process. We support the work of MONUSCO,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa in preparing for
the elections and encourage them to maintain their
cooperation with the Independent National Electoral
Commission. We also encourage them to redouble their
efforts to improve the security situation, respect for
human rights and to combat Ebola.

Thechallenges facingtheDemocraticRepublic ofthe
Congo on the margins ofthe elections have exponentially
increased and their solution lies in addressing the
root causes of the conflict, one of which is the lack of
control over natural resources, which is a factor that
contributes to prolonging the crisis as a result of the
fragmentation of armed groups and the systematic
exploitation of the country's resources by transnational
corporations that operate without oversight.

For that reason, we believe that it is not enough
to monitor and sanction armed groups - both their
leaders and individual members - and the parties to
the conflict. We must apply sanctions to the networks
that make up the entire chain of those involved in
the conflict, including commercial and financial
facilitators. In that regard, the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council must work
together to investigate and identify these corporations,
thereby countering or definitively eliminating these
criminal networks.

In short, the control of areas rich in natural
resources and their sovereign administration is
paramount, both for the cessation of hostilities and
for economic development. When a country maintains
effective control of its resources and there is a political
will to administer them for the benefit of the population,
it is possible to achieve a structural change that leads
to the stabilization and strengthening of the rule of
law, while fully respecting the country's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

