Mr. Simcock (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her briefing. It is shameful that several of the most
notorious perpetrators of crimes against the Libyan
people this past decade continue to enjoy impunity.
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, Mahmoud Al-Werfalli,
Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled and Abdullah Al-Senussi
must face justice for their alleged crimes. We call on
the individual Libyans or groups that are harbouring
Al-Qadhafi and Al-Werfalli to deliver them to Libyan
authorities immediately. We also call on those who are
sheltering Al-Tuhamy, former head of Libya's notorious
Internal Security Agency, to end their protection of that
perpetrator. We are also closely watching the Libyan
Supreme Court's case against Abdullah Al-Senussi.

Accountability for those architects of Libya's
darkest days would ensure that the Libyan Victims of
their atrocities are not forgotten. It would also deliver a
powerful message of deterrence to future abusers and
to those involved in the current conflict who may be
guilty of atrocities. We regret that collectively we have
little to show in the service of justice for the Libyan
people and remedying the suffering that they have
endured at the hands of those individuals. Beyond those
four cases, violence and abuses continue in Libya today.
Human traffickers and smugglers prey on the most
vulnerable, especially migrants, refugees and asylum-
seekers in Libya. A civil war continues to rage, and the
number of civilian casualties and injuries is escalating.
We strongly support accountability for any crimes that
have been committed, including by officials and senior
leaders involved in those networks.

The United States Government continues to receive
other reports of potential human rights abuses in
Libya, including accounts of arbitrary killings, forced
disappearances, unlawful detention, torture and sexual
violence perpetrated by multiple militia groups and
security forces, including people in leadership and
command positions. The current conflict in Libya has
had a destabilizing humanitarian effect, resulting in an
increased number of displaced persons, including the
migrant and refugee population. Prolonging that conflict
will further strain the provision of basic services to the
population and will contribute to political insecurity
and instability.

Libya's political and security instability has created
an environment conducive to human rights abuses. In
an effort to address the root causes of these atrocities,
the United States continues to support a rapid return
to a political process. We thank Special Representative
Salame for his ongoing efforts to secure a negotiated
political solution to this crisis. Mr. Salame and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya team face
great physical risk in the work they are doing. We were
reminded of this by the terrorist attack that killed three
United Nations employees in Benghazi a few months
ago, as well as by the recent air strike, in violation of
the United Nations arms embargo, that nearly hit the
United Nations compound in Tripoli. We continue to
call for de-escalation, a ceasefire, economic reforms
and an improvement in the security environment, and
we condemn all acts of violence against the Libyan
people and the United Nations workers who are trying
to help the country achieve stability.

The United States has historically been and
will continue to be a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for Victims of atrocities
through appropriate mechanisms. The perpetrators of
atrocity crimes must face justice, but we must also be
careful to recognize the right tool for each situation. I
must reiterate our long-standing and principled objection
to any assertion of the ICC's jurisdiction over nationals
of States that are not party to the Rome Statute, in the
absence ofa Security Council referral or the consent of
such States. Our concerns regarding the ICC and the
situation in Afghanistan are well known. Our position
in no way diminishes the commitment of the United
States to supporting accountability for atrocity crimes,
violations of international humanitarian law and gross
Violations of human rights.

