Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): We
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Qatar for having honoured us with his presence this
morning.

We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and to express British appreciation to him
for all of his efforts, including his work to establish the
Quartet. I think that this may well the Secretary-
General's last public speaking opportunity in this
forum, so I would like to pay tribute to him for what he
has done over so many years working with the Council.

We very much agree that the key issue remains
ending the frustration and instability that prevail in the
Middle East through a comprehensive and just
solution. Colleagues have already sketched out the
elements of a prescription for such a solution. Progress
in Israel and Palestine is of the utmost importance for
the achievement of peace and stability in the region. It
is essential that we make progress towards a
comprehensive peace and a two-State solution and
recognize, at the same time, that we need a regional
approach which encompasses all the relevant issues.

For the United Kingdom, Prime Minister Blair
and his Government remain fully engaged and
committed to that purpose. The United Kingdom
welcomes the ceasefire in Gaza, which came into effect
on 27 November. We hope that it will be a first step
towards further progress. We maintain that the Road
Map is the best way to achieve a two-State solution.
Both Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas have
reiterated their commitment to it as the way forward.
We continue to call upon both sides to implement their
commitment in full. We hope that a meeting between
the Prime Minister and the President can take place at
the earliest opportunity and that it will lead to real
progress.

The United Kingdom continues to call for the
release of the captured Israeli soldier, Corporal Shalit,
and for Palestinian legislative Council members
detained in Israel to be accorded their full legal rights
and to be either charged or released.

We will continue to support the Palestinian
people through the Temporary International
Mechanism. So far, the European Union has
contributed a total of more than €186 million to that
Mechanism. That includes payment to key workers in
the public sector, such as health care workers, teachers,
the poorest Palestinian Authority employees and some
of the most vulnerable Palestinians. Those allowances
have helped to keep basic services running, put money
into the economy and provided a livelihood for the
poorest Palestinian families.
We welcome President Abbas's efforts over the
past few months to form a national unity Government.
We still need a Palestinian Government that we can
work with. The United Kingdom supports the Quartet's
call for a Palestinian Government to be formed with a
platform based on the Quartet's three principles:
renunciation of violence, recognition of Israel and
acceptance of previous agreements and obligations,
including the Road Map. Until then, we will continue
to provide support to the Palestinian people directly.

The United Kingdom and the European Union as
a whole underline the importance of preserving and
strengthening the capacity of Palestinian institutions.
The European Union has expressed its readiness to
provide enhanced support to a Palestinian Government
with which the EU can engage.

Recent events have further highlighted the need
for us to move forward and return to a political
process. We express our grave concern at the incident
that took place in Beit Hanun on 8 November, which
led to the tragic death of Palestinian civilians. We have
continued to call on Israel to do everything it can to
avoid civilian casualties.

The firing of Qassam rockets from Gaza into
Israel must stop. Recent clashes between Hamas and
Fatah have led to the deaths of innocent children. All
sides in Israel and the occupied territories must
intensify efforts to bring all violence to an end.
Civilians on both sides have the right to live in peace
and security.

We continue to call on Israel to freeze all
settlement activity, including the natural growth of
existing settlements, and to dismantle all outposts built
since 2001, in line with the provisions of the Road
Map. It is essential that the Palestinian Authority make
every effort to prevent terrorism, as required under the
Road Map. We welcome President Abbas's recent
efforts to improve the security situation in Gaza.

We must now all build on this fragile progress to
try to create the political, security and economic
conditions for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East reflecting all relevant Security
Council resolutions, including, most recently,
resolution 1701 (2006).
