Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Like
others, I welcome the Indian initiative to convene this
open debate on combating piracy, and I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing this morning.

The Security Council is central to the international
community's response to piracy off the coast of
Somalia. Multinational, multi-agency naval operations,
the use of best management practices, vessel protection
detachments and privately contracted armed personnel
have all had an impact on reducing the number of
hijackings and attacks in the high-risk area off the
coast of Somalia. But despite the significant reduction
in the number of successful hijackings in the last year,
the threat of piracy remains serious, and we cannot be
complacent.

The Council also follows developments in other
parts of the world with growing concern, particularly
with respect to the growing violence seen in attacks
in West Africa, in the Gulf of Guinea, and the rise
of attacks in South-East Asia. Innocent seafarers are
still being held hostage in unacceptable conditions or
subjected to ever more violent acts of armed robbery
at sea.

The United Kingdom remains strongly committed
to the fight against piracy. We believe that it is vital to
break the piracy business model. The key to achieving
that is a comprehensive approach that tackles piracy
directly at sea and its root causes on land. Poverty, a lack
of security and no job opportunities or prospects create
an environment where some believe that crime pays.
We must show those individuals that criminal activity
does not pay and will not go unpunished. We therefore
strongly support efforts to bolster investigation,
prosecution and penal capacity in regional States.
Capacity should be built in a way that does not prevent
facilities and expertise from being used in other areas
of law enforcement.

Both the reward and the funding of the piracy
business model lie in ransom payments. Recognizing
that, my Prime Minister established an international
piracy ransoms task force at the London conference with
the ultimate ambition of stopping all ransom payments.
Task force members reached a clear consensus on a
number of substantive, practical steps towards the
long-term goal of stopping pirate ransom payments.
The task force's conclusions will be presented to the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia at
its plenary meeting next month. We have heard how
INTERPOL is leading international efforts to track
ransom money to various parts of the world. It is vital
that the beneficiaries of ransom payments be brought
to justice.

Developing regional maritime capacity in order to
enable littoral nations to manage their own waters is
also essential. In West Africa for example, the United
Kingdom is supporting the industry-led initiative to
develop a maritime trade information sharing centre,
and we welcome the kind offer from Ghana to host the
centre. The centre will provide important real-time
information, advice and warnings for commercial
shipping travelling in West Africa, while allowing
regional States to work in partnership to develop
a better understanding of their own - and their
region's - maritime domain.

In Somalia, the United Kingdom is implementing
a multimillion-pound development programme focused
on building institutions, creatingjobs and opportunities,
developing health care and providing humanitarian
assistance. Across the Indian Ocean, we continue to
support States in developing prosecutorial and penal
capacity and maritime capabilities.

Piracy is organized crime. It thrives in places
where the rule of law is weak or has broken down. It
is therefore vital that we, the international community,
tackle those drivers of crime on land in an integrated
manner. We are starting to see results, so now is not the
time to be complacent and step back, but to forge ahead
with ambitious capacity-building and development
programmes.

