The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Croatia, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr.
Drobnjak (Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the further
report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human
rights in Croatia pursuant to Security Council resolution
1019 (1995), document S/1996/691. Members of the
Council have received photocopies of a letter dated 16
September 1996 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/1996/763.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

 

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General of 23 August 1996
(S/ 1996/69 1), submitted pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1019 (1995) on Croatia.

"The Security Council notes progress in the
humanitarian and human rights situation in some
areas. The Council regrets, however, that many of its
previous requests have not been complied with by
the Government of Croatia. Numerous incidents
threatening the population in the formerly
Serb-controlled areas are a continuing source of
concern and could jeopardize the prospects for
peaceful and substantial reintegration of refugees and
displaced persons in Croatia.

"The Security Council commends the
Agreement between the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, signed in Belgrade
on 23 August 1996, and expects the commitments
contained therein to be implemented.

"The Security Council recognizes steps taken
by the Government of Croatia to reintegrate refugees
and displaced persons into Croatia but urges the
Government to expand its programme to accelerate
the return of all such persons without preconditions
or delay. The Council urges the Government of
Croatia also to expand its humanitarian relief efforts,
especially as winter approaches.

"The Security Council in the statement of its
President of 3 July 1996 (S/PRST/l996/30)
highlighted the need for adoption of a
comprehensive amnesty law, in cooperation with the
United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES). Since the report of the
Secretary-General of 23 August 1996, which found
no substantial progress in this regard since passage
of the Government of Croatia's amnesty law of 17
May 1996, the Republic of Croatia on 20 September
1996 enacted a new amnesty law. The Council
welcomes this development as a step towards
addressing the concerns outlined by the Statement of
the President on 3 July 1996 and emphasizes that
such a law must be implemented without delay and
in a fair and equitable manner, with full respect for

 

the rights of the individual. The Council will follow
such implementation closely. The Council notes that
a comprehensive new amnesty law and its equitable
application are also vital elements in preparing for
elections in Eastern Slavonia and important factors in
the successful completion of the UNTAES mandate.
"Despite some positive developments, the
Security Council is deeply concerned that residents of
the Krajina and Western Slavonia continue to suffer
from inadequate security, including the danger of theft
or assault at any time. The Council also notes with
concern attacks and threats against those engaged in
humanitarian relief activities and human rights
monitoring in the area. In particular it deplores the
reported involvement of Croatian uniformed military
and police officials in acts of looting and harassment.

"The Security Council urges the Croatian
authorities to act immediately to improve the security
situation in those regions. It urges that Croatian
officials ensure that members of the military and
police refrain from criminal and other unacceptable
behaviour, and increase their efforts to protect the
human rights of all persons present in Croatia,
including the Serb population.

"The Security Council welcomes the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
his report for specific action which must be taken to
improve the human rights situation in the Republic of
Croatia, inter alia in the framework of the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium (S/ 1995/951, annex), as part of
the peace process towards a comprehensive political
settlement in the region. In this context, the Council
calls upon the Government of Croatia to expand
investigations of crimes committed against the Serb
population in 1995. The Council again calls upon the
Government of Croatia to rescind its decision of
September 1995 suspending certain constitutional
provisions affecting the rights of national minorities,
principally Serbs.

 

"The Security Council reminds the Government
of Croatia of its obligation to cooperate with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and, in particular, to execute the arrest warrants
issued by the Tribunal regarding individuals under
Croatian jurisdiction, including prominent accused
persons known or believed to be in areas under its
control, and to transfer to the Tribunal all indicted
persons. In this context, the Security Council
deplores the failure to date of the Republic of
Croatia to execute the arrest warrants issued by the
Tribunal against individuals indicted by the Tribunal,
in particular the Bosnian Croats referred to in the
letter of 16 September 1996 from the President of
the Tribunal to the President of the Council
(S/1996/763), and calls for the execution of those
arrest warrants without delay.

"The Security Council recalls that no individual
should be arrested and detained on the territory of
the former Yugoslavia for serious violations of
international humanitarian law until and unless the
International Tribunal has reviewed the case and
agreed that the warrant, order, or indictment meets
international legal standards.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter and requests that the Secretary-General
continue to report on the situation, in any case no
later than 10 December 1996."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/39.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 4.10 pm.

