Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: An extremely worrying
impasse persists in efforts to bring about Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations, amidst low confidence
between the parties, disputes over the terms of
reference for negotiations, continued creation of facts
on the ground, tensions in Jerusalem, uneven
developments in the remainder of the West Bank and
unsustainable conditions in Gaza.

Intense diplomatic activity has continued, to try
to bring about resumed negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians, including United States Envoy George
Mitchell's recent visit to the region. These efforts are
continuing, and the parties have indicated that they are
reviewing developments, but a breakthrough has not
been achieved.

The Secretary-General and his Envoy are actively
engaged with the parties and regional partners, and
within the Quartet, in an effort to support the initiation
of a meaningful process that leads to a clear endgame.
The Secretary-General met Envoy Mitchell on
6 January, and we welcome Mr. Mitchell's engagement
with Quartet envoys and other partners in Europe on
12 and 13 January. We also note the efforts of Egypt,
which hosted Israeli and Palestinian leaders for
discussions this month. Special Coordinator Robert
Serry recently visited Cairo and Amman.

We believe that the Quartet can and must play its
full role at this crucial juncture if obstacles are to be
overcome and a process is to be resumed with
prospects for success. The parties must also assume
10-22064
their responsibilities. Notwithstanding certain steps,
Israel can and should do considerably more to build
confidence through the implementation of obligations
on the ground and by signalling a genuine commitment
to negotiating and resolving all core issues, including
Jerusalem, within a clear time frame. While we do not
underestimate the difficulties and concerns involved,
the Palestinians should continue to engage in earnest,
as they are doing, in an effort to bring about resumed
negotiations.

Despite the political impasse, the Palestinian
Authority continues its efforts to advance its State-
building agenda. During the reporting period, the
Palestinian Authority marked the completion of its
1,000th small project since 2008 targeting underserved
communities. On 14 January, Prime Minister Fayyad
presented the Government's priority interventions for
2010: institution-building, strategic infrastructure and
the delivery of services. We urge the international
community to support that programme. The total cost is
estimated at $5.5 billion, of which only 50 per cent is
fully or partially funded.

The Palestinian Authority also faces a recurring
budget deficit that is estimated at $1.2 billion. It is
therefore in need of further budgetary support in 2010.
In fulfilling outstanding pledges from the Paris and
Sharm el-Sheikh donor conferences, the Palestinian
Authority has requested that assistance be frontloaded
and that measures be taken to ensure the predictability
of financing.

The Palestinian Authority also continues to make
progress in the areas of law and order and combating
potential terrorism, in accordance with the Road Map.
Four hundred newly trained Palestinian security
personnel were deployed in Hebron in early January.
Progress has been made in recent months in addressing
human rights concerns in Palestinian Authority prisons.

We note positively new Israeli measures to
facilitate economic activity in the West Bank. On
4 January, the opening hours of the Tarkumiya
commercial goods crossing between the southern West
Bank and Israel were extended to improve access for
goods. On 15 January, a section of a road south-west of
Hebron that connects two major routes and provides
critical access for some villages to service centres was
reopened to Palestinian traffic for the first time since
2001.
3
We urge Israel to take more far-reaching
measures to facilitate Palestinian development in the
West Bank, including the further easing of closures -
which stand at 569 obstacles to movement -
facilitating improvements in Area C and refraining
from demolishing Palestinian homes. During this
reporting period, demolitions left over 100
Palestinians, including 34 children, homeless.

I would like to reiterate the Secretary-General's
concern about the situation in East Jerusalem. He calls
on Israeli authorities to put an end to activities such as
settlement construction and expansion, house
demolitions, the closure of institutions and the
revocation of residency rights.

As they have for nearly a decade and contrary to
the Road Map, Palestinian institutions in East
Jerusalem remained closed during the reporting period,
including Orient House and the Chamber of
Commerce. Protests by Israelis and Palestinians alike
against Israeli actions in Sheikh Jarrah - where
several families have been evicted and a further 25 face
the same threat - have continued and now take place
most weeks. Seventeen demonstrators arrested on
15 January were released the following day after the
Israeli court ruled their arrests illegal, but a further 20
were detained on 22 January. There are also persistent
concerns with regard to settler-run archeological
excavations, including tunnelling activities, in the
sensitive Silwan neighbourhood, which is adjacent to
the Old City. New cracks that appeared in roads after
recent heavy rain have been attributed by some reports
to those activities.

There continue to be official announcements of
intent to expand settlement construction within the
Israeli-determined municipal boundaries of occupied
East Jerusalem, in areas of existing settlement and in
Palestinian neighbourhoods. Those include the 692
new housing units in three existing settlements
announced on 28 December, a new project announced
on 4 January to house 24 settler families in the
Palestinian neighbourhood of the Mount of Olives, and
a plan announced on 6 January to establish 50 new
settler housing units in the Palestinian neighbourhood
of Shuafat. We urge the Israeli Government not to
finalize the approval of those plans. The international
community does not recognize Israel's annexation of
East Jerusalem. The status of the city remains a final
status issue for negotiations, through which a way must

be found for Jerusalem to emerge as the capital of two
States.

The policy of partial temporary settlement
restraint in the remainder of the West Bank announced
in November by Prime Minister Netanyahu is being
broadly implemented. Teams of Israeli inspectors have
visited settlements to verify that stop-work orders are
being put into effect. However, due to the exemptions
in the policy and, in some cases, the fact that
construction is continuing contrary to the policy,
construction activity has been reported in several
settlements. On 20 January, Defence Minister Barak
upgraded to university status a college in the large
settlement of Ariel in the occupied West Bank, while
Prime Minister Netanyahu planted trees in Gush Etzion
and Ma'ale Adumim on 24 January.

Settlement activity throughout the territory
occupied in 1967 is illegal, and its continuation is
contrary to the Road Map. We once again strongly urge
the full implementation of Israel's obligations to freeze
all settlement activity, including as a result of natural
growth, and to dismantle the outposts erected since
March 2001. On 12 January, Prime Minister Fayyad
announced that the Palestinian Authority is seeking to
implement a boycott of settlement products within
Palestinian areas.

Palestinian, Israeli and foreign protestors
continued demonstrating in the villages of Nil'in and
Bil'in, where the barrier is built on occupied
Palestinian territory contrary to the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. There have also been
clashes between protestors and Israeli security forces.

During the reporting period, there was a
substantial increase in Israeli military operations in the
West Bank - 143 in total - in response to alleged
security threats. Three Palestinians were killed, 87
injured and over 300 arrested, 12 of whom were found
to be carrying explosives. In a serious episode,
Palestinian gunmen killed a settler on a road near
Nablus on 24 December. In an action strongly
denounced by the Palestinian Authority, Israeli forces
entered Nablus on 26 December and killed three
Palestinians alleged to be the perpetrators. Palestinian
security forces arrested several individuals in the
course of their own investigations into the killing of
the settler.

In total, there were 107 violent incidents between
settlers and Palestinians during the reporting period,
which left 22 Palestinians and 18 settlers injured -
partly due to the "price tag" policy to protest the Israeli
Government's policy of settlement restraint. Following
the evacuation of the Givat Menachem outpost
yesterday, settlers attacked Palestinians and their
property in the neighbouring village of Bitilu. We note
that the Israeli police detained a number of settlers on
suspicion of involvement in the mosque arson at
Yassuf, which was reported in the last briefing.
However, more must be done to impose the rule of law
on violent settlers.

Turning to Gaza, as he stated on the first
anniversary of Operation Cast Lead on 27 December,
the Secretary-General remains gravely concerned that
neither the issues that led to the conflict nor its
worrying aftermath is being addressed. This has
created an unsustainable situation and a sense of
hopelessness for the civilian population in Gaza, more
than half of whom are under 18.

Hamas remains in de facto control of Gaza,
asserting security control and pushing forward its
social and institutional agenda. We regret its refusal to
sign the Egyptian reconciliation proposal, accepted late
last year by factions of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) following an extended process of
discussions, and urge Hamas to reconsider this
position.

We continue to support the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority, and to express the
hope that free and fair elections throughout the
Palestinian territory can be held as soon as possible. In
the meantime, with the passing of the 25 January 2010
date by which the ranks of elected officials would
ordinarily have been renewed by elections, the
presidency and legislature have been extended by PLO
decision until elections can be held, though the
legislature is unable to meet due to the internal divide.

Efforts to secure the release of Israeli captive
Gilad Shalit in exchange for a number of the 9,000
Palestinians in Israeli jails have not so far achieved a
breakthrough.

There was a notable increase in the number of
projectiles fired from Gaza by militant groups during
the earlier part of this reporting period. Over 70
projectiles of different calibres were fired, 19 of which
reached Israel. There were 20 Israeli incursions and 11
air strikes against targets in the Strip, leading to 11
Palestinian fatalities, including six civilians, and six
injuries. This spike in violence is worrying and
underscores the fragility of the current situation.
However, we continue to believe from our contacts that
major constituencies wish to maintain calm. We urge all
parties to refrain from violence and respect
international humanitarian law.

Reports of weapons smuggling continue to cause
concern. Egyptian efforts to combat smuggling have
continued, including through the use of tunnel-
detecting sensors and the insertion of metal sheeting in
parts of the ground along the border. Goods smuggled
through tunnels are both sustaining and distorting the
Gaza economy. There is an urgent need for all
crossings into Gaza to be opened as foreseen in the
Agreement on Movement and Access.

On 6 January, during a demonstration by
Palestinians in Rafah, Gaza, demanding the entry of a
solidarity convoy of humanitarian aid, an Egyptian
soldier was shot and killed on the Egyptian side of the
border with Gaza. As the incident evolved, at least 13
Palestinians were injured on the Gazan side of the
border. The Egyptian authorities have called on Hamas
to ensure that those involved in the killing are brought
to justice.

We repeat our call for an end to the blockade of
Gaza. During the reporting period, a weekly average of
534 truckloads of imports entered the Strip, a 10 per
cent decline in quantity from the last reporting period,
although it is positive that in December there was a
slight expansion in the types of allowed imports, with
goods such as candles, brooms, eye glasses and
blankets entering. There was a 13 per cent increase in
the amount of cooking gas entering Gaza, although
shortages remain. There has also been a limited
response to the United Nations call for a winterization
package for Gaza. In particular, since 29 December,
and following an appeal to the Israeli Government by
the Secretary-General, 57 truckloads of glass have
entered the Gaza Strip as part of an Israeli clearance
for a total of 100 truckloads. This has enabled more
ordinary families to repair some of the lesser damage
caused during operation Cast Lead. In addition, Israel
permitted the export of 41 truckloads comprising
nearly 2 million carnations and over 40 tons of
strawberries during the reporting period, with
approximately 300 tons of strawberries expected to be
exported by the end of the season.

The Gaza power plant faces fuel shortages,
largely as a result of funding shortfalls, and efforts are
continuing to resolve this important issue to prevent a
shutdown of the plant, which would have worrying
humanitarian consequences. It is also vital that the
entry of materials for repair of electricity infrastructure
be facilitated by Israel, together with sufficient
quantities of fuel.

On 1 January, citing concerns over tunnelling and
the risk of attack, the Israeli authorities announced that
the Nahal Oz crossing, which is used for the transfer of
fuel from Israel to Gaza, will no longer be operational.
The bulk of fuel imports will now pass through the
much smaller-capacity Kerem Shalom crossing. With
the exception of a conveyer belt at the Karni crossing
used for the import of grain, it is very concerning that
Kerem Shalom is now the only operational crossing for
the import and export of goods into and from Gaza.

There has still been no satisfactory Israeli
response to the United Nations proposal to complete
stalled projects for housing, schools and health
facilities. This is extremely disappointing, and the
Secretary-General intends to continue to pursue this
matter. We note with concern restrictions that appear to
be preventing senior international visitors from
entering Gaza.

Towards the end of 2009, there was an increase in
impediments within Gaza due to demands from Hamas
for information from aid agencies, leading to several
incidents involving the confiscation or interference with
aid supplies. Following interventions by the United
Nations, the goods have been released and operations
resumed. We will continue to insist on non-interference
with international aid operations in Gaza.

On 15 January, an arrangement was concluded
whereby the Government of Israel made a payment of
$10.5 million to the United Nations in respect oflosses
sustained in the nine incidents investigated by the Gaza
Board of Inquiry. In the light of this payment, the
United Nations has agreed that the financial issues
relating to those incidents have been brought to a
satisfactory conclusion. As members of the Council are
aware, the Secretary-General has written to the
President of the Council informing him of this
arrangement. We hope that Israel will allow the entry
of sufficient materials to allow the rebuilding of the
damaged United Nations buildings and facilities now
that funds are available.

We continue to support all efforts towards a
resumption of Israeli-Syrian negotiations, and
comprehensive regional peace. United States
Envoy Mitchell visited Lebanon and Syria on 19 and
20 January in the course of consultations on a
comprehensive regional peace, and met with the
leaders of both countries. On the ground, the situation
in the occupied Syrian Golan remains stable, although
settlement activity continues.

Progress in Lebanese-Syrian relations was
highlighted by Prime Minister Hariri's first visit to
Damascus on 19 December 2009, where he met Syrian
President Bashar Al-Assad for extensive talks. The
Prime Minister also visited Turkey Jordan, the United
Arab Emirates, Egypt and France during this reporting
period. President Sleiman held talks with French
President Sarkozy in Paris on 30 December.

On the security front, an explosion took place in
the evening of 26 December 2009 inside a building used
by Hamas in Beirut's southern suburb of Dahiye. The
explosion left two Hamas members dead and wounded
three others. The investigation into the incident is
ongoing. Progress, albeit slow, continues to be made
towards the reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared refugee
camp, which commenced on 25 November 2009.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remains quiet but fragile. On 26 December, in the
vicinity of Sarda, a UNIFIL patrol observed several
men digging a hole, where 250 kilograms of explosives
were found by UNIFIL; the men fled as the patrol
approached. Israeli air violations continued on a daily
basis during the reporting period, with a marked
increase in early January.

We remain deeply concerned at the current
stalemate. If we cannot move forward decisively
towards a final status agreement, we risk sliding
backwards, with potentially profound and negative
implications. We continue to urge the parties to
implement their Road Map obligations, build
confidence, resume negotiations on all final status
issues and see them through to a two-State solution,
and we believe the Quartet must play its full role in
support of the process. We remain committed to an end
to the occupation that began in 1967 and an end to the
conflict, through the creation of a Palestinian State
living side by side with Israel in peace and security and
comprehensive regional peace, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, previous agreements, the
Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

