Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): At the outset, on
behalf of my delegation, I wish to express my gratitude
to the Austrian presidency of the Security Council for
this opportunity to address an issue that, unfortunately,
reflects problems in many parts of the world. I would
also like to take this opportunity to welcome the
statement by the Secretary-General on this subject.

While Georgia has aligned itself with the
statement made by the Swedish representative on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union, I
would like to take this opportunity to stress some
additional points.

The recent developments in my country confirm
that when a State is in constant breach of norms of
international humanitarian law and voluntarily
accepted international commitments, the result is
human suffering and ethnic cleansing.

Five months ago, we all had an opportunity to
address this matter at an open debate here in this
Chamber (see S/PV.6151 (Resumption 1)). At that
time, my delegation provided the Council with detailed
information on civilians living under foreign
occupation in two regions of my country, Abkhazia and
the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia. We also offered
a rationale for the actions of one permanent member of
Council, which consecutively vetoed the presence of
two international monitoring missions in Georgia.
Unbiased and qualified international monitors would
have provided a clear assessment of the situation on the
ground. Once again, the veto of one permanent member
led to the failure to create an objective source of
information for the international community.

Since our statement five months ago, nothing has
changed. Ethnicity-based violations and other gross
and massive violations of human rights law and
humanitarian law happen on a daily basis. During the
past several days alone, four Georgian teenagers, aged
14 to 16, were kidnapped from a village located near
the occupation line and charged with terrorist activity.
Earlier today, in addition, five citizens who happened
to be fishing in Georgian territorial waters controlled
by the central Government were kidnapped on charges
of so-called illegal fishing and are being held in
custody. Only a couple of days ago, 16 men were
released after being arrested for simply cutting down
trees in a forest that is, again, close to the occupation
line.

These deplorable provocations coincided with the
eighth round of talks in Geneva, where the European
Union, the United Nations and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe are trying to
facilitate a dialogue between the parties to achieve a
peaceful solution of the problem. The previous rounds
in Geneva showed nothing but the unwillingness of our
northern neighbour to engage itself in a substantive
dialogue.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to the
problem of humanitarian access to civilians in need of
assistance. In the Tskhinvali region of South Ossetia,
the occupying forces continue to block access for
humanitarian aid and international humanitarian actors,
which obliges missions to enter the Tskhinvali region
exclusively from the territory of the Russian
Federation. This policy represents yet another breach
of the principles of international humanitarian law, as
well as of paragraph 3 of the European Union-brokered
ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008.

Notwithstanding the protests of numerous
international organizations against this discriminatory
policy, the policy persists. The blockade turns the
territory into a black hole, where people are deprived
of their basic rights and where humanitarian aid is
simply not allowed. The continuation of the current
state of affairs cannot be tolerated by the international
community.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council that my
country stands ready to work with the international
community in order to ensure that real progress in
protection of civilians becomes a reality.

