Let me begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing and all three parties - Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan - for joining the meeting today. The United Kingdom is a friend to all three nations, with partnerships that support each to prosper. We recognize the rights of all three countries to utilize Nile waters and believe that, done right, the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam has, as Ms DiCarlo set out, real potential to be a positive development for the region. The United Kingdom places strong emphasis on consensus between parties on developments that impact a shared natural resource. We are pleased that many of the key elements needed to reach such consensus are captured in the Agreement on Declaration of Principles, reached by the parties on 23 March 2015, in particular the principles of not causing significant harm and of equitable and reasonable utilization. Since the Agreement on Declaration of Principles, the three parties have continued talks, including with the support of mediation by the United States, to reach a more detailed trilateral agreement on the filling and operation of the dam. The progress and commitment have shown the spirit of cooperation across the Nile. We would like to take this opportunity to thank the Sudan for Prime Minister Hamdok's current role in brokering talks, even though it is a party to the discussions. We also thank the Chairperson of the African Union (AU), President Ramaphosa, and the Chairperson of the AU Commission for their actions last Friday and over the weekend to support that effort, with a further round of talks to resolve those issues that remain outstanding. I am grateful to Ambassador Matjila for South Africa's update on those talks and on next steps. We are encouraged by the engagement and commitment shown. We recognize, however, that reaching agreement requires compromise by all parties. It is important that all parties keep sight of those key principles agreed as part of the Agreement on Declaration of Principles. It is in that spirit that talks should continue and conclude. The United Kingdom is confident that, working together, Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan have the strength and resolve to reach an accord to the benefit of all. In concluding, let me once again reaffirm the United Kingdom's support for the Governments and the peoples of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan in their endeavours to reach a mutually fair and equitable agreement. I hope that they have all heard the message of Council members today that all three sides refrain from actions that would undermine negotiations and that they engage constructively and urgently, ina spirit of compromise, to conclude negotiations and reach an agreement.
