Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the delegation of Spain for convening this open
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov, and Ambassador Gerard Van Bohemen for
their briefings.

China applauds the unceasing efforts of the
Afghan Government to safeguard national stability,
promote national reconciliation and advance economic
development. On the other hand, we should be
cognizant of the fact that Afghanistan still faces
grave political, economic and security challenges. The
road to peace and development remains long, and the
mission remains arduous. It is China's hope that the
international community will continue to treat the
issue of Afghanistan as a priority and will continue its
support and aid to Afghanistan.

The first prong of such an effort involves drastically
improving the security situation in Afghanistan. The
international community should lend strong support to
the capacity-building of the Afghan National Security
and Defence Forces, so as to shore up Afghanistan's
independent defence and counter-terrorism capabilities
and effectively tackle terrorism, transnational crime
and drug trafficking. We hope that the rest of the
region will continue to cooperate with Afghanistan
in the security sector so as to jointly build a secure
regional environment.

The second prong involves steadfastly advancing
the process of national reconciliation in Afghanistan.
The international community should spare no effort to
support an inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation process and support the efforts of the
parties concerned to settle their differences through
dialogue. The quadrilateral coordination group, which
is made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and the
United States, will continue to play a positive role in
galvanizing that process.

The third prong involves supporting Afghanistan's
development guided by Afghanistan's own initiatives.
China commends the Afghan Government for drawing
up the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework. We hope that the international community
will deliver on its aid pledges and provide targeted
assistance in line with the development strategy drawn
up by the Government of Afghanistan and based on the
country's actual needs on the ground.

The fourth prong involves helping Afghanistan
integrate into regional economic cooperation. Just
recently, the General Assembly unanimously adopted
resolution 71/9, on the situation in Afghanistan. That
resolution refers to the importance of the One Belt,
One Road initiative - the Silk Road Economic Belt
and the Twenty-first century Maritime Silk Road - to
the promotion of Afghanistan's economic development
and regional cooperation. We hope that the countries
concerned will work, as outlined in the resolution,
to strengthen regional economic cooperation and
connectivity and help Afghanistan join the mighty tide
of regional development.

China commends the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and supports the Mission's positive role in helping
Afghanistan safeguard its national security,
promote economic development and improve its
governance capacities.

We will continue to support the work of UNAMA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto. China has been consistently supported
the reconciliation process, characterized by Afghan
leadership and ownership, as well as Afghanistan's
capacity-building in the security sector to combat
terrorism and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization's
positive role in this area.

China steadfastly supports Afghan integration
in regional development cooperation and will work
with the Afghan Government to implement the
Chinese-Afghan memorandum of understanding on the
One Belt, One Road initiative and to strengthen our
cooperation in areas such as business, trade, energy
and infrastructure.

China is ready to work with the rest of the
international community and continue our tireless
endeavour to help Afghanistan achieve peace, stability
and development as soon as possible.

