Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by welcoming His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo. We also
welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK); we thank him for his briefing this
morning.

Costa Rica knows that Kosovo's declaration of
independence has substantially altered the situation, as
well as the circumstances in which UNMIK operates,
as the Secretary-General notes in his most recent report
to the Security Council (S/2008/458). The complex
situation in the Balkans over the centuries is not going
to be resolved in a period so brief as that in which the
United Nations and UNMIK have been playing a role.
But it is only right to recognize the contribution that
the Organization has made to date in normalizing
certain very important aspects of the lives of the
peoples concerned. It is also right to observe that
history records lengthy periods of peaceful coexistence
and tolerance among them.

That is the basis for Costa Rica's support of the
Secretary-General's activities to reconfigure UNMIK
within the mandate defined in resolution 1244 (1999).
We are convinced that the reconfiguration proposed by
the Secretary-General and implemented by his Special

Representative is the best way, given the current
circumstances, to ensure that UNMIK can continue to
contribute to the mission entrusted to it by that
resolution. It should also be stated that the
contributions made by the European Union (EU) and
other European bodies and agencies are central pillars
in the establishment of a long-term solution to the
Kosovo conflict.

The Special Representative's briefing this
morning provided a clearer and more detailed picture
of the weakened situation of UNMIK and the
limitations it faces in carrying out its work, fulfilling
its mandate and enforcing its decisions, in the light of
the new reality. Costa Rica believes that the Security
Council therefore cannot continue much longer to
ignore the need for a formal review of the situation and
the mandate of the Mission.

Because of its importance from the standpoint of
justice, Costa Rica wants to highlight the contribution
made this week by the Government of Serbia in
arresting the fugitive Radovan Karadzic, who is
accused of crimes against humanity committed during
the appalling events that took place during the war
among Serbs, Bosnians and Croats at the end of the
twentieth century. Without doubt, that arrest reflects
the guiding principles of the new Government of
Serbia, which is a source of gratification to us. It also
reflects Serbia's commitment to full integration into
Europe.

At the same time, we voice our concern at the
availability of large quantities of illicit arms in
Kosovo, as noted by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 8 of his report. We respectfully but
vehemently urge that a solution be speedily found to
that problem.

Finally, Costa Rica appeals once again to the
parties to look to the future rather than to the past and
to begin a process of reconciliation and political
dialogue that can resolve the outstanding issues and
find a lasting solution that will benefit all the
inhabitants of the region.

