Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me first to associate myself with the words of solidarity
that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia
addressed to the parties involved in the tragic air crash
that took place yesterday and which particularly affects
Kenya.

 

We would also like to welcome and thank President
Chiluba of Zambia for coming here this morning and for
making such a brilliant, sincere and profound statement
during our debate. We also welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa and Namibia, who I would
particularly like to thank for the warm words that they have
extended to me.

We believe that this has really been a meaningful
month for Africa and the Security Council. Your firm
leadership, Sir, your tireless capacity for taking the
initiative and your power to get people to meet have played
a decisive role. The Great Lakes region has received
particular attention throughout January, and we think that
this was necessary.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
all of the parties present in New York have engaged in
direct dialogue and renewed their commitment to the
Lusaka Agreement. The momentum created during this
recent period must not be lost. The United Nations has a
role to play and an historic responsibility with regard to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Thus Argentina
commits itself to working constructively to ensure that the
Security Council can adopt a resolution that will authorize
the deployment, as speedily as possible, of 500 military
observers, with reasonable security guarantees, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report
contained in document S/2000/30.

In this connection we reiterate our firm position
regarding respect for the territorial integrity and political
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At
the same time, we understand that there will be no lasting
solution without an appropriate scheme of security
guarantees for all the countries of the Great Lakes region.

As regards Burundi, we trust that the experience and
wisdom of President Mandela will contribute to national
reconciliation. His words at the historic Security Council
meeting of Wednesday, 19 January, showed the parties the
course to follow. We reiterate our support for the Arusha
process and for a dialogue that would include all the
parties, with the ultimate objective of creating and
strengthening an open, democratic and tolerant society in
Burundi.

The questions of Angola and Sierra Leone also
received attention from the Security Council in January. We
would like once again to thank Ambassador Fowler for his
excellent briefing, at the meeting held on 18 January, on his
most recent trip to Angola. The sanctions regime imposed
on UNITA is, at long last, beginning to be effective. This
is very important because we believe it will help to
restore confidence in the Security Council. Having said
this, we cannot but express our concern at the continuing
armed conflict and the humanitarian situation in
Angola - a situation that Mrs. Ogata described on 13
January as being possibly the most serious in Africa. We
would reiterate once again our belief that no military
solution can bring long-term peace and stability to
Angola, and that for this reason the conditions must be
created for an open-ended political dialogue. In this
context, we believe that a multidimensional United
Nations presence must be maintained in Angola.

This month we have successfully negotiated a draft
resolution that calls for a considerable expansion of the
composition and mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). That draft, I hope, will be
adopted next week. We believe that UNAMSIL will make
an important contribution to the Lome peace process and
to stability in the subregion.

Two important open debates on Africa were held in
January: the oral briefing by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and the debate on the impact
of AIDS on peace and security in Africa. These two
issues have led us to consider, as Vice-President Gore
indicated to the Security Council on 10 January, a broader
concept of threats to international peace and security,
which we are charged with monitoring.

Other African issues that were not taken up this
month require our attention. Mr. President, you quite
rightly called January the "Month of Africa". It has been
a month of great effort, activity and creativity, a source
of pride to you and to your delegation. During the
Argentine presidency in February, with the contribution
and cooperation of the Secretary-General and of all
Members of the United Nations, we promise to do our
utmost to ensure that the Security Council can continue to
contribute to ensuring peace in Africa.

