Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Presidents of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and the Prosecutors for the
presentation of their respective reports.

Since the presentation of the evaluation reports on
3 June (see S/PV.7455), the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia has made considerable efforts,
trying four accused in four cases in first instance and
three cases on appeal. It will also complete this month,
in cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, the largest appeal judgement ever been
carried out by the Tribunal: the Butare case. In the same
vein, there is every reason to believe that the timeline
concerning the two rulings planned for March 2016 as
well as the completion of the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in December 2017
will be respected.

To date, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has rendered 147 rulings or judgements out
of the 161 cases for which it is responsible. The work
accomplished by this Tribunal should be commended,
as should its enormous contribution to international
justice. However, despite the progress made, the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
continues to encounter difficulties. The departure of a
number of qualified staffmembers is likely to cause new
delays. Accordingly, the necessary attention should be
paid to the analysis of the financial strategy drafted by
the Tribunal, with a view to allowing it to retain staff
members and carry out its work in accordance with
the set time frame. Similarly, the question before the
Council of extending the terms of judges should have a
positive outcome.

We welcome the fact that the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda has completed its work this year,
even though the costs and deadlines initially set by the
relevant Security Council resolutions have largely been
surpassed. The objective of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda is to combat impunity and console
the victims and their families. We would like to pay
due tribute to all of the Tribunal's judges and staff who,
despite difficult conditions, have carried out their task
in a dignified manner. However, we regret to note that
some fugitives are still avoiding justice. We have just
been informed by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda that one of them has just
been apprehended in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the arrest and hope that the eight
others will be found and transferred to the Mechanism
and to the national tribunals to stand trial. To that end
we reiterate our appeal to the countries where those
fugitives appear to be in hiding to engaged in greater
cooperation with the Mechanism.

We note with satisfaction the almost seamless setting
up of the Mechanism, as well as its operationalization,
which is evidenced by its numerous judgements, orders
and opinions. Its first judgement, which concerns
the Ngirabatware case, was rendered according to
the timeline. The Mechanism has ruled on various
administrative and judicial issues and is working
effectively to protect witnesses. Its two sections are
actively supporting national tribunals, and many good
initiatives are being carried out, including provisions
in terms of time and resources for future judgements
in the first instance and on appeal, the establishment of
a staff-recruitment policy, computerized networks, and
so on. We hope that those planning efforts will make it
possible to ensure that the errors of the past are avoided.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
its new President, Judge Carmel Agius, as well as for
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. President Agius has sought to promote
effectiveness and transparency in order to complete the
work of the Tribunal in the stipulated time frame.

