Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (Spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting. We also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their excellent briefings.

When this second meeting was convened to address
the situation in Idlib, we could not help but wonder if we
should prepare for the worst-case scenario in Idlib and
if the United Nations should urgently review its state of
readiness in the event that developments took a tragic
course and we again found ourselves with a situation
similar to that of Aleppo, which has been virtually
completely destroyed by the war. Equatorial Guinea
believes that there is indeed cause for concern, as a
surge in ceasefire violations in the de-escalation zone
is increasingly worrisome, with serious consequences
for the humanitarian situation faced by civilians in
Idlib, an increase in the number of fatalities and a wave
of displacement, as Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lowcock
have described.

We are facing a devastating scenario in which
thousands of families and villages have been completely
annihilated and in which corpses, as has been
underscored, are arriving from hospitals and schools
on a daily basis, as well as a huge number of internally
displaced persons, many of whom are wounded and
face an acute lack of hospitals and means to care for
them. Worse still, the few hospitals that can still care
for the wounded are constantly under attack.

We call on all the parties to put an immediate
end to the escalation of tensions in Idlib and to do
everything possible to prevent the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas, health centres, schools
and other civilian infrastructure, and to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian
law to prevent civilians from bearing the brunt of the
fighting. They also have an obligation to protect civilian
infrastructure, such as hospitals, schools, warehouses
and so on.

As we underscored recently, given this bleak
outlook, we cannot remain mere onlookers. Passivity
and the lack of genuine political will to bring an end
to the hostilities in Idlib will, in one way or another,
turn us into participants in the ongoing tragedy
in Idlib. We must therefore be unwavering in our
determination to resolve the situation in that supposedly
demilitarized zone.

We encourage better Russian-Turkish cooperation
aimed at stabilizing the situation in Idlib and stress
the need to take effective measures to combat terrorist
organizations in Syria. We recall that no one should
sabotage the effective coordination of those bilateral
actions, which could thwart the spirit of Astana and
increase the risk of tensions, as well as tear apart the
political process in Syria and the formation of the
constitutional committee.

In conclusion, we would like to echo some internal
Syrian voices who are calling on the United Nations
to consider deploying an impartial and independent
monitoring team in Idlib in order to ensure the cessation
of all acts of violence against women, document any
violations and a posteriori prosecute and punish those
responsible. We believe that measure deserves the full
attention ofthe Council, since it is aimed specifically at
protecting the Syrian people from a possible massacre
looming on the horizon in Idlib. We call on those
countries that have influence on the events that are
unfolding to exert the necessary pressure on the parties
to avoid a huge loss of innocent lives, as we are now
seeing in Idlib.

