Mr. Awan: First of all, let me express my
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Poland to the United Nations for having invited me
and facilitated my coming to New York for today's open
debate. My thanks also go to War Child Holland, and
my colleague with me now, Mr. Eamonn Hanson, for
allowing me to take the floor at this important meeting.

The world today has become a global village, which
is quite different from the way it was when I was a boy.
My name is Majok Peter Awan, and I know exactly what
it is like to live in a village. I was born in 1979, in a
remote village called Pakeer, located in what is now the
Jonglei state of South Sudan. At that time, we did not
have any hospitals or schools or even infrastructure to
connect us with the world outside the village. The world
was unaware of our existence, much less the suffering
we endured during the Sudanese civil war. And we had
no idea what the rest of the world looked like.

Yet, since the time when I was a child, the Security
Council has recognized the severe impacts of war and
other forms of armed conflict on boys and girls, whose
protection it has taken steps to improve. It has developed
a unique monitoring and reporting mechanism to
collect information on the grave violations of children's
rights in conflict, and, over the past two decades, it has
increased its attention to children involved in armed
conflict. But despite improved information systems
and stronger normative frameworks, children living
in conflict zones continue to face many of the awful
abuses and violations of their rights that my peers and I
faced in the Sudan a long time ago.

As a child, I lived in a village where our community
took care of its members, although with little. We still
felt responsible for the well-being of our children,
parents and grandparents. But our well-being was not
defined by material things; it was about the love and
tenderness we shared with each other in the hope that
the children would grow up peacefully.

At the age of five, I was already herding cattle, goats
and sheep in the hot sun of tropical Africa, together
with other children of my age. I was one of those many
smiling, innocent, playful children. Little did I know
what was to follow. The civil war in the Sudan broke
out and soon reached my village. I really had no clue
why the adults were fighting. Unfortunately, I found
out very soon.

When I was seven years old, the local rebel group
fighting the Government in Khartoum took me from
my home and made me undergo a six-month intensive
military training. I was then assigned to local rebel
commander to work as his bodyguard and perform such
additional duties as cooking, fetching water, gathering
firewood, spying and looting. It was an overwhelming
and debilitating situation of do-or-die. My four friends
and I would play under the shadow of fear, because it
was illegal to play. With that high level of vulnerability,
there was nothing I could do but follow orders.

There was no social media to share my experiences,
no United Nations monitors to document my story and
no child-protection actor to calm my fears. It was me,
myself and I in a devastating situation. Nobody saw me.
The world had no clue as to what was going on. I felt
totally abandoned by it. The serious trauma caused will
have a lasting impact on the rest of my life. Of that I
am sure.

But you know what? I managed to escape and
survived the brutal killings and massive abuses of the
1992-1994 period of confusion in the Sudan. At the age
of 15, I managed to reach the Kakuma refugee camp
in Kenya, which was managed at that time by Radda
Barnen; it is now run by Save the Children International.

Much was accomplished thanks to the camp's
capacities and the support I received. I remember that
they urged us to go to the church, play with other children
and not stay by ourselves. After two years of trauma, I
was able to socialize with other children again. Not all
children can recover like I did without assistance from
the outside. Child-protection programming, including
individualized psychosocial support, education and
livelihood opportunities, is key in the recovery of
children and their families affected by conflict.

With unconditional support from my maternal
uncle and child-protection actors, I went to school
and university and finally got a job with War Child
Holland as a child-protection and psychosocial-support
coordinator in South Sudan. I am now able to help
other little Majok Peters in my own country, which
has been torn by a series of wars. Every single day,
when I am in contact with all those innocent children
affected by conflict, I see myself. As a child-protection
and psychosocial-support coordinator, administering
psychosocial support, managing cases, tracing and
reunifying families and helping children formally
associated with armed groups, survivors of sexual
violence, children with disabilities, children who are
separated from their parents and detained children is
not a simple thing, but a commitment.

Naturally, carrying out those functions makes
me sad and brings back many bad and sad memories.
But I am also happy that the world today knows, at
the very least, what child protection, mental health
and psychosocial support are and what they do. Not
enough has been done, which is a shame since there is
no excuse or reason for not knowing the harsh situation
of those children.

Yes, we can switch off our televisions when it
shows children with war trauma, but one minute later
we will see it on our daily Twitter news feed or in our
Instagram stories or we will see bloody pictures of
wounded children on the leading international news
websites. It is here and now. We cannot deny it anymore
like the world did when I was a child.

In 2018, almost 50 million children were
in need of protection in humanitarian settings.
Yet child protection has not been systematically
prioritized during humanitarian responses. It remains
underfunded, deprioritized and even too late when
children's lives are at risk. During a crisis, children
are among the most vulnerable. They are exposed
to life-threatening risks, extreme violence, abuse,
physical and sexual exploitation, abduction or military
recruitment - voluntary or forceful. Child protection
programmes are essential for preventing violence
against children, facilitating family tracing and
reunification and ensuring proper and timely referrals
of children in need of health care, food, education and
psychosocial support.

My appeal to the Security Council is to ensure that
children affected by conflict get the full support they
need to heal their physical and psychological wounds.
Otherwise, their past will become their burden.
We know that today about 420 million children are
growing up in conflict-affected zones. One of five will
require urgent psychosocial support. In South Sudan
alone, 19,000 children are associated with armed
groups or forces. Every year, at least $200 million of
humanitarian aid is needed to scale up basic mental
health care packages to reach children and adolescents
in conflict zones. Additional support is needed for
comprehensive child protection, case management,
including reintegration, and livelihood and education
programmes in order to provide individualized, gender-
sensitive support to address affected children's needs.
What can the Governments in this Chamber do?
First, I call on them to promote the right to mental
health and psychological well-being in international
forums and to integrate mental health in their national
laws, policies and emergency plans. All Governments
should commit to increase their mental health spending
allocation to at least 5 per cent of their total health
budget. That should be in addition to budget allocations
within their relevant sectors.

Secondly, I urge them to invest in child protection
systems and services at the national, regional, and
international levels. That includes increased long-
term funding for reintegration programmes for former
child soldiers, like me, as well as support services for
survivors of sexual violence, children with disabilities
and others in need, family tracing and reunification
for those separated from their parents or guardians
and timely referrals for children in need of health care,
food, education, shelter and psychosocial support.

Thirdly, I encourage them to ensure that United
Nations peace operations and political missions have
the necessary resources to advance the children
and armed conflict agenda. Such funding should be
structured as long-term funding, rather than bursts
of short-cycle humanitarian funding. That will allow
multi-year interventions, in line with the long-term
impact of war on children and the necessary deep
social transformation to address factors that predispose
children to recruitment. Where missions are downsized
or transitioning, we must make sure that United Nations
country teams are equipped to carry out those functions.

And, lastly, I urge them to take action to address
the ongoing violation of children's rights. That includes
calling on all countries to endorse the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and the Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, and putting pressure
on them to end and prevent grave violations against
children, as well as to prioritize justice for crimes
against children. Only through those measures will
we be able to contribute to improving the lives of our
youngest citizens in our global villages.

For me personally, the main character of a good
and nice village is social cohesion - the duty to watch
after each other. This is true for the elderly, but also
for our children - especially those who cannot stand
up for their own rights or grow up in conflict-affected
zones. That is exactly how we lived in my village when
I was that smiling 5-year-old boy - not driven by any
materials wants, but by love, tenderness and the hope
for children to grow up peacefully.

We can no longer ignore the facts, we can no
longer wait, and we cannot we stand still. Please take
responsibility as the adults of our global village and
take care of our children in conflict-affected zones. The
worlds is engulfed by wars and conflict in Asia, Africa,
the Middle East and the rest of the globe. Children are
the victims of such wars. We must redouble our efforts
and support our children for the betterment of our
global village. We are all inhabitants of the same global
village. It is therefore time to act accordingly, since no
child should ever be part of war.

