Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the United States
delegation for its initiative to convene today's meeting.
We also would like to thank all the invited briefers
for their assessment of the situation on the protection
of children in armed conflict and their commitment
to that objective. We would like especially to express
our gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, for her untiring work for the well-being
of children in situations of armed conflict.

Crimes against children and their suffering in
conflict situations always especially shock and shake
us. Equal attention must be paid to all six categories
of grave violations against children in armed conflicts,
namely, the recruitment and use of children, sexual
violence, killing and maiming, kidnapping, attacks
on schools and hospitals, and a refusal by parties to
conflict to afford access by humanitarian organizations
to children. It is just such a comprehensive approach
that is enshrined in resolution 1612 (2005) and the
successive Security Council documents on the issue.

In that way, the parametres for the functioning of
monitoring and accountability mechanisms have been
determined, as well as the actions of the thematic
Security Council Working Group. Their work must focus
on situations of armed conflict on the Security Council
agenda, as such situations are most urgent in their scale
and nature. Clearly, children require assistance, and
not only in times of conflict. Their protection can be
most effectively upheld by the international community
if it abides strictly by the existing mechanisms for the
division of labour within the United Nations system
through the consistent and targeted work of each of its
entities in its own field.

In her briefing, Ms. Zerrougui in detail noted the
suffering of children in various parts of the world
that have been engulfed in conflict. We are extremely
concerned about the situation of children in yet another
region, namely, south-eastern Ukraine. Children there
find themselves in apressing, dire humanitarian situation
as a result of large-scale military actions launched by
the country's authorities in that region - including
aerial artillery strikes on residential houses and other
civilian facilities. The call to put an end to the blood-
letting has gone unheeded by Kyiv for much too long
now.

According to data from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
beginning in mid-April, at the very least 23 children
have been killed and 38 injured in the country as a
result of the destruction of 200 schools and the absence
of basic security. The school year in Donetsk and
Luhansk has in effect been disrupted. Extreme pressure
has been predicted on the educational system of other
regions. A great many educational establishments and
accommodations have been allocated to internally
displaced persons. No less than 20 hospitals in Donbass
are no longer functioning. Another 17 have been
destroyed or seriously damaged.

A serious lack of physicians and medical personnel
is being felt. Especially alarming is the fate of children
who require immediate medical assistance - injured
children, insulin-dependent children, children who
suffer from cancer and other serious illnesses, as well
as disabled children - in the combat zone in south-
eastern Ukraine. According to various sources, over
1,000 children have been orphaned. Unfortunately,
although Russia's human rights defenders have stated
the Russian side's readiness to rapidly welcome those
sick children from Donetsk and Luhansk for treatment,
children requiring special medical assistance have
not received any response from Kyiv. We hold on to
the hope that, in the light of the recent agreements
achieved, renewed outbreaks of military activity in
those long-suffering regions will be avoided. However,
the children there and the children who have left
population centres that have been overtaken by conflict
continue to cry out for heightened attention and care.

We have carefully considered the Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/339) on children and armed
conflict. We are concerned about the increase in the
number of parties in conflict that allow serious crimes
against children to occur - the annex to the report
lists 59. Despite the fact that some have been on the list
of violators for more than five years, there still is no
effective approach on how to redress the situation. We
believe that clear procedures and criteria are needed for
the listing and delisting of parties to conflicts from the
annexes to the Secretary-General's annual report.

The work of that mechanism must be as objective
and as transparent as possible. The Council provided
the relevant instructions in resolutions 1998 (2011) and
2068 (2012). The parameters for selecting information
to be used in the preparation of the report is of great
importance. A balanced assessment on the basis of
verified reliable data is a guarantee of the accuracy and
appropriateness of recommendations made, as well as
a guarantee of their practical implementation for the
forging of mutually respectful dialogue with interested
Governments.

