Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In this twenty-first century, the international
community finds itself obliged to take up new
challenges and to deal with old ones, such as piracy.
Judging by all accounts, the pirates of the twenty-first
century are well organized and equipped. Their actions
are increasingly bold and their demands outrageous.
There are almost daily reports of new ships being
seized. Piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia is a serious threat to the life of seafarers and
ship passengers and detrimental to the security of
shipping. It makes it difficult to provide international
humanitarian aid to Somalia and leads to serious
economic losses for many States.

All that demands that we, members of the
international community, act resolutely. The problem
has recently been the focus of attention in the Council,
which has already done a fair amount in that direction.
In addition to the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea and other international legal
instruments, there are resolutions that provide a
legislative basis for action to ensure the security of
shipping in the region and send a strong signal to
Members of the United Nations regarding the need to
become actively involved in solving that very complex
problem. It is important that the new Council
resolution be based on current international law and
not be designed to change it.

For Russia, as a maritime Power, safe shipping is
of priority importance. Our citizens have already
suffered from piracy. In October 2008, the Russian
Navy became involved in international efforts to
08-65219
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia under resolution
1816 (2008), acting together with the military vessels
of other States. Over 30 Russian and foreign ships have
been escorted safely through the most dangerous part
of the area and several pirate attacks thwarted. Our
escort ship Nyeustrashimy will soon be leaving the
region, but our presence will be ensured by other
Russian naval ships, which will, of course, continue
working with partners to combat piracy.

We welcome the fact that, in response to the
appeal of the Council to unite efforts to combat piracy,
a large number of States and organizations have
responded. We would highlight the active position of
countries in the region and the European Union. Much
work is being undertaken by the International Maritime
Organization, whose expert and intellectual potential
will be increasingly in demand. We support the
proposals to establish some machinery to coordinate
the actions of the international community to end the
threat of piracy, as reflected in the resolution that we
have just adopted.

Unfortunately, in most cases so far the pirates
have gone unpunished. To a significant extent, this is
the result of the inadequate development of legal and
practical procedures for holding the pirates to account.
We call for a more active use of international legal
instruments to ensure the security of shipping and for
further improvement to legal regulations in this area,
taking into account, of course, the specifics of each
situation.

The new resolution we adopted today is an
important decision, reached at the request of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, whose
representative is here with us today. But we should not
forget that piracy and armed robbery at sea is just the
tip of the iceberg of the problems facing Somalia today.
The problem is hardly likely to be resolved by force
alone. We have to work actively to achieve social,
economic and political stabilization in Somalia, so as
to undermine the material base of the pirates.

This is referred to specifically in resolution 1838
(2008), which states that peace and stability, the
strengthening of State institutions, economic and social
development, respect for human rights and the rule of
law are all essential to establishing the conditions to
completely eliminate piracy and armed robbery in the
coastal waters off the coast of Somalia. It is also clear
that a long-term solution is possible only if there is a
3
comprehensive political settlement in Somalia, with
assistance from the African Union, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole. We expect
that the resolution we have just adopted will help, in
practical terms, to that end.

