Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the Republic of Belarus, I first thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting and for providing this
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
problem of terrorism, which is of concern to the entire
international community and which has been the focus
of the Council's constant attention since the events of
11 September 2001.

We commend the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) in monitoring and providing
assistance to States in their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). At the same time, that work
requires some improvements in order to ensure full
implementation of that resolution, which can be
enhanced by the measures set out in the Committee's
report of 19 February 2004 (S/2004/ 124).
Belarus hopes that the new structure proposed for
the CTC and the inclusion in its work of a strategy for
active links will speed up the process of implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and will create the conditions
necessary for more effectively providing States with
technical assistance to strengthen their counter-
terrorism capacities. Belarus supports the existing
format and principles of the Committee's work, which
encourage consensus in the international community
regarding the threat to international peace and security
posed by terrorism and on practical steps to counter
that threat.

The constructive interaction of the Republic of
Belarus with the Committee on legislation to
implement resolution 1373 (2001) has a positive
impact on our national legal system and supplements
cooperation to improve counter-terrorism legislation
with other international organs, in particular the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime.

In this area, Belarus expects of the Committee not
just an overall assessment of the degree of
development of various norms of national counter-
terrorism legislation but also concrete
recommendations on how to bring our legislation into
conformity with international standards, based on a
thorough study of the experiences of other countries
possessing legal systems of a similar nature.

On 21 January of this year, a national seminar
was held in Minsk on the implementation of the
universal counter-terrorism conventions in the
legislation of the Republic of Belarus. That seminar
was organized by State entities of Belarus, together
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. In
that seminar, which included the participation of
international experts, a detailed analysis was made of
the anti-terrorist provisions of our national legislation.
That analysis confirmed that those provisions were
rather progressive in nature and, on the whole, in
keeping with the provisions of the international
conventions to combat terrorism to which Belarus is a

party.

The need to supplement national legislation arises
basically with regard to the ratification of the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism. It is proposed that the
ratification of that Convention will take place in the
spring session of the Parliament of the Republic of
Belarus, concluding the process of formalizing our
Government's participation in the 12 main international
conventions against terrorism.

At Security Council meetings on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts, Belarus has repeatedly drawn attention to the real
national situation in the area of combating terrorism,
which is marked by a lack of information on terrorist
activities, including their financing. Given our situation
as a transit country, Belarus has made a top priority of
adopting measures to strengthen customs, migration
and border controls to prevent terrorist movement and
to combat criminal activities linked to terrorism. The
Government of the Republic of Belarus welcomes CTC
assistance in resolving those tasks, in the light of our
previous request for technical assistance. Such
assistance would help to enhance cooperation with the
Committee as it carries out its mandate.

In conclusion, I thank the leadership of the CTC,
in particular the Chairman, Mr. Inocencio Arias, for his
tireless efforts to advance the work of the CTC, which
is an exceptionally important body for combating
terrorism under the aegis of the United Nations and for
creating a broad international counter-terrorism
network.

