Mr. Mutaboba: I must at the outset apologize for
the sound of my voice: it has been affected by travel
and by the great deal of talking I have recently done in
Guinea-Bissau - but the talking has been useful.

The report before the Council, contained in
document S/2009/ 169, is the thirty-fourth report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS).

Its highlights are that the report reviews the main
developments in Guinea-Bissau since the Secretary-
General's previous report, of 2 December 2008
(8/2008/751), in particular the formation of the new
Government, and the tragic events of March and the
aftermath.

The ruling party, the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC),
won an absolute majority in the legislative elections of
November 2008, and President Nino Vieira invited the
PAIGC leader, Carlos Gomes, Jr., to form a
Government, which took office on 8 January 2009.
09-29637
On the evening of 1 March, a bomb blast killed
the Chief of General Staff, General Tagme Na Waie,
and a few hours later, the head of State, President Joao
Bernardo Vieira, was also assassinated. On 2 March,
the Council of Ministers instructed the Prosecutor
General to establish a commission of inquiry into both
assassinations. On 3 March, the Speaker, Raimundo
Pereira, was sworn in as interim President of the
Republic, in keeping with the provisions of the
constitution, with the main task of organizing the
anticipated presidential elections.

Reaction to the assassinations was swift, and
several countries and organizations, including the
African Union (AU), the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries (CPLP), the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the European
Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the United Nations, and bilateral
partners, condemned the assassinations and called for a
transparent investigation. They also called for the full
restoration of the constitutional order through the
holding of presidential elections.

Here are just a few words to update members of
the Council on developments in Guinea-Bissau since
the report was published.

On political developments, the state funeral of
President Vieira took place on 10 March in an
emotional but peaceful atmosphere. On 14 March, the
Council of Ministers nominated Navy Commander J ose'
Zamora Induta as Chief of General Staff and
Lieutenant Colonel Antonio N'djai as Vice-Chief of
General Staff. The army and air force chiefs of staff,
who are more senior in rank than those two men, were
passed over. The interim President issued a decree on
4 April to confirm those appointments on an interim
basis until the swearing-in of the elected President of
the Republic, although the constitution does not give
him such a power.

The commission of inquiry into the double
assassinations started its work on 12 March. The
Prosecutor General and Minister of Justice requested
technical and financial support. The Prosecutor
General expressed concerns about the lack of security
for commission members and witnesses against threats
and intimidation and the lack of cooperation from the
military with regard to information exchange on the
military inquiry.
A parallel inquiry has been set up by the military
to investigate the assassination of General Tagme Na
Waie. The military commission detained a number of
military and civilian people. According to the Guinea-
Bissau League of Human Rights, some of the detainees
show signs of physical mistreatment. On 2 April, the
Prosecutor General called on the international
community to intercede so that those impediments
could be resolved and conditions created for the
inquiry to proceed.

ECOWAS and the CPLP sent delegations on
3 March to discuss the crisis. The 26th ministerial-level
meeting of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council recommended that ECOWAS mobilize
international support, including from the United
Nations, for the preventive deployment of military and
police to ensure the protection of institutions of the
State, Government officials and the electoral process. It
also recommended immediate steps to implement the
ECOWAS Praia plan of action against drug trafficking,
using Guinea-Bissau as one of the pilot countries. I am
happy to report that Guinea-Bissau will be the first
country to be used in the pilot.

The CPLP Council of Ministers, meeting in Praia
on 25 March, among other things, supported the setting
up of an international commission of inquiry, endorsed
the ECOWAS proposal on preventive security
deployment, if this was requested by the Guinea-Bissau
Government, was coordinated by the African Union
and received a mandate from the United Nations.
However, on 1 April, the Minister of Social
Communication and spokesperson of the Government
stated that Guinea-Bissau had made no request for such
a deployment and highlighted that what was needed
was international support for security sector reform.

On 6 April, the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union, Jean Ping, announced the
appointment of Mr. J 050 Bernardo de Miranda, former
Minister of External Relations of the Republic of
Angola, as AU Special Envoy for Guinea-Bissau.

Regarding the presidential elections, a constitutional
crisis was averted after talks between interim President
Pereira and parliamentary and non-parliamentary
political parties, as well as civil society, culminated in
broad consensus to hold elections on 28 June 2009.
The budget for the elections is nearly $5 million. The
precise figure is $4,965,709. The Resident
Representative of the United Nations Development
Programme has indicated that, including pledges, the
current gap stands at $2.5 million.

With regard to human rights developments, Pedro
Infanda, the lawyer of Rear Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto,
was detained by the military and subject to torture on
23 March. Mr. Infanda's arrest followed his public
criticism of what he considered to be unconstitutional
nominations to the military leadership. The military
claimed that his comments were a threat to peace and
security. Mr. Infanda appeared before the Prosecutor
General on 27 March and was interned in hospital. The
former Prime Minister and current President of the
Audit Court, Francisco Fadul, was also attacked in his
residence in the early hours of 1 April by armed men in
military uniforms, after he had made comments on the
radio critical of the armed forces. The nominee for
Chief of the General Staff condemned the attack but
said it was probably carried out by individuals not
belonging to the armed forces who wanted to tarnish
the reputation of the armed forces. The President of the
League of Human Rights went into hiding on 1 April
after League staff reported that it had been threatened
by an armed individual in plain clothes.

On socio-economic developments, the teachers'
and health workers' unions have taken strike action
over salary arrears and other issues. The Government
currently owes three months' worth of salaries from
2008 and is processing February salaries.

In conclusion, allow me to highlight some key
points. First, the people of Guinea-Bissau voted
maturely and massively for hope and change in their
lives. They were faced with infighting in the governing
party prior to the tragic events of March. The
Government was then forced by the events of 1 and
2 March to focus its energies on managing the political
and military crisis. It is also grappling with a
precarious fiscal situation and faces enormous
difficulties in clearing salary arrears and tackling the
social issues that it promised to resolve.

While the patience of the people of Guinea-
Bissau is seemingly endless, one has to recognize that
disillusionment is setting in, as is a feeling of
frustration that any promise made quickly evaporates
with another cyclical crisis. The people are being asked
to go to the polls on 28 June 2009 to elect a President.
Many of them question the appropriateness of elections
soon after major Violence and before the socio-political
and military environment has had time to settle. We
support elections as part of the democratic process and
respect for the Constitution, but we must take on board
those perceptions and be aware that there is a growing
disconnect between the population and the democratic
process, which, in the eyes of many, treats the people
as electoral fodder and gives them nothing in return. It
is important, therefore, that the population see some
quick improvements in their lives if democracy is to
mean anything to them.

Secondly, a sound Commission of Inquiry is
essential to end the cycles of violence and impunity in
the country. Officials tell me endlessly that they fear
that such an inquiry will fail like so many previous
ones. The Prosecutor General has, on several
occasions, argued that the Commission does not have
the necessary material or technical support. He also
recently complained about the lack of cooperation from
the military in this matter. It is also important to
acknowledge that asking investigators and witnesses to
carry out their duty and be brave when there is no
safety net adds to the distinct possibility of failure.

Those pessimistic assessments are an argument
for the creation of an international commission of
inquiry and the provision of protection for witnesses
and national officials involved in such an inquiry. The
ECOWAS/CPLP proposal for protection provides a
window for action to protect individuals and to
guarantee peace and security. However, that
international inquiry and protection offer requires a
request from the Government, which has not been
forthcoming. In contrast, following the 23 November
2008 attack on President Vieira, the caretaker
Government in power and civil society asked for
protection for top State officials. In my assessment, the
security environment in the country is volatile and the
international community must consider how best to
bolster the security of the State, if called upon to do so,
in what could be a rapidly changing environment.

Thirdly, security sector reform (SSR) is among
the key reforms of the State. The focus of national
stakeholders is particularly on defence. I regret to
inform the Council that they have lost faith in the
international community's ability to kick-start the
reform. There are indeed programmes ready that need
funding. Now is the time to get some quick wins and to
start implementing those programmes, which in
particular affect the veterans and other servicemen
above the age of retirement.
09-29637
There is an urgent need to focus on the basic
needs of the military and of the population in general.
As an integral part of the security sector reform plan, I
am currently working with the Government of Guinea-
Bissau, from the top down, to develop projects that
would use military labour and land allocated to the
armed forces to grow and process food, build homes
and schools and provide other social services, using
military personnel. Those projects will address the
need to create a modern republican army endowed with
the basic rights to food, shelter and education. The
success of such projects will have a positive impact on
SSR and on relations between the civilian population
and the military. It is expected that, ultimately, the
latter will become partners in the attainment of
development and political stability in Guinea-Bissau.

At the same time, it is crucial that the
international community provide financial and
technical support to implement the national SSR
programme and the ECOWAS regional action plan to
address the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa as a
region. In that connection, the Department of Political
Affairs - through the United Nations Office in West
Africa, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Criminal Police Organization - have
agreed to work in synergy to support the
implementation of the ECOWAS action plan. That joint
initiative aims at providing technical assistance and
building the capacity of police and law enforcement
agencies in ECOWAS member States to improve the
prevention of and fight against organized crime and
drug trafficking. Guinea-Bissau is one of the pilot
countries of this initiative, as I have already
mentioned, and the country's international partners
should help to make the initiative a success.

Finally, through you, Mr. President, I would like
to call on the members of the Council and the
international community to send a signal to the security
forces and the Government of Guinea-Bissau that they
are the only parties responsible for protecting and
upholding the human rights of the people of Guinea-
Bissau. I also urge each member of the Council to
contribute its part to the efforts being made by the
international community to support the elections,
programmes aimed at ending impunity, and security
sector reform in Guinea-Bissau.
