Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends once again the quality of the
work undertaken by the three Committees chaired
respectively by Ambassadors Arias, Verbeke and
Burian. We congratulate them most warmly and stress
that theirs is a major contribution to the struggle being
waged globally against the scourge of terrorism. That
struggle is also being waged by those who work every
day on the ground in security services throughout the
world or who serve as experts on our Committees, the
Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Group.

The complexity and sensitive nature of that
commitment require not only the mobilization of
States, but also the utmost transparency in order to
guarantee the legitimacy of activities planned and
undertaken. That speaks to the importance of public
meetings such as that being held today and of their
informative nature, which we highly appreciate. That is
all the more true given the fact that, like many other
African countries, the Congo is particularly interested
in such aspects as facilitating the provision of technical
assistance to States and dialogue with States in the
context of compliance with resolutions 1624 (2005),
1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004).

We are pleased to note the progress that has been
made in that regard with the valuable assistance of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate in improving
the approach towards States and identifying solutions
adapted to their specific needs. My delegation also
wishes to commend in that regard the programme of
cooperation activities with States adopted by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), including the organization of seminars and
workshops in the context of efforts to assist States in
drafting their reports to the Committee.

To touch on just a few important aspects of the
three Committees' work, I wish to make a few general
comments.

The Security Council established the counter-
terrorism committees to emphasize the need to combat
that scourge in all its forms and manifestations,
drawing on appropriate means and in full respect of the
United Nations Charter. States have also been
continuously reminded to ensure that any measure
taken in that regard be consistent with their obligations
under international law, and in particular human rights
law, refugee law and international humanitarian law.
Respect for human rights and freedoms therefore lies at
the heart of our efforts to counter terrorism, and it is
recommended that we remain mindful of that in the
work of the three Committees, especially with regard
to the listing and delisting of natural legal persons.

Indeed, such procedures are an essential
instrument for guaranteeing justice and respect for the
principle of representation in court, and for reminding
us, when necessary, that concern for justice is what
differentiates the partisans of terrorism from those of
freedom and counter-terrorism. In that respect, my
delegation calls for ongoing efforts by the three
Committees to address cases on hold and to ensure that
such issues as humanitarian exemptions be given
special attention.

Furthermore, the role of States is of primary
importance in improving the work of the Committees.
The Congo therefore endorses enhanced cooperation in
the context of established mechanisms by appealing to
all States to ratify the 13 counter-terrorism instruments.
This may be the right moment to appeal yet again for
greater openness towards the developing countries in
order to help them better to meet their obligations in
the context of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted by the United Nations. At the same time, we
welcome and should like to see closer cooperation
between the Committees, including through joint and
synchronized activities among experts, for instance
during their visits to States. Consistency must be the
watchword between the Committees and States and
among the Committees themselves. In that regard,
guidelines represent an important contribution. Taking
account of the various mandates, we might also wish to
consider establishing bridges to ensure greater
harmonization of procedures.

Under the auspices of the permanent mission of
Greece, a symposium was held recently to consider the
political and legal aspects of the sanctions regime in
general. We have heard eloquent testimony to the
interest in that issue of all States Members of the
United Nations - not just members of the Security
Council, but also States belonging to other United
Nations bodies. However, at the end of the day, it is the
Security Council that is responsible for the missions
assigned to the three subsidiary bodies whose reports
we are discussing today. Consistency within the
Council - and I would even go so far as to say the
responsibility of certain of its members, and in
particular the permanent members - are of course
decisive for the success of the sanctions regime.

