Mr. Chikoti (Angola): We congratulate Japan
for the manner in which it has been conducting the
Security Council during its presidency for the month
of July. Angola applauds Japan's decision to convene
this important meeting on the theme of peacebuilding
in Africa, thus translating Japan's commitment to
cooperation with the African continent, as reflected
in the series of Tokyo International Conferences on
African Development dating back to 1993. May I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his insightful
remarks, as well as Minister Amina Mohamed of Kenya
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
briefings.

At the 2005 World Summit, the United Nations
established the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. The 10-year review of what we refer to as the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture concluded
in April with the concurrent adoption of identical
resolutions by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. Ten years ago, at the African Union Summit
held in Banjul, African Governments adopted a
policy framework on post-conflict reconstruction and
development to guide its work in support of countries
emerging from conflict in Africa. More recently,
to better respond to the challenges facing African
countries emerging from conflict, the African Union
Commission launched in 2012 the African Solidarity
Initiative, aimed at mobilizing resources for post-
conflict reconstruction and development. I mention
those efforts to advance the peacebuilding agenda,
both at the United Nations and at the African Union, in
order to underline the fact that peacebuilding is being
accorded the required priority in the midst of other
competing issues on the international agenda.

Today's debate on peacebuilding in Africa allows
members of the Security Council and the broader
United Nations membership an opportunity to reflect
on challenges faced by African countries emerging
from conflict in the transition from war to peace, the
priorities for peacebuilding at the national level and,
in particular, the role of the United Nations. Resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262,
adopted in April, of which Australia and Angola were
facilitators, define conflict prevention as the key element
in peacebuilding. They also includes activities running
through all phases aimed at preventing the outbreak,
escalation, persistence and recurrence ofconflict, as well
as addressing roots causes, assisting the parties to end
hostilities, ensuring national reconciliation and moving
towards recovery, reconstruction and development.
All elements of that definition are important, as they
underscore institution-building as the fundamental
prerequisite for a successful peacebuilding process.

It is widely understood that the existence of conflicts
versus efficient institutions differentiate capable from
fragile States. Therefore, institution-building must
be accorded the highest priority in any peacebuilding
effort. Countries emerging from conflict need to build
institutions that help ensure individuals' safety, reform
the security sector, revitalize their economies, provide
social services, support national reconciliation and
political cohesion and establish the rule of law.

In spite of the constraints imposed by a lengthy
armed conflict that lasted nearly 30 years and caused
widespread devastation, Angola has been implementing
a development model through a broad national
reconciliation process launched in 2002, leading to
the approval of the Constitution of the Republic in
2010, which reaffirmed the rule of law and democracy,
extending rights and freedoms to all citizens and
ensuring the participation of all in the democratic
process. This national resolve has enabled the Angolan
Government to secure gains that are recognized at
the subregional, regional and international levels. In
this regard, I would like to refer to the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), which
Angola currently chairs, and comment on the initiatives
being undertaken under the auspices of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Angola remains strongly committed to the central
role that preventive diplomacy plays in the resolution of
conflicts in the Great Lakes region. Angola also strongly
believes in the urgent need to put the Great Lakes
region on the path towards sustainable development
through the promotion of investments, international
cooperation and support to help this huge market enjoy
the peace dividend. The Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework, established to support the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Region, is
an important tool for achieving the aforementioned
requirements and must be supported, together with
the ICGLR Regional Initiative Against the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources.

The Kinshasa Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, held on
24 and 25 February, brought awareness not only to
the investment opportunities offered by the region
but also to what the region needs to do to improve the
business environment, which includes implementing
wide-reaching social reforms, promoting transparency,
encouraging business incentives and establishing
anti-corruption programmes. I should like here to thank
the Secretary-General for his commitment to Africa
and for convening that conference.

In search ofpeaceful solutions to political crises and
conflicts in the Great Lakes region, Angola has helped
to promote the launch of the Guarantors of the Peace,
Cooperation and Security Framework mechanism, led
by the United Nations, with the participation of ICGLR
and the Southern African Development Community;
the Private Sector Investment Conference for the Great
Lakes Region, held in Kinshasa; and the decision
urging the South Sudanese leaders and people to put
aside their differences and work for the implementation
of the peace agreement in South Sudan.

Concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
ICGLR reiterated the need to combat negative forces
and to complete the preparation for the presidential and
legislative elections in a peaceful, credible, inclusive
and transparent manner, in accordance with the
Constitution of the country. Regarding Burundi, ICGLR
reiterated the call for an inclusive and transparent
dialogue to discuss all issues that pose a threat to the
integrity, security and peace of that country.

We recognize the important work the Peacebuilding
Commission is doing in the consolidation of peace in
several African countries. The PBC played a crucial role
in the fight against the Ebola outbreak in Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, and is promoting post-Ebola recovery
in collaboration with the Economic Community of
West African States and other international, regional,
bilateral and multilateral partners.

We would like to underline the importance of
financing for peacebuilding. In countries emerging
from conflict, financial support is crucial to achieving
many of the lofty and laudable goals associated with
peacebuilding. Even the most carefully crafted and
best-designed peacebuilding programme will fail
if the financial resources to implement its various
components are not provided in a timely manner.
Political consensus among national stakeholders and the
commitment of Governments are essential ingredients
of peacebuilding. However, unless financial resources
are provided to implement priority programmes for
which political consensus and commitment exist,
peacebuilding efforts can easily be derailed.

Iwould like to issue a cautionary note to the Council.
Peacebuilding is a complex process encompassing
many priorities and involving many stakeholders. More
importantly, the hierarchy of priorities varies from
country to country. An election, while being decisive
for a nation emerging from conflict and a tool for
the consolidation of democratic institutions, is not in
itself the solution for consolidating peace in a post-
conflict country, since weak institutions and economic
stagnation go hand in hand with relapse into conflict.
Furthermore, unless institutional capacity-building and
economic recovery are addressed first, a relapse into
conflict is the most probable outcome, in particular
when the election results are challenged by the losing
parties.

Post-conflict countries must build strong
institutions and revitalize their economies in order to
enable their Governments to meet the socioeconomic
needs of their people by creating job opportunities and
providing social services and the necessary conditions
for the well-being of their population. Governments in
post-conflict countries must gain legitimacy through
their performance and ability to deliver results and by
adequately resolving the socioeconomic problems of
their people.

To conclude, it is clear that financial assistance is
central to peacebuilding in post-conflict countries in
order to support the implementation of concrete social
programmes, while bearing in mind the importance of
national ownership, in which the national authorities in
post-conflict countries lead the way in the establishment
of peacebuilding priorities.

