First and foremost, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption by France of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June. I am grateful to you for agreeing to convene this meeting at the ministerial level in the light of the delicate situation with regard to the question of Palestine. I appreciate the briefing concerning the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of 2334 (2016). Egypt associates itself with the statement made in that regard on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The unfolding repercussions of the coronavirus crisis have made it necessary for all States and peoples to show solidarity and mitigate the effects of the pandemic on the most affected societies. However, the crises affecting the Middle East continue to fester, even though the Secretary-General has called for a ceasefire in all international conflicts with a view to creating conditions conducive to their resolution. The Palestinian cause continues to lose ground and the situation in the occupied territories is deteriorating. Yet the Palestinian cause continues to be the crucial Arab cause; it is pivotal for stability in the region. It is inconceivable that the Middle East region could enjoy any degree of stability so long as the Palestinian people is unable to exercise its legitimate rights, particularly the right to self-determination and the establishment of its independent State. Even as the Palestinian cause has lost momentum, the practices of Israel on the ground have gained pace. Such actions are intended to impose a fait accompli and undermine the two-State solution, making it impossible to establish a Palestinian State. The settlement activities of Israel have continued. The occupation authorities have persisted in confiscating land, expelling Palestinian citizens, destroying their homes and announcing plans to build more settlement units. At the same time, Israeli settlers have violated the rights of the Palestinian people in the West Bank. Egypt has consistently emphasized that those practices must be curbed and must come to an end in order to create conditions conducive to the resumption of negotiations between the two sides on the basis of the two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and international law and decisions. However, the agreement for the formation of the new Israeli Government provides for a move towards annexing parts of Palestinian territory in the West Bank, starting in July 2020. That measure would contravene international law, the resolutions of the United Nations and all terms of reference of the peace process; indeed, it would destroy the two-State solution and undermine any prospect of resumed negotiations between the two sides. Egypt wishes to emphasize that the move by Israel towards the unilateral annexation of Palestinian territories will further aggravate the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, not to mention adversely affecting the security and stability of the region as a whole, in spite of regional and international endeavours to resolve the crises in the region. Moreover, by annexing Palestinian territory, Israel would allow extremist voices to claim that negotiations had failed to secure even a modicum of the Palestinian people's rights, particularly its legitimate right to self- determination. The resulting situation would fuel calls for violence and terrorism in the region, which has endured those scourges for decades. By the same token, it would undermine moderate voices that have consistently endeavoured to uphold the principles of peace and coexistence among all peoples. Egypt reaffirms its long-standing position that the Palestinian people has the right to exercise self-determination by establishing its independent State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and that all unilateral practices that undermine peace and stability and endanger the two-State solution must come to an end. Egypt has supported every endeavour to relaunch Palestinian- Israeli negotiations as soon as possible on the basis of the authoritative international decisions and agreed terms of reference for the peace process. Egypt endorses the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the region to live in peace and security. Accordingly, it urges that, in order to safeguard the capacities of the region and its peoples, the voice of reason and wisdom must prevail, and any course of action that could undermine stability must be avoided. Egypt hopes that security, stability and peace will prevail in the Middle East region, as both an ideal and a reality, for the sake of a better future for the peoples of the region and generations to come.
