Mr. J allow: I thank the Council for the opportunity
to once again brief the Council on the progress of the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and of the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals.

At the ICTR the Office is currently fully engaged
in the completion of its remaining activities in order to
ensure a smooth, efficient and effective closure of the
Tribunal and the handover of all residual matters to the
Mechanism. Since my last report to the Council (see S/PV.6880), my Office has continued to work on the
prosecution and completion of the appeals cases, the
preparation ofthe records ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor
(OTP) of the ICTR for archiving and handover to the
Mechanism, the completion of residual and closure
issues, as well as providing support to the OTP of the
Mechanism. We have also devoted considerable time
and effort over this period to ensuring the establishment
of the OTP Hague Branch of the Mechanism, which
was launched on 1 July 2013.

The heavy appellate workload of the ICTR continues
to require significant time and human resources. Since
June 2013, the ICTR-OTP has responded to 8 appeals
filed by 8 different convicted persons in the Butare,
Nzabonimana and Nizeyimana cases. It has also assisted
the Mechanism-OTP in responding to the appeal in
the Ngirabatware case. The cases are now pending
hearing by the Appeals Chamber. Furthermore, the
OTP has been actively preparing for the hearings in the
Karemera et al case involving two convicted persons
that the Appeals Chamber has scheduled for the week
of 10 February 2014. In the meantime, we are awaiting
judgement by the Appeals Chamber in the Ndahimana
case for 16 December 2013 and in the Military H case
involving four accused in February 2014.

A key milestone in the archiving project was
achieved with the commissioning of the OTP archives
store and its transfer to the Mechanism. The facility,
I am advised, conforms to the required international
standards of archiving and provides enhanced security
of the records. The handing over of the OTP records to
the Mechanism Registrar continues. It is expected that
an additional 231 boxes in respect to three completed
cases will be handed over at the end of this year. In
the meantime, the Mechanism OTP will continue full
access to the active records of the ICTR, which will
also in due course be transferred to the Mechanism.
That process will continue on an ongoing basis as and
when related litigation is concluded.

As expected, the imminent closure of the ad
hoc tribunals has generated broad interest within
the international community on the potential for
their practices and other aspects of their legacy to
contribute to the capacity-building of national and
other international tribunals in the investigation and
prosecution of international crimes. That impetus
has encouraged the ICTR OTP and the offices of the
prosecutor of other tribunals to share their experiences
with national and international stakeholders on best
practices in the fight against impunity.

Meanwhile, work on the OTP's best-practice
manuals continues. The Manual on the Investigation
and Prosecution of Sexual Violence will be finalized
and launched, after review, in Kampala in January 2014.
That will follow the earlier launch of the Manual on the
Tracking and Arrest of Fugitives, which was effected in
September 2013.

I would now like turn to the activities of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism.

This reporting period has involved much activity on
the establishment of The Hague branch, the recruitment
of staff for core and ad hoc functions, the preparation
of the budget for the 2014-2015 biennium, the setting
up of systems and procedures to streamline operations
and to ensure greater coordination between the Arusha
OTP and The Hague branch, as well as the management
of the ad hoc and core activities of the Mechanism OTP
in general.

In May 2013, in preparation of the start of
operations of The Hague branch, I participated in the
annual regional conference of chief prosecutors in the
former Yugoslavia in Brijuni, Croatia, together with the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I am pleased to report
to the Council, that the recruitment of core staff for The
Hague branch, which was launched on 1 July 2013, is
almost complete. I am hopeful that the remaining core
staff will be in place by the end ofthis year. In addition,
OTP staff in both the ICTR and the ICTY have been
designated to double-hat to support the Mechanism
OTP during their tenures at the respective Tribunals, as
envisaged by the Security Council.

The creation of a roster of potential staff for
recruitment in the event of an arrest and subsequent
trial or appeal is also in progress. Tracking of the three
fugitives, namely Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana, remains a top priority for
the Mechanism. We continue to actively engage with
all States with which the fugitives may have any
connections. I plan early in the year to visit a number
of countries in East, Central and Southern Africa in
order to secure enhanced cooperation from them in the
tracking effort of the Mechanism.

1 would like to seize this opportunity to thank
INTERPOL and the United States Department of
State through its War Crimes Rewards Program for
their continuing support in those tracking efforts. The
Security Council should continue to call on all States to
cooperate fully with the Mechanism in order to ensure
that those indicted are brought to account. That will
ensure that justice is done for the victims and survivors
of this great tragedy and that there is a proper closure
of this process of accountability, in which the United
Nations and the rest of the international community
have rightly devoted considerable effort and resources.

The Mechanism OTP, in conjunction with
INTERPOL and the Office of Global Criminal Justice
ofthe United States State Department, continues to lend
support to Rwanda's tracking efforts with regard to the
six fugitives cases that have been referred to Rwanda.
These are the cases of Charles Sikubwabo, Fulgence
Kayishema, Ladislas Ntaganzwa, Aloys Ndimbati,
Charles Ryandikayo and Pheneas Munyarugurama.
Last month, in November 2013, Ijoined the Presidents
and Registrars of the ICTR and of the Mechanism on
the first joint ICTR-Mechanism principals' mission to
Rwanda to meet and consult with senior Government
officials and to brief them on the Mechanism, the
ICTR's remaining workload, the ongoing transition of
responsibilities from the ICTR to the Mechanism and
the areas for potential cooperation between Rwanda
and the Mechanism, particularly in the area of training
and other capacity-building efforts.

In relation to the continuing activities of the
Mechanism OTP, the Office has during this reporting
period responded to a total of 80 requests for assistance
from 17 countries and international organizations, out
of a total of 112 requests for assistance for both the
Arusha and The Hague branches. Responding to those
requests has involved locating and reviewing relevant
evidence, certification of documents, contacting
witnesses, requesting variation of protective measures
and seeking the consent of providers for disclosure of
restricted material.

We continue to monitor the cases of Munyeshyaka
and Bucyibaruta, which were transferred to France
in 2007, together with those of Uwinkindi and
Munyagishari, transferred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013,
respectively. Munyagishari Bernard was physically
transferred to Rwanda on 24 July 2013, and his case is
now at a pre-trial stage before the Rwandan courts. The
commencement of the trial of Jean Uwinkindi has now
been set for 22 January 2014 before the High Court in
Rwanda. Both cases also continue to be observed by
monitors appointed by the Prosecutor ofthe Mechanism.

Briefing on the Augustin Ngirabatware
appeal - the only appeal currently before the Arusha
branch of the Mechanism - was completed during this
reporting period, and we anticipate that oral argument
will take place in the first half of 2014. In addition, the
Mechanism ad hoc appeals team responded to several
motions filed in that case and in the Niyitegeka cases.

The Hague branch has also been active in the
reporting period, responding to the appeal of Radovan
Stankovie against a decision of the ICTY Referral
Bench and a motion for contempt filed against Radovan
Karadzie.

Although established in two branches, at The Hague
and in Arusha, we are committed to ensuring that the
OTP operates as a single office. I believe this can be
attained through regular periodic consultations and
working Visits between staff, the redeployment and use
of human and other resources between the two branches
in response to work demand and the harmonization,
where possible, of working methods and prosecutorial
regulations between the two branches.

The first of such high-level consultations, involving
the senior legal officers in charge of the two branches
and some senior staff with the Prosecutor, has just
concluded in Arusha. The meeting provided us with
the opportunity to consider and agree upon measures
that, in our view, will enhance the efficiency ofa single
OTP of the Mechanism. In that respect and as a result
of the meeting, I have last week promulgated a code
of conduct for the staff of the Mechanism OTP, which
regulates the professional conduct of such staff, as well
as regulations for the management of foreign requests
for assistance from the Mechanism.

The ICTR remains committed to and confident of
a timely and efficient completion of its mandate, with
the conclusion of the bulk of appeals anticipated in 2014
and the conclusion of legacy-related works by that time.
The Mechanism, too, is now fully operationa, with both
branches largely staffed and attending very actively to
both its continuing and ad hoc activities. The support
of the management and staff of both the ICTR and the
ICTY, the Secretariat of the United Nations and of
Member States, as well as the very effective and dynamic
leadership of Honourable Judge Theodor Meron - the
first President of the Mechanism - have all combined
to achieve the historic launch and functioning of a new
international tribunal within a relatively short period.
We are confident that with that continuing support,
the Mechanism will, despite challenges in tracking
of fugitives, among others, also come to realize and
fulfil the mandate that has been set for it by the United
Nations.

