I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his detailed briefing. I also thank Mr. Cano Salazar for his briefing and for his contributions in the implementation of the peace agreement. This briefing takes place at a very challenging time, but we must continue to show our solidarity and support to the Government and people of Colombia. Indonesia takes note the unilateral ceasefire announcement made by the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional. We hope this ceasefire will lead to a permanent ceasefire and contribute to lasting peace in Colombia. Having said that, let me make three brief points. First, we strongly welcome the efforts made by the newly inaugurated regional and local administrations to incorporate peace implementation in their agendas. We also welcome the acceptance by the governors of the national Government's proposal to create a peace office in departmental governments towards ensuring dedicated resources for the implementation of peace-related programmes. From Indonesia's experience, local administrators, supported with adequate resources, play an instrumental role in the peacebuilding process. The fact that former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) took part in the formulation of the local development plans is also a major, and encouraging, development. Looking ahead, we believe that in the long run, this element of territorial-peace focus will be fundamental. Indonesia therefore encourages all relevant parties to provide necessary support to ensure the sustainability and success of these programmes. This relates to my second point, on the long-term reintegration strategy. We support the Secretary-General's recommendation that all relevant parties must start to shift focus to strengthen the foundation for a longer-term reintegration process. We continue to call on all relevant parties to redouble their efforts to ensure the effective implementation of the reintegration road map as a comprehensive and sustainable long-term framework. As the reintegration road map itself was agreed between the parties, it is imperative that they work jointly to deliver on their individual commitments in its implementation. That brings me to my last point, on ensuring that the benefits of these programmes reach all communities that have suffered from decades of violence. As pointed out in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/239) and by Special Representative Ruiz Massieu, with more than two-thirds of former combatants residing outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration, it is equally crucial to devote attention to their concerns and specific needs. We have always believed that capacity-building and technical support, along with projects geared towards economic self-sufficiency, would contribute positively to creating a conducive environment for the peace agreement. But the fulfilment of socioeconomic needs alone is far from enough. Additional efforts are needed to guarantee the safety and security of all. In this regard, we welcome the launching of the action plan and road map to protect human rights defenders and community and social leaders, and urge their effective implementation. Furthermore, we welcome the efforts of relevant units in Colombia, to provide protection for former FARC-EP members and to bring the perpetrators of the killings to justice. It is crucially important to extend the presence of the State to the people. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak will pose many challenges for Colombia over the coming months. But with the Government's commitment to the implementation of peace-related programmes, as well as the continued support of the Council and the United Nations system, I am confident that together, we will prevail.
