Mr. Arias: Thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to speak today in my capacity as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. In my statement, I should
like to give the Council an overview of the work
undertaken by that subsidiary body under my
chairmanship and to make a few personal remarks.

In 2008, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions built
on the work completed under previous Chairmen and
continued to examine ways to best implement the notes
by the President of the Security Council in documents

S/2006/507 and S/2007/749. Among the priorities set
by the Working Group in 2008 were issues related to
the summary statements on matters of which the
Security Council is seized, meeting formats, the
participation of non-Council members in the work of
the Security Council and the role of the Security
Council President and the Chairs of subsidiary bodies.
Owing to time constraints, we were unable to examine
the last issue.

Early in the year, the Working Group worked
towards improving the summary statements by making
them more user-friendly. The Working Group
subsumed similar and related items into a single
agenda item. The Working Group is still considering a
proposal to make the summary statement more
accurate, reflecting the items of which the Council is
actually seized and giving the Council greater
involvement in its preparation. We expect agreement to
be reached on that matter in the coming days. The
Working Group also considered a proposal by the Chair
on meeting formats and the participation of non-
Council members, but was unable to reach a decision
on that matter.

Further, the Working Group received a letter
dated 5 September from the Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, requesting us
to examine their current procedures and to recommend
measures to improve them, based on the practices of
other Council subsidiary bodies. In deliberating that
issue, we consulted the Secretariat and were briefed by
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Following those consultations, we drafted a response
that is currently under no-objection procedure and
should be delivered to the Chair in the following days.
That communication includes a response from the
Secretariat on the questions posed to them and
highlights relevant passages of note of the President of
08-64915

the Security Council in document S/2006/507 that
could assist them in enhancing the efficiency and
effectiveness of the methods of the Working Group.

As a follow-up to the open debate on the
implementation on the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/507), the delegation of
Belgium submitted a proposal to update that note.
However, some delegations suggested that we defer the
consideration of that issue until 2009.

Finally, I would like to point out that, regardless
of specific results, the fruitful exchanges held this year
within the Working Group were crucial to clarifying
and improving the implementation of current working
methods, as well as to exploring new ways to make the
Council more efficient in its deliberations.

Before closing, on a more personal note, I would
like to extend my particular gratitude to all members of
the Working Group for their time and effort. Their
contributions to improving the working methods will
definitely be translated into concrete results in the
subsequent work of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

