Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Issa Konfourou,
Permanent Representative of Mali and my personal
friend. We thank Mr. Koen Davidse for his service as
Deputy Special Representative for Mali, and we wish
every success to his replacement, Ms. Joanne Adamson,
who is here with us today.

Today, I would like to focus on three points: first,
the political and security situation; secondly, the peace
process; and thirdly, action for peacekeeping.

First, I will address the political and security
situation. Allow me to offer President Keita the sincere
congratulations of the Kingdom of the Netherlands on
his re-election. I would also like to commend the joint
and coordinated action of the international community,
including the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
in supporting the electoral process. In the wake of
the elections, tensions between the Government and
the opposition have persisted. It is essential that the
long-awaited reforms move forward. Decentralization
is an imperative. The electoral system needs to be
radically overhauled.

Malian citizens deserve to have a Government that
they can trust, and one that trusts them. The Secretary-
General considers the human rights situation alarming.
The fact that the Malian armed forces are directly linked
to 18 cases of Violations of those rights raises serious
concerns. Four cases involve summary executions. We
urge the Malian Government to prevent and publicly
denounce human rights violations, including those
committed by Malian forces, such as in Boulikessi,
where 12 civilians were killed. The Government must
investigate allegations of violations and prosecute
the perpetrators. It is important therefore that those
responsible, as established by the investigations, not go
unpunished. That is particularly true in central Mali, a
region where human rights and the security situation
are deteriorating rapidly, as Mr. Lacroix mentioned.

The repercussions of Mali's instability are felt

beyond the country's borders, throughout the Sahel and
in Europe. The stability of the entire region is crucial
to the fight against such threats as trafficking in human
beings, illegal immigration, terrorism and organized
crime. We also call for the operationalization of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). That includes the implementation of a strict
framework for human rights compliance. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands will maintain its strong commitment
as a partner for stability in the Sahel.

Secondly, I now turn to the peace process. Following
the elections, the President of Mali was re-elected. We
therefore expect a new impetus to be given to the peace
process and the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Admittedly, progress
has been made with regard to the peace process. But
the full implementation of the agreement is far from
assured. Malians have seen too few tangible results.
That is why we call on all parties concerned, and
especially the Government, to take up the challenge
and move forward, in the interest of the Malian State,
its population and the stability of the entire region.

The role of MINUSMA has been essential in
supporting the peace process and stabilization efforts
in northern Mali. In that regard, we welcome the
Secretary-General's efforts to give new momentum to
the political process. We welcome the signing of the
pact for peace on Monday. We particularly welcome the
Government's commitment to an inclusive approach.
The implementation of the pact should be as inclusive
as possible. It must embody the voice and effective
participation of women, youth and civil society.

The pact must also be used to make progress on
the peace agreement and make it more measurable. We
expect progress on the key proposals of the agreement:
first, the effective establishment of legitimate bodies
and services of the State; secondly, decentralization;
thirdly, reconciliation; and fourthly, reform of the
security sector and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process.

Resolution 2423 (2018) requires the full integration
into the Malian defence and security forces of at least
1,000 members of the signatory armed groups. We
expect all parties to honour that obligation. The Council
has already been firm in its exhortations to make the
necessary progress. We must not hesitate to continue
in that direction by using the sanctions regime against
those who obstruct the peace process.

Thirdly, I will speak about action for peacekeeping.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends the men
and women engaged in the Mission, including our
compatriots. During the last reporting period, the
Mission suffered no casualties, even though attacks
against it and its troops continued. That is due to the
effective implementation of the recommendations of
the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers. It is also the result of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, for which Mali is a key
case study. But as Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix said, we
must remain cautious because we do not know what
tomorrow will bring.

As a troop-contributing country, the Netherlands
has sought to improve the performance and impact
of MINUSMA. In particular, we have contributed to
cutting-edge capabilities in the area of intelligence. We
have also encouraged a rotation system, recognizing
that the continued availability of those resources is
crucial to the effectiveness of peacekeeping. We will
continue to support the Secretary-General in his efforts
to advance the priorities of Action for Peacekeeping.
We commend the leadership of Cote d'Ivoire on that
issue, in its capacity as co-Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations.

The new MINUSMA mandate requires
a comprehensive strategic framework.
It attaches particular attention to migration, climate
and the human rights capabilities of the Mission.
We would appreciate it if the Secretary-General
could elaborate on those issues in his next report.
ItisessentialthatMINUSMAhavethesurgeresourcesand
capacitiesnecessarytoeffectivelyimplementitsmandate.
That includes taking firm and effective measures to
protect civilians, by military and non-military means,
in particular in central Mali.
In conclusion, now that the elections are behind us,
our work begins.

