Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also take note of the
presentation of his report (S/2013/263, annex), which we
listened to with concern owing to the lack of progress
reported in the period under consideration. We wouldl
like to make five comments with regard to the report.

First, we reiterate our support for the Dayton
Agreement and for the protection and preservation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that it is crucially important
for the political leaders and the international presence
to continue to focus on observing the balance created by
that Agreement and the follow-on political structures.

Secondly, with regard to my previous point,
we continue to be disturbed by the pitch and level
of negative rhetoric on the part of certain leaders
against the Dayton Agreement and the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are especially concerned because those words are
accomopanied by efforts to undermine, and in certain
cases even to disrupt, the functioning of the Federation
and its institutions. In spite of the Constitutional crisisi
and the stalemate in the current situation, we welcome
the fact that the 2013 State budget has been adopted.
We also View positively the fact that the State Council
of Ministers has been able to meet regularly. Moreover,
we emphasize the need to resume dialogue among
political parties, especially in order to make progress
on the legislative front.

Thirdly, we are concerned at the ongoing situation
in Mostar, where it has not been possible to hold
elections for local authorities as was done in the rest
of the country on 7 October 2012, owing to the failure
to implement the ruling of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
Constitutional Court. We hope that the multiparty
facilitation process will lead to resolving the situation
and mitigating tensions. In that regard, we also hope
that that important step will be the basis for tangible
progress and the transformation into a stable and
democratic country.
Fourthly, it is unfortunate that, during the period
covered by the report, the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina were unable to make any concrete
progress with regard to the pending objectives set by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council as
prerequisites for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We look forward with interest to the
outcome of the Board's upcoming meetings, on 22 and
23 May. We hope that the Board will be able to come up
with specific recommendations on the way ahead.

Fifthly, we recall the implementation of the ruling
against Bosnia and Herzegovina of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie-Finci case. We
underscore the importance of protecting the rights of
ethnic minorities, and hence the implementation of this
important ruling.

The report illustrates that, however good the
intentions and support of the international community,
they alone will not lead to progress. In that regard,
we agree with High Representative Inzko that respect
for the Dayton Agreement - and in particular for the
constitutional framework and the rule of law - is both
a crucial prerequisite and a tool for achieving long-term
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is now up to the
authorities and political parties to do their part.

