Mr. Fowler (Canada): As I had occasion to do
earlier this morning, I extend a warm welcome to you,
Sir, as you preside over the work of the Council for the
month of June. Along with others, I wish that your
month may be somewhat less interesting than the
month of Ambassador Wang Yingfan, whom I certainly
join others in congratulating, through Mr. Chen Xu, on
his exceptional management of the affairs of the
Council during a truly troubling period. I was, of
course, well aware of what the impact on April would
have been had all that occurred then instead of in May,
and I am very happy that it did not.

Turning to the matter at hand, Canada has long
supported the work of the two ad hoc war crimes
tribunals, and continues to do so steadfastly today. I am
pleased to reiterate that firm support. We are therefore
very happy to welcome Ms. Del Ponte back to the
Council. Both tribunals play an essential role in the
promotion of human security and create a positive and
important precedent for the creation of a permanent
international criminal court where, of course, as
Ambassador van Walsum has just pointed out,
important issues such as those that have arisen in Sierra
Leone, as highlighted a moment ago by Ambassador
Holbrooke, could be addressed in what we hope will be
a timely and expeditious manner. Clear and consistent
international support for the Tribunals, including full
cooperation in Tribunal investigations, is crucial, we
believe, if we are to end the cycle of impunity and
Violence. Justice is indeed an essential precondition for
reconciliation.

While some of the most notorious alleged war
criminals remain at large, we are nonetheless pleased
with the tribunals' success in obtaining custody over
some high-ranking accused persons. In that regard, it
is, we believe, appropriate to recall the clear obligation
of all Member States to assist the tribunals in the
investigation, arrest and prosecution of all indictees.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, we welcome this
occasion to remind all parties that these obligations are
an essential component of the full and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). Operative paragraph 14 of resolution 1244
(1999) demands full cooperation by all concerned,
including the international security presence, with the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Canada welcomes the recent visit by Republika
Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodic to The Hague.
We hope that this will be a further step towards full
cooperation on the part of the Republika Srpska
authorities, who have, of course, the primary
responsibility for arresting indicted war criminals on
their territory, including Radovan Karadzic.
Like Ambassador van Walsum, we are greatly
encouraged by the cooperative attitude demonstrated
by the new Croatian leadership in Zagreb. This
continued cooperation at all levels of authority will be
crucial in ensuring progress on such key issues as
refugee return and reconciliation.

Canada's support of the two Tribunals has been
wide-ranging. In addition to providing $3.3 million to
both Tribunals since their creation, over and above our
assessed contributions, Canada has agreed to provide
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia with 21 forensic experts from the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police to assist with the exhumation
and identification of bodies in Kosovo. We are also
encouraged by the progress being made in the
functioning of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda. We commend the Prosecutor and the
Government of Rwanda for their extensive efforts to
enhance cooperation and are pleased that Ambassador
Mutaboba is here with us today so that we can register
this point directly with him.

We are pleased to hear of the Prosecutor's plan
for future work, and we will give every consideration
to her request for additional support to pursue the
financial resources of accused persons.

