Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the briefers for their
presentations today and for their hard work in carrying
out their respective functions.

First of all, we would like to support the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), which is a successful outcome of
multilateralism, diplomacy and dialogue, and represents
a breakthrough in the non-proliferation regime.
Similarly, we wish to highlight the commendable
monitoring work being done by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) as well as its efforts to ensure
that nuclear energy is used only for peaceful purposes.

In this vein, we welcome the commitment and
determination shown by the parties to the full and
effective implementation of the JCPOA. The Plan of
Action has worked, and it has been possible to achieve
the primary objectives it established, despite the great
challenges the Plan faces, including the withdrawal
of the United States, which has generated significant
challenges for the Plan's implementation and brought
about economic restrictions that directly affect the
Iranian people. We also note with satisfaction that all the
reports issued by the IAEA since the entry into force of
the JCPOA to date have shown that Iran has complied
with its commitments under the Plan and the Additional
Protocol to the IAEA Safeguards Agreement and is
under the most stringent monitoring and verification
regime in the world.

However, we are concerned about the information
provided in the seventh report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/492) and the allegations made by
various countries with regard to Iran's activities that
contravene the provisions established in paragraph
3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), in particular
the test flights of ballistic missiles capable of carrying
nuclear weapons, the launching of ballistic missiles
against other neighbouring countries, and the transfer
of Iranian-manufactured arms and unmanned aerial
vehicles to various countries in conflict in the
Middle East. We are likewise concerned by activities
involving the transfer of weapons - unmanned aerial
vehicles manufactured by Iran - to various conflict-
affected countries in the Middle East. We therefore
call on Iran to refrain from taking measures that could
undermine the agreement, such as involving itself
in hostile activities that destabilize the region and
engaging in aggressive rhetoric, which could lead to
mistrust among the signatories to the JCPOA and the
rest of the international community. It should also
refrain from actions that contravene the obligations set
out in resolution 2231 (2015).

We are concerned at the statements made by Iran's
authorities that it would not commit itself to respecting
the limits on its enriched uranium stockpiles and heavy-
water reserves and that it would suspend compliance
with the uranium enrichment limits and measures to
modernize and upgrade the Arak heavy-water reactor,
if its demands are not met by the other parties to
the J CPOA.

We deplore this situation and hope that Iran will
maintain the commitment that it has shown so far and
continue to abide by the agreement and the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015) fully and effectively.
Furthermore, we echo the call of the Secretary-General
on States that use and fully support the procurement
channel, as this is the key mechanism for building
confidence and transparency.

Finally, we call for a continuation of the cooperation
that has been shown by the parties to the agreement
so far. In that respect, we highlight the laudable role
played by the European States in the implementation of
measures that promote economic activity, so as to ensure
compliance with the commitments in the agreement,
including the lifting of the sanctions, with a view to
delivering economic benefits to the Iranian people.

The failure of the JCPOA would have negative
effects in terms of non-proliferation and international
security, and we must therefore endeavour to ensure its
preservation, because this is a shared responsibility on
the part of the States that are signatories to the agreement
and the other States Members of the United Nations.

