Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this meeting. In such a volatile
international context, it is essential to emphasize
the importance of national reconciliation in the
peaceful settlement of conflicts in order to maintain
international peace and security. We would also like
to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing
this morning.

This month we celebrate the International Day for
Tolerance, given its importance in the lives of peoples
as a key means of achieving peace, prosperity and
survival for all humankind. Tolerance is a civilized
behaviour that is embodied in peaceful coexistence
among the different religions and cultures through the
consolidation of constitutional principles and national
legislation, which must condemn all forms of violence,
hatred, extremism and discrimination against any
group because it is different.

Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations
states that
"any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security, shall, first of all, seek a solution by
negotiation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements, or other peaceful means of their
own choice".

That is why the Kingdom of Bahrain believes that no
effort to achieve peace will be successful if States
continue to fuel conflicts as a way of imposing their
hegemony over other States. It is therefore crucial to
implement the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Organization.
Such resolutions reiterate that interference in the
internal affairs of States must be avoided and that
mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and the peaceful
settlement of disputes must be supported.

We must also cooperate in the fight against
extremism and terrorism, in particular cross-border
terrorism, which prevails in various parts of the world.
We must also strengthen collective efforts to provide
the necessary humanitarian assistance to peoples and
countries and to combat the agendas of those who seek
to destabilize national and international stability.

I also wish to refer to the report of the Secretary-
General on the prevention of armed conflict
(S/2001/574), in which he stresses that the achievement
of peace requires the coherent political participation of
women and young people in reconciliation efforts. In
that regard, we note the good offices of the Secretary-
General, the various Special Envoys and Special
Representatives, and other senior advisors.

Another report of the Secretary-General
(E/2019/68), on progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), sheds light on the
importance of SGD 16, dedicated to the promotion
of peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
development, the provision of access to justice for all,
and building effective, accountable institutions at all
levels.. However, progress in these areas continues
to face many challenges. Leaving no one behind is
another international initiative to protect and promote
human rights. That is why it is imperative to follow a
certain number of policies that are conducive to the
achievement of just and lasting growth.

Lastly, the international community must support
effective reconciliation efforts, the rule of law and
respect for the dignity of individuals and disseminate
concepts promoting a culture of peace among peoples
in order to prevent the scourge of war. The Kingdom of
Bahrain reiterates that it will work with international
partners and the United Nations to achieve these
noble goals.

