The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of C6te
d'Ivoire.

I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
her briefing on the sixth report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089). I would also
like to thank Ambassador Karel van Oosterom,
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands and
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for introducing his latest six-month report (see S/2018/1106). I also thank Mr. Serge Christiane, Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union, for his excellent briefing on the activities of the
Procurement Working Group. Finally, I would like to
welcome the presence among us of the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Michael Pompeo, and Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-
General, who is not often with us, but whom I personally
would like to see more often at our meetings.

More than three years after its adoption, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is today
at a crossroads. The unity of the Council, which
made possible the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015)
endorsing the JCPOA, is now being undermined, to the
point of impacting the interpretation of the provisions of
the Plan, which had been welcomed by the international
community.

With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, my
delegation would like to express its appreciation for the
cooperation between the Iranian Government and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Indeed,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1089), the IAEA continues to perform its role,
without hindrance, in the verification of Iranian nuclear
facilities.

In the Agency's latest report, dated 12 November,
it notes that Iran is in compliance with its commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, has not
enriched uranium to prohibited levels or created illegal
stockpiles and continues to apply, on a provisional basis,
the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement,
pending its entry into force. Based on that observation,
my delegation believes that the implementation of the
Iranian nuclear agreement should continue since it meets
the requirements of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.

With regard to the issue of ballistic missiles, my
country remains concerned about reports that Iran
tested medium-range ballistic missiles, which could be
nuclear-weapon delivery systems, on 1 December.

cote d'Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to urge the Iranian authorities to strictly uphold their
obligations, which would undoubtedly contribute to
facilitating discussions on the implementation of the
JCPOA and strengthening confidence and cooperation
among the signatory parties. It also invites them to
dispel all doubts with regard to alleged ballistic-missile
transfers. In that regard, my country supports the
establishment of consensual investigation mechanisms
to establish the truth on that issue.

With regard to information on the illicit transfer
of and discovery in the region of debris from other
types of weapons allegedly manufactured in Iran, my
delegation urges the United Nations to expeditiously
conclude investigations into their origins and the timing
of their transfer. Cote d'Ivoire would like to encourage
the Iranian authorities to reassure the international
community by scrupulously applying the provisions of
the Security Council resolutions relating to, inter alia,
the travel ban and measures to freeze assets.

Given that C6te d'Ivoire is strongly committed
to multilateralism and the promotion of multilateral
frameworks, where consensus is built to address current
threats to international peace and security, I would
like to reiterate our support for the JCPOA, which
remains a strong guarantee of the implementation of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges the parties to the
Plan of Action to agree on the interpretation of its
provisions and resolve any misunderstandings through
the mechanisms provided for that purpose, in particular
the Joint Commission established in its annex IV. My
country also encourages them to maintain their level
of commitment and work together towards the full
implementation of the Plan, which, like any human
undertaking, remains open to improvement.

My delegation urges all States parties, without
exception, to return to the negotiating table and calls
on them to fully uphold their respective commitments,
while bearing in mind the need to strengthen
international security by fully implementing the
agreement, which has already led to significant progress.
cote d'Ivoire also invites the Islamic Republic of Iran
to pay particular attention to the concerns raised by the
members of the Council and maintain its cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency. It also
calls on Iran to scrupulously respect the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

