Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to begin by welcoming you in
our midst and congratulating you on the skilful way in
which you are discharging your responsibilities as the
head of this Council. It is a source of pride for us to see
Benin presiding over the Security Council, a pride
which is entirely understandable when one realizes
that, in addition to being a neighbour, a brother and a
friend of Burkina Faso, holding the same values and
united in a common destiny within the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Benin
does us credit by its ardent and committed
championing of the cause of peace.

Thus we fully understand that in your term in the
presidency of the Council, you should wish to present
for our consideration the thorny topic of cross-border
issues in West Africa. You, Mr. President, are
convinced, as we are, that the proper understanding and
mastery of these phenomena will to a large extent
determine whether stability and peace prevail in our
subregion, thus enabling it to embark on genuine
development.

We recognize, as the report of the Secretary-
General does, that the last decade was particularly
trying for West Africa in terms of conflict, political
crises and insecurity in all its forms. Nonetheless, there
has been no lack of resolve and determination on the
part of States or political leaders. Many of them have
contributed with initiatives that have helped to rein in
some forms of violence and banditry. Those initiatives
include, among other factors, police cooperation and
exchange of information among States and regular
consultations among the authorities responsible for
security issues. Even the bilateral commissions have
offered opportunities to rethink the measures and
actions undertaken to combat insecurity and instability
in West Africa.

But it is plain that much more needs to be done to
promote and render safe the free movement of people
and goods among member countries within the
meaning of the ECOWAS Protocol to curb the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
trafficking in children and the recruitment and use of
child soldiers and other mercenaries. Manifestly, there
is a need for more resolve and more means to put a
stop to monetary extortion and brutal acts committed at
the roadblocks and to end the activities of traffickers
and thieves of all descriptions. We must acknowledge
that the magnitude of the actions required and the tasks
to be fulfilled places a considerable constraint on the
preventive and development policies of States and
obliges them to rely on international assistance, first
and foremost that of the United Nations.

The political and social consequences of the
security situation and conflicts in West Africa have
been thoroughly noted and studied in the successive
reports of the Secretary-General. The Security Council
itself became involved, including by dispatching a
mission to the subregion in June 2004, a mission that
reported exhaustively on the real situation prevailing in
West Africa. Thus cooperation with the United Nations
is encouraging and should be further strengthened with
the admission of ECOWAS as an observer to the
United Nations.

Above and beyond the specific assistance given
in the context of peacekeeping operations, I believe
that I can state that in Liberia and Sierra Leone and
now in Cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations has, more
than any other organization, made a decisive
contribution in the struggle against two major scourges
in West Africa: first, against the circulation of small
arms and light weapons, in the framework of the
Bamako Moratorium - to which much reference has
been made this morning; and secondly, against the use
of child soldiers, whose plight has been vividly
depicted for us by Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

Still, in the area of cooperation, I must not forget
the increasingly visible partnership with the European
Union, particularly in the area of training, logistical
support, assistance to post-conflict reconstruction and
assistance in the humanitarian area.

In February 2004 there was a consultation
between the European Union and ECOWAS at Abuja,
which led to the establishment of a common work
programme with clearly defined objectives. We take
this opportunity - even if voices of greater authority
have already done so - to commend and thank all
those of good will who thus helped our subregion find
a better balance for tackling the only worthwhile
objective: the battle for development.

Above and beyond all those actions, it must be
clearly understood that the maintenance of peace and
security in West Africa is first and foremost the
responsibility of the States and all the political actors
there.

In conclusion, I wish to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa, whose important statement will undoubtedly
help deepen our understanding of the issue, and
especially to better define the vital elements of any
resolution of cross-border issues in West Africa.

To you personally, Mr. President, we repeat how
gratified we are with the exemplary way in which you
represent us in the Security Council. Your colleague
and friend, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina
Faso, who would very much have wished to participate
in this important debate but who was unable to travel at
the last minute, has instructed me to convey this
brotherly sentiment to you.

