Mr. Jacob (Israel): Israel is pleased to be
participating in today's debate on terrorism and
strongly supports the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). The Counter-Terrorism Committee
has the potential to be an indispensable instrument for
communicating the proper message to terrorists and
their supporters and for coordinating our efforts to
protect civilization from this deadly threat.

Israel believes that foremost among the CTC's
priorities must be to ensure that States comply with the
provisions established by the Security Council to
combat terrorism. In so doing, the Committee must not
shy away from its obligation to scrutinize carefully not
only the reports that have been submitted but also the
actions of States, and it must be willing and courageous
enough to draw international attention to such actions.
No State can be allowed to believe that it can continue
to support terrorism with impunity.

I wish to express my congratulations to
Ambassador Greenstock for his conscientious and
capable leadership of the CTC. Israel believes that the
work of the CTC is absolutely essential to the full
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), and we
support the Committee's work. We further encourage
the Secretariat to take steps to resolve the
administrative issues that have constrained the CTC,
whose smooth functioning is urgently needed.

Terrorism is an issue of particular relevance to
my Government and to the people of Israel. Since the
establishment of our State in 1948, Israel has been a
frequent target of terrorism and continues to be one
today. Last month, more than 130 Israeli civilians were
murdered by terrorists. In the past two weeks, two
public buses were attacked by suicide bombers, killing
14 Israelis.

It is as a result of such attacks that Israel has
developed an extensive network of Government
authorities, a body of domestic legislation, a range of
practical policies and an intense commitment to combat
terrorism in all its aspects. Our full range of counter-
terrorism efforts was detailed in the report we
submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1373 (2001),
and I will not recall them here.

The landmark resolutions that were adopted by
the Council following the horrific attacks of 11
September marked a major turning point in our efforts
to eradicate the scourge of terrorism. The Council
rightly understood that terrorists do not operate in a
vacuum and that we will never be successful if we go
after only the terrorists themselves. Rather, terrorists
depend on the support, assistance and safe harbour
granted by States, and it is the States that provide such
assistance to terrorist organizations that must be
targeted, no less than the terrorists themselves. We are
hopeful that the CTC will be instrumental in ensuring
that State support for individuals or organizations
involved in terrorist activities is eliminated and that
States comply with the directives of the Council, as
detailed in resolution 1373 (2001).

Ending State support for terrorism does not only
mean disrupting State financing; it also means ending
the encouragement, incitement and moral and religious
sanctions of those acts. Not only must terrorists be
denied the tools they require to spread fear among
civilians, but they must hear from their own societies
that they will not permit acts of mass murder to be
committed in their name. Religious leaders must not
instruct their followers that murder and suicide are an
expression of God's will. Political leaders must View
the perpetration of terrorist attacks by their citizens as
a cause for grief and introspection, not for celebration.
Resolution 1373 (2001), and resolution 1368
(2001), which preceded it, further recognized that
terrorism constitutes a threat to international peace and
security and that States have an inherent right to
individual and collective self-defence against it.
Terrorists and their supporters must understand not
only that is there nothing to be gained by attacking
civilians, but that there is much to be lost as well.
Terrorists cannot be allowed to operate with impunity,
and they cannot be recipients of political concessions.
While we must combat despair and poverty, we must
make absolutely clear, in both our words and our
deeds, that there is no grievance that justifies terror.

Israel understands the challenges facing certain
States that have little experience in battling terrorism.
In that respect, Israel stands ready to assist those States
in developing a counter-terror capacity. Our experience
with terrorism is long; we have developed many
strategies and techniques and have many experts with a
wealth of experience in this field. Israel is eager to
share its know-how with others and to do its part to
assist the international community in carrying out this
important work.

Israel hopes that its own struggle against
terrorism, although unfortunate, will be of value to
other States and, at the same time, that it will be able to
learn from the knowledge and expertise of others in our
shared challenge of combating terrorism. We must
remember that a terrorist threat anywhere is a threat to
States everywhere.

We firmly believe that through the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, by increasing and enhancing international
cooperation and by using the tools at our disposal to
target State sponsors of terror, we can protect ourselves
and succeeding generations from the horrors of
terrorism.

