Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset, I should like to warmly welcome
His Excellency Mr. Leonardo Simao, Foreign Minister of
Mozambique, to today's Council meeting and to thank
him for delivering a very important statement.

The Chinese and African peoples share identical or
similar historical experiences. China has all along been
following closely the developments in Africa. We deeply
sympathize with the conflict-torn African continent in the
post-cold-war era and with its people for the suffering
caused by conflicts. It has been an important component
of China's foreign policy to support the African people in
their endeavour to achieve lasting peace and strengthen
friendly relations of cooperation with all African other
countries.

His Excellency Mr. Qian Qichen, the Vice-Premier
and Foreign Minister of China, is now visiting Africa. In
his meetings with leaders of African States, he said that
the disintegration of the bipolar world has made a huge
impact on Africa, which greatly needs an environment of
peace, unity and stability. China attaches importance to
Africa and supports the just demands and reasonable
stand of African countries in international affairs. This is
just what we are doing at the United Nations, including
the Security Council.
Mozambique has now set out on the road of
consolidating peace, the road of economic rehabilitation
and reconstruction, following the successful elections and
the establishment of a new Government. The success in

 

the Mozambican peace process has shown us that, even if
there are numerous difficulties and hardships the conflicting
parties can turn hostility into friendship and achieve the
peace and stability to which the people ardently aspire, as
long as, acting in their overall national interests, they have
the necessary political will and persevere to achieve a
political settlement through peaceful negotiations.

The international community - particularly the United
Nations and donor countries - has made tremendous
efforts and put in enormous resources for the settlement of
the conflict in Mozambique. China not only participated in
the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ),
but also sent monitors to the elections in Mozambique.
While engaged in in-depth discussions of the Secretary-
General' s "Supplement to an Agenda for Peace" (S/1995/1),
people are summarizing the experience gained in
ONUMOZ, which they hope will bring some inspiration
and guidance to many other United Nations peace-keeping
operations. In our view, the key to the success of
ONUMOZ lies in the observance of the purposes and
principles of the Charter and the adherence to the principles
proven effective in traditional peace-keeping operations.
That success was also dependent on the unswerving support
of the international community, including that of the United
Nations and the Security Council.

The Mozambican people are now faced with the
arduous task of economic reconstruction, which calls for
constant strong support from the international community.
The Chinese Government and people will, as always, do
whatever they can to help the Mozambican Government and
people overcome the current difficulties and achieve
economic and social development.

