Mr. Romulo (Philippines): The Philippines
congratulates Indonesia and its Foreign Minister on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council.

The changing face of our world highlights the
indispensable role of regional and subregional
organizations in our quest for peace and security. For
the Philippines, the peace and security of the different
regions of the world hold great importance in terms of
our commitment to the basic principles of the Charter
and because of our deep concern for our nationals. One
tenth of our nationals are outside the country and live
in practically every region of the world. It is thus in the
Philippines' national interest that all regions remain
peaceful, stable and progressive.

The Charter provides the basis for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. Working with the United
Nations, regions must strengthen their potential to
resolve disputes and maintain peace and security.
Cooperative ventures between the United Nations and
regional organizations in the field of peacekeeping, and
enhanced interaction on conflict prevention and
peacebuilding prove the importance and usefulness of
that partnership. To further strengthen that critical
partnership, may I respectfully propose the following.

First, the exchange of information on matters
relating to the maintenance of peace and security at the
regional level should serve as the backbone for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

Secondly, formal arrangements for collaboration
should be concluded between the United Nations and
regional organizations to establish clear areas of
responsibility and more efficient cooperation. The
Secretary-General's 2005 report "In larger freedom"
recommended memorandums of understanding to
govern such relationships. The Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) signed such a
memorandum on 27 September 2007. It may also be
recalled that ASEAN was granted observer status in the
General Assembly on 4 December 2006.

Thirdly, cooperation between the United Nations
and the concerned regional organization should be
monitored. Monitoring should be seen as a nurturing
process whereby best practices are highlighted for
future reference and guidance.

Fourthly, the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, should always endeavour to open all
channels of communication and consult with regional
organizations.

Regions must play a primary role in the peace
and security of their respective areas. ASEAN has
concluded several initiatives that have significantly
contributed to peace, security and stability in our
region. Those include the declaration of a Zone of
Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in South-East Asia, the
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, the
Declaration of ASEAN Concord, the Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, the
establishment of the ASEAN Regional Forum, the
ASEAN Dialogue Process, the Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, and
regional actions undertaken in cooperation with the
United Nations with regard to Cambodia and Timor-
Leste.

We must also take an active interest in
developments that relate to efforts to build stronger ties
between our respective regions and the United Nations.
One pressing issue involving ASEAN and the United
Nations is the situation in Myanmar, or Burma. On the
issue of Myanmar, the Philippines reiterates that
ASEAN should continue to give full support to the
good offices role of the Secretary-General in the person
of Special Adviser Ibrahim Gambari. For the
Philippines, it is our hope that all efforts in our region
and here in the United Nations will produce positive
and tangible outcomes that will lead to national
reconciliation and a peaceful transition to democracy in
Myanmar. It is our fervent and hopeful expectation
that, to begin that national reconciliation and peaceful
transition, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi will be immediately
released without any condition or restriction, and that
all parties, including the National League for
Democracy, will be part of the democratization and
constitutional process in Myanmar.

