Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
thank you for convening this meeting on Darfur. Once
again, we express our gratitude to the delegation of
Ghana for its presidency last month.

We are delighted to have the Secretary-General
among us for this important debate on the situation in
Darfur and on the implementation of resolution 1706
(2006), which the Security Council adopted on 31
August 2006. We thank him for his sobering statement
on the situation in Darfur. We also thank the
representatives of the Sudan, the League of Arab States

and the Organization of the Islamic Conference for
their statements, which cast a ray of hope with respect
to the Sudan and the international community
addressing the crisis in Darfur.

The situation in Darfur is at a crossroads and
needs urgent, decisive initiatives to advance the
implementation of the stalled Darfur Peace Agreement.
The humanitarian situation on the ground is
deteriorating further, access is restricted and the
security situation of humanitarian workers is getting
riskier by the day. The political situation is at a
stalemate, as there is no progress in persuading the
non-parties to sign up to the Agreement; instead, they
have become more fractured and belligerent. Tension is
building between the Government and the armed
groups as the Government is deploying a massive
military force to strike at the rebels at any time. We
heard this morning that aerial attacks have actually
been carried out in response to attacks from the rebels.
A situation of dangerous escalation is again developing
and should be contained.

In our view, a military solution to the current
situation can only add to the misery and suffering of
the people and complicate the already fragile political
and security situation in Darfur. It was the failure of a
military approach to the Darfur crisis that necessitated
the N'Djamena Ceasefire Agreement and,
subsequently, the peace process in Abuja. The Sudan
should know better the futility of military approaches
to political problems after the longest civil war in
Africa, in southern Sudan. Sudan has actually taught us
and demonstrated to us the value and virtue of
negotiated peaceful solutions to protracted political
crises with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
negotiated at Naivasha and Nairobi.

The deadline for the African peacekeeping
mission is drawing near. Resources to keep the force
there are drying up. The Sudanese Government has
signalled that the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) can leave when its mandate expires later this
month. That is a most frightening scenario. Never
before has the international community abandoned a
humanitarian and political crisis on the scale of what
exists in Darfur. We cannot leave the people of Darfur
alone. The situation demands international action with
the full participation of the Sudan.
We have before us resolution 1706 (2006), which
has been rejected by the Sudan because of a perceived
mistrust of the presence of a United Nations force in
Darfur to implement the Darfur Peace Agreement
(DPA). We are intrigued by that argument, because the
presence of the United Nations in Darfur is not going
to be any different from the Organization's presence in
southern Sudan, except in size and composition. There
is an urgent need, at this hour, for the African Union
and the United Nations to re-engage the Government of
the Sudan in exploring mutually reassuring approaches
to implement the Council's resolution.

Tanzania has full trust in the ability and
resourcefulness of the Secretary-General to find ways
to break the impasse. It would be helpful to initiate
urgent consultations with the Government of the Sudan
and the African Union, together with the other
stakeholders and facilitators who were involved in the
negotiations leading up to the Abuja Agreement, on
how to find creative and acceptable ways to implement
the Agreement. We were gratified to hear this morning
from the representative of the Sudan that the
Government of the Sudan is open to consultation and
dialogue with the United Nations on the need to
implement the Darfur peace process.

In the meantime, an urgent initiative should be
undertaken to extend the mandate of the African Union
and to mobilize the resources needed to cover the cost
of the African Union Mission in the Sudan between the
end of September and the end of the year. Depending
upon the outcome of the political consultations we
have just suggested, the United Nations should
continue to put in place the basic logistical
requirements for what would be an acceptable
multinational force to go to Darfur on terms agreeable
to the Sudan, but under the auspices of the United
Nations.

We hope those ideas will contribute to finding a
way out of the current political impasse and the
deteriorating security situation.

Let me also add my voice in extending
condolences to the people and the Government of the
United States on the fifth anniversary of the bombing
of the Twin Towers, and in recalling the dangers posed
by international terrorism.

