Mr. Kubis: At the oustet, allow me to congratulate
the new members of the Security Council on assuming
their responsibilities, as well as to thank those that left
the Council at the end of last year for their continuous

strong support and cooperation with the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

Let me start my briefing by applauding the
bravery of the Iraqi security forces, including the
popular mobilization forces, the Peshmerga and tribal
volunteers, as well as the endurance of the Iraqi people.

Three months after the Mosul liberation operation
began, combat operations in the eastern part of Mosul
have come to an end. The steady progress should not
serve to conceal the fact that fighting has been - and
will continue to be - a massive challenge, in particular
inside the old city, in western Mosul. With significant
support from international partners, especially the
United States, Iraqi forces will remain engaged in
complex urban operations. Yet the liberation operations
in Iraq are coming to an end in the near foreseeable
future. The days ofthe so-called caliphate ofthe Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) are numbered. I take
this opportunity to honour the martyrs who sacrificed
their lives in the fight against the ISIL international
terrorists for the sake of a free and united Iraq and in
defence of human values shared by the world, as strong
allies of the United States and a steadfast part of the
international anti-ISIL coalition.

In the post-Da'esh period Iraq will need continuous
substantial and substantive support and assistance from
the international community, including its regional
partners. Any abrupt scaling down of engagement or
support would mean repeating mistakes of the past i
mistakes that have had grave consequences for stability
and security well beyond the borders of Iraq.

The humanitarian concept of operations adopted by
the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi security forces,
including the popular mobilization forces, prioritizes
the protection of civilians in an unprecedented manner,
in both the planning and the conduct of military
operations, based on the lessons learned from mistakes
of the previous liberation operations. The conduct of
all security forces during the liberation operations has
mitigated much, but not all, of the fear that existed
among the population of Mosul prior to the operation.
I note that UNAMI has received no evidence of any
systematic or widespread violations of international
humanitarian law or human rights law on the part of
the security forces. Regrettably, however, criminal acts
against civilians and prisoners of war still occur. There
are most often quickly investigated, with measures
taken to prevent such acts in the future. I furthermore
note that security screenings of civilians leaving
areas controlled by Da'esh appear to be conducted in
a transparent manner and in general observance of
international standards. However, I express my concerns
about disturbing reports of looting and destruction of
civilian property and looting of humanitarian aid by
armed groups operating in support of the Iraqi security
forces, in particular by some local resistance groups.

Protecting civilians, avoiding steps that could
incite sectarian tensions and preventing looting and
revenge attacks in Mosul, but also in other liberated
areas of the country, are of vital importance for
winning the hearts and minds of the population. They
constitute the first steps in the process of national and
community-based reconciliation and in building a truly
unified and united Iraq in which all its people will feel
like equal citizens, be treated fairly and be protected
by the State. I am pleased to note here that, during its
meeting on 30 January, the Council of Representatives
supported the Prime Minister's proposed candidates
for the positions of Minister of Defence and Minister
of the Interior. Swift action to agree on the selection
and appointment of ministers for the remaining vacant
posts, including the Ministers of Trade, Industry and
Finance, is necessary.

The world will not forget the horrendous crimes
committed by Da'esh. Provisional justice for the
victims of human rights abuses and violations requires
the re-establishment of the formal justice system, the
effective and efficient documentation of violations
and abuses and the establishment of non-formal
justice mechanisms, such as truth-telling, specialized
care and rehabilitation programmes for women and
deradicalization programmes for children subjected
to extremist indoctrination. There is also a need for
broader intra- and inter-community dialogue on justice
and human rights.

Attention should also be given to the needs of
ethnic and religious minorities, which have been
disproportionately affected by the conflict. Since 2003,
Iraq has lost more than half of its ethnic and religious
minority population. It is my fear that, without an
adequate response, that process will continue even after
the defeat of Da'esh. Special attention should therefore
be paid to arrangements that address the specific
security and other concerns of minorities in order to
enable them to return to their homes.

Over the past months, I have engaged with the
leadership of the Iraqi National Alliance, the largest
parliamentary block, on the way forward in post-Da'esh
Iraq. The National Alliance submitted its national
settlement initiative to UNAMI on 30 October 2016.
I welcome and support that encouraging move. The
National Alliance initiative is a good starting point in
the Iraqi-owned and -led. but United Nations-facilitated,
process of national settlement and reconciliation and
has already sparked a wave of interest in all sectors of
Iraqi society. UNAMI is currently working with those
groups, including the Sunni and Turkmen components,
the Kurdistan region of Iraq, civil society, minority
communities, tribal leaders and youth and women's
groups, with the aim of soliciting their views and vision
on how to build a post-ISIL united Iraq based on the
principles of equality and citizenship. Let me emphasize
that, for national reconciliation to succeed, it must
be supported by grassroots initiatives. I am therefore
glad to announce that UNAMI has launched a series of
events under the theme "Iraq: Youth and Coexistence".
The first such event took place on 28 January in Basra,
where 120 youth from the four southern governorates
participated.

After months of uncertainty regarding the timing of
the Provincial Council elections in Iraq, Prime Minister
Al Abadi announced on 17 January that governorate
and district council elections were scheduled to be
held on 16 September. It is now up to the Council of
Representatives to urgently put in place the appropriate
legal and institutional framework for those elections
to take place. A clear and comprehensive electoral
legal framework is essential to enable preparations
by the Independent High Electoral Commission. I
also encourage the Government of Iraq to provide
the requisite funding for the Commission in order to
facilitate its regulatory and operational planning and
preparations for the elections. In addition, on 23 January,
the Kurdistan Regional Government announced that
the parliamentary and presidential elections would be
conducted on 11 November.

During the previous phase of the Mosul operation,
an estimated 825,000 civilians remained in their homes
in the areas retaken by the Iraqi security forces. Nearly
190,000 people have been displaced since mid-October,
far fewer than humanitarians had feared. Thirty
thousand of those people have already returned to their
homes and more are doing so every day. Although the
military campaign to oust ISIL from Iraq is nearly
won, the humanitarian crisis is expected to continue for
months, if not years. In December 2016, humanitarian
partners presented an advanced summary of the 2017
humanitarian response plan. At least $985 million
is required this year to reach the 5.8 million most
vulnerable Iraqis. Of that total $331 million is being
sought specifically for the Mosul response.
A great deal is already being done. More than
1.4 million displaced Iraqis have returned to their homes,
including 1 million in the past 12 months throughout the
country. The United Nations Development Programme
Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization is
currently operational in 21 liberated towns and districts.
Hundreds of thousands of people have returned to the
cities and districts facilitated by that activity.

Allow me now to turn the issue of missing Kuwaiti
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives. The Government of Iraq has shown
determination to pursue the important work of locating
missing persons. Through the proactive efforts of the
Iraqi Ministry of Defence, the number of witnesses
coming forward to give information has increased
dramatically. Field visits and excavation work continue,
both in Iraq and in Kuwait.

Separately, efforts in recovering Kuwait's missing
patrimony are ongoing. Over 6,000 Kuwaiti books have
been located and itemized from the libraries of the Kufa
and Babil Universities, and are being prepared for an
official handover to Kuwait. Yet time is not on our side.
As time passes, it makes locating burial sites all the
more difficult. We owe it to the families of the deceased
to continue supporting Iraq in this humanitarian
process and to continue employing a multidimensional
and innovative approach, which Iraq requires to honour
and fulfil its international obligations in this area.

