Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Foreign Minister Portas, for
presiding over today's meeting. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov;
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Guterres; and the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, Ms. Chan, for their respective
briefings.

The world is undergoing deep and complicated
development and change. Traditional security issues,
such as conflict, wars and territorial disputes, endure,
while non-traditional security issues, such as poverty,
backwardness, terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, transnational organized crime and
internet security issues, have also come to the fore. The
two categories are often interrelated and mutually
reinforcing. China therefore appreciates Portugal's
initiative in convening today's meeting, which will
help the international community to increase its
awareness of the new challenges.

Faced with various global security threats and
challenges, the international community should
strengthen multilateral cooperation and respond
through collective action, while adhering to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The United Nations and the Security Council can play
their due roles, pursuant to the Charter and the relevant
division of labour.

In recent years, the Security Council has adopted
several important resolutions on combating terrorism
and preventing proliferation, which have made
important contributions to promoting international
cooperation, to combating terrorism and to
strengthening the international system to prevent
proliferation. The Security Council has also organized
thematic debates on how such issues as transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking, development,
HIV/AIDS and climate change affect international
peace and security.

Some consensus has been reached. Transnational
organized crime often intertwines with drug trafficking
and terrorism. It aggravates illicit financing and arms
trafficking, thereby affecting the security, stability and
economic development of countries and regions in
conflict. The Security Council should continue to pay
attention to the issue of transnational organized crime
from the perspective of prevention and conflict
resolution.

In conflict and post-conflict situations, the tasks
of preventing and treating HIV/AIDS and other
communicable diseases are particularly arduous. In that
respect, the World Health Organization (WHO) has
played a very important lead role in recent years.
While considering the particular situations on its
agenda and devising well-formulated plans for post-
conflict reconstruction, security sector reform and the
reintegration of former combatants, the Security
Council should give due consideration to the need to
prevent and treat HIV/AIDS and other communicable
diseases, in close cooperation with the WHO.

Climate change is a serious common challenge to
all of humankind. The international community should
strengthen its cooperation on the basis of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and its Kyoto Protocol so as to face the challenge
together. China has always participated proactively and
constructively in the negotiations and international
cooperation on climate change, and called for climate
change to be addressed in the framework of sustainable
development, in accordance with the principles of
fairness and common but differentiated
responsibilities.

In addressing these new challenges, the various
United Nations entities need to carry out their work in
accordance with the mandated division of labour, their
comparative advantages and the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. They should maintain
coordination and synergy while avoiding duplication of
effort that results in differences of opinion and wasted
resources.

Developing countries are constrained by their
level of development and are particularly affected by
the international economic and financial crisis. As a

result, they face various difficulties in responding to
challenges and threats. The international community
should pay paramount attention to that issue and
proactively provide financial and technical assistance
to developing countries.

