Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): One of two timely
questions was asked concerning Abyei, regarding
which we must be aware of the fact that, despite several
political commitments that were made five and a half
years ago, there is still no joint police force there. The
United Nations and the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei provide the minimum necessary level
of police to ensure the minimum level of law and order
in the Abyei box. We have created units that provide
and contribute to community policing in the Ngok
Dinka community. Need I mention that we made the
same offer to the Misseriya community, which was
rejected by the Government of Khartoum and resulted
in the asymmetrical situation, which, I believe, the
representative of the Russian Federation pointed out.
That continues to be our objective.

With regard to the events in Juba in July, as I told the
Council, we are firmly committed to the implementation
of the recommendations of the report, which resulted
from the independent special investigation led by
Major General Cammaert. My close colleague,
Mr. Wane, is heading up a task force that is working
towards implementing all of the recommendations in
connection with soldiers, civilians and police officers.
All of that has been put in motion, and I promise to
keep the Security Council up to date in real time.

With regard to the host of questions that were
asked this morning, I thank you, Sir, for having taken
this initiative. We know the very special role that your
country plays in the area of police contributions. I
commend both the quantity and the excellent quality
of your country's contribution of police personnel. The
corps is made up of people who are highly professional
and whose conduct is beyond reproach. And I am
truly grateful.

I believe that the discussion has illustrated above
all the fact that police activities, which form a part of
peacekeeping operations, cannot serve as a universal
model. At the core of the matter constant tensions arise
from two constraints, which vary according to the
context: on the one hand, the necessity to compensate
for the inexistence or shortcomings ofa national police,
and, on the other, to boost national capacities. And the
situation changes from one moment to the next.

Ten years ago in Haiti, the problem was the
gangs of Cite de Soleil. The priority was therefore an
intervention on the ground to neutralize the members
of those gangs. Today, as the Haitian National Police
has reached a greater level in terms of quantity and
quality, priority has been placed on the very important
area of training in terms of both of those elements. The
police component of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, in its role of maintaining law and
order, is much less needed and has become rather a
backup force, composed of our troops and police units
remaining in the country.

The situation in South Sudan was the exact opposite.
In 2011, the mandate accorded by the Security Council
was one of capacity-building. The terrible deterioration
of the situation there, which began in December 2013,
meant that, because of the impossibility of cooperating
with South Sudanese institutions that had blood on
their hands, we had to put capacity-building activities
on hold. And we focused to a much greater degree on
policing while hoping that the time would come - as
the Police Commissioner said - for integrated joint
policing, provided for in the peace agreements, and
full-on capacity-building. There is no one-size-fits-all
model. Every situation has to be dealt with individually.

I would like to address some of the other issues
that were brought up. Clearly, language skills are a
must. Wherever possible, we need to have more police
who can interact with the local populations. That was
one of the goals of the Conference on Peacekeeping in
Francophone Environments, held in Paris three weeks
ago. In two weeks, I will take part in the sixteenth
Summit of the International Organization of La
Francophonie, to be held in Madagascar. I use all such
opportunities to remind people of the major importance
of capacity if we want to function correctly.

Secondly, with regard to intelligence policy, I
know that the terminology continues to lead to certain
comments, but it is clear - and Mali was clearly an
interesting case here - that we cannot act effectively if
we are blind and deaf. Therefore, we need intelligence
capacities in military terms; we need intelligence
for policing and for civilian activities. Therefore,
Mr. President, you know that we are implementing,
we are trying to design a type of framework for what
could be the intelligence policy of the United Nations.
It is clear - and we are working with Member States
on that - that we do take account of all the limits
concerning, first of all, the need to be consistent with
our mandate, not working outside our mandate. It is
really for the needs of implementing the mandate.

We work in a positive relationship with the host
Government. We are prohibited from undertaking any
James Bond-style or other such type of operations.
Everything needs to be very much focused on the
needs that we face. For all that, we need specific tools
in terms of technology, that is, surveillance drones in
many situations could really help us in our work. Then
there are the observation balloons, with clusters of
cameras and sensors. Those play a very critical role.
They allow us to supervise the security in the capital
of the Central African Republic, in Bangui. In terms
of new institutions, including in Bangui, we have set
up a task force for the security of the capital, and this
brings the military and the police closely together, and
all that is being constantly fine-tuned. I think all that is
really necessary.

In part, all that is really the outcome of the impetus
that was given by Senegal's resolution 2185 (2014) two
years ago. I think that the Secretary-General's report
that will be issued shortly will give a good illustration
of the fact that the Council has given a major impetus
to that, and it helps us out very much in all our work.

I will conclude on an important point, which was
illustrated during the United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit held last spring. This is an opportunity for me
to thank all the police-contributing countries because
I know very well how in each country a permanent
tension exists between its domestic security needs and
the interest of ensuring that its national police acquire
international experience and also contribute to the needs
of the international community. I know to what extent
that is very difficult for Ministries of the Interior, for
the heads of national police forces and of gendarmeries.
The figures show that. We have doubled the numbers of
United Nations police force over the last seven or eight
years. We now have 13, 500 police, and new pledges
have been made in the framework of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. All that
shows that there is now a greater awareness of the
importance of all that work. Once again, it demonstrates
the generosity of the contributing countries, and that
should be commended. Allow me to particularly thank
your own country once again, Mr. President, for all that
Senegal is doing to help us.

