The President: In accordance with Article 11 ofthe
Statute of the International Court of Justice, the Council
will now hold an eighth meeting to elect one member of
the International Court of Justice, by further ballots for
the one seat remaining to be filled.

I should like to informthe Councilthatlhave received
a letter from His Excellency Mr. Matthew Rycroft,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations, dated 20 November 2017, communicating the
decision to withdraw the nomination of Mr. Christopher
Greenwood for election to the International Court of
Justice. Accordingly, Mr. Greenwood's name is not
included on the ballot papers.

May I take that the Council is now ready to proceed
to the vote?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to a new ballot. I
request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

At the invitation ofthe President, Ms. Melikbekyan
(Russian Federation) and Mr. Bandiuk (Ukraine)
acted as tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the candidate
for whom they wish to vote.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members that
in accordance with the established practice, the ballots
will not be counted until it has been verified that the
ballot papers in the General Assembly have also been
collected. The Council will remain in session pending
the receipt of that information.

>l<>i<>l<


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Dalveer Bhandari 15

Mr. Dalveer Bhandari has accordingly received
the required majority of votes in the Security Council.
I have communicated the result of the voting to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
57th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing the one
remaining member of the International Court of
Justice, Mr. Dalveer Bhandari obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly."

Accordingly, the same candidate has received the
required absolute majority of votes both in the Council
and in the General Assembly.

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidates, the
jurists Mr. Ronny Abraham, Mr. Dalveer Bhandari,
Mr. Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade, Mr. Nawaf
Salam and Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf have been
elected to the International Court of Justice for a term
of office of nine years, beginning on 6 February 2018.

I should like to congratulate them and wish them
every success in the high office to which they have been
elected.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to thank the
tellers for their assistance in the conduct of the elections.
I would also like to thank all Council members for the
constructive manner in which they have engaged in the
election process.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.05 pm.

