Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First and foremost, I wish to inform the
Security Council that, as we meet here today to discuss
the situation in my country, thousands of Syrians,
honest Americans and persons from other countries are
demonstrating on 47th Street, outside the Conference
Building, calling on members ofthe Council to stop their
bombing of and interference in Syria as well as their
support for terrorist groups. Similar demonstrations are
also taking place in other American cities, including in
the State of California.

This important meeting about my country, Syria,
is being held at a critical time, as we are witnessing
serious disruptions that run contrary to the promising
signs of the past week. This is mainly due to the fact
that the United States disavowed the agreement it had
concluded with the Russian Federation in Geneva on
9 September. It is also due to the unwillingness to
force the armed groups supported by the so-called
international coalition to abide by the aforementioned
Geneva agreement. One must point out that the term
"international", used to describe this coalition, does
not convey the reality. That is to say, the coalition was
formed outside the realm of international legitimacy,
without a Security Council resolution and without
coordination with the stakeholder, namely, the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. This coalition
is reminiscent of other destructive coalitions to which
many speakers today have referred, coalitions that have
brought nothing but disaster to such countries as Iraq,
Libya and Yemen.
When the United States Administration decided to
intervene unilaterally in my country through air raids,
American officials came to us to say that Washington
would commit not to use American warplanes to target
the Syrian Army or vital infrastructure. Rather, only
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) would
be targeted. I received the personal assurances on that
point from the Permanent Representative of the United
States, who spoke on behalf of her Government. It was
a message conveyed by her Government.

Two years after the establishment of the coalition
and the beginning of the air raids, American officials
have forgotten their promises and their commitments.
American jets are bombing Syrian Army facilities and
vital infrastructure and American soldiers are now
present in Syrian territories. The American military
aggression on eastern Syria, the Turkish military
aggression on northern Syria and the Israeli military
aggression on southern Syria mean, without a shadow
of a doubt, that the proxy war has become a real war and
a true aggression on my country.

My country welcomed the Russian-American
statements on 9 September after both parties agreed
to combat the terrorist organizations, the Islamic State
of Iraq and al-Sham (ISIS) and the Al-Nusra Front,
regardless of their their names. That agreement was
concluded with the knowledge and consent of the Syrian
Government. However, the international community,
represented by the Council, received a horrific shock
before which it stood helpless, unable to issue a
condemnation or express outrage at the very least.
That shock was the unjustified, brutal aggression that
was launched by American, British and Australian and
Danish fighter jets against Syrian Arab Army targets.
The units of our army are combating the ISIS terrorist
organization in the mountainous area of Tharda, in
the vicinity of Deir ez-Zor airport. Those units had
been defending tens of thousands of Syrian civilians
besieged by ISIS in Deir ez-Zor city.

That gruesome attack resulted in numerous
casualties among the officers and soldiers of the Syrian
Arab Army - 83 martyrs and over 100 wounded. The
aggression, which lasted for an entire 50 minutes of air
raids and was preceded by reconnaissance flights by
drones over two days, paved the way for ISIS terrorists
to enter the military site of the Syrian army that was
targeted deliberately before the Syrian army was able to
recapture it again. To add insult to injury, our soldiers
and the wounded were victims of another air strike by

drones while they were evacuating their positions in
Tharda after it was targeted.
Before that deliberate and unacceptable
aggression, my country had been focusing on the issue
of disassociating terrorist groups, in line with the
statement of the International Syria Support Group
issued at a meeting in Vienna on 14 November 2015.
That is to say, we wanted to determine those that are
terrorist groups, those that are not and those that can be
considered to be opposition groups. However, it appears
that 10 months were not enough for some to solve this
puzzling mystery. It appears that some suffered from an
early bout of Alzheimer's disease while trying to solve
this mystery.

Along the same lines, Damascus expected
Washington to fulfil its commitments in this regard
by putting an end to the policies and practices of
certain well-known countries that sponsor and support
terrorism politically, logistically, financially and
ideologically through the media. We expected an end
to the influx of terrorists, weapons and funding from
countries neighbouring Syria through the borders and
the use of terrorism as a tool for political blackmail.

American reconnaissance aircraft, surveillance
satellites and intelligence services failed to distinguish
between ISIS and those fighting ISIS. The so-called
international coalition failed to do so. It is no stranger
to such failure. For years the coalition failed to detect
thousands of foreign fighters that came to Syria and
Iraq from around the world, an issue that was dealt
with, thankfully, by a speaker in the Council today.
They failed to detect convoys of armed vehicles and
thousands of ISIS terrorists who travelled from Iraq to
Palmyra in a long journey of over 200 kilometres across
the Syrian desert. They failed to detect thousands of
lorries that steal and smuggle Syrian oil to Turkey in
order to fund the attacks of ISIS. They also failed to cut
off the funding of terrorist organizations, even though
they know very well the origin and destination of every
dollar that reaches ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front. The
only success they were able to achieve was to fabricate
false accusations, made-up incidents, politicized
reports and edited videos about the suffering of Syrians
to demonize the Syrian Government and its allies.

It is quite astonishing that the United States
Secretary of State would use the testimony ofa so-called
eye witness who noticed planes over the humanitarian
convoy that was attacked yesterday in northern Syria.
The testimony of that eye witness, who is a member
of the so-called moderate armed opposition, the Syrian
opposition, was sufficient to establish that the air
bombing of this humanitarian convoy occurred and for
Mr. Kerry to accuse both the Syrian and the Russian
Governments. My question is, can one individual in a
crowded area that is inhabited by thousands of people,
can he, on his own, notice airplanes, while others,
thousands who live in this area, did not see these air
strikes? The issue of eye witnesses is a laughable one,
especially when we are reminded that those who accuse
the Syrian Government of using chemical weapons
relied on a single eye witness account who saw orange
smoke. That is what we were told by the Syrian
opposition. No one was there - neither the Turkish
army, nor the American army nor the terrorists who
stole Syrian helicopters from where they were parked
at the airport.

To refresh the memory of Council members, I
want to recall the mistakes by American officials. It
appears that the American side does not learn from
its mistakes. Since the establishment of the so-called
international coalition, American forces made several
mistakes. It mistakenly bombed an elementary school
for the visually impaired in the city of Raqqah and it
mistakenly air-dropped assistance over Ayn Al-Arab
city that included weapons and rockets that fell into
the hands of ISIS terrorists. It mistakenly killed Syrian
civilians near the city of Raqqah, while claiming to
target a weapons factory for ISIS. The gravest mistake
was subsequently committed by a French and American
forces when ajoint air raid resulted in the death of over
200 civilians near Aleppo in the town of Manbij. One
Council member deplored the situation in Aleppo just a
few minutes ago. We note that 200 civilians were killed
near that very city in a joint air raid carried out by the
international coalition.

The latest wave of false accusations levelled
at my Government included the allegation that we
targeted a humanitarian convoy outside of Aleppo.
Such accusations are part of a filthy propaganda war
that was launched by well-known parties to exploit the
suffering of the Syrian people for the sole purposes of
scoring cheap points in the press, employing political
blackmail and upholding their agendas with no regard
for the heavy toll paid by the Syrian people whenever
those same parties reject any solution that is not in line
with their agendas. thereby prolonging the crisis.

My country, Syria, has warned of the attempts
of certain regional parties to torpedo the American-
Russian agreement ever since it was announced and
before it entered into force. I want to draw attention
to the heinous Israeli attacks on Syrian territory in
recent weeks, which intensified once the American-
Russian agreement to combat the Al-Nusra Front and
other terrorist organizations, such as the Al-Yarmouk
Martyrs Brigade, was announced. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations remains suspiciously silent
although we have sent many letters to the Council about
the Israeli violations and the treatment of terrorists in
Israeli hospitals.

I also wish to draw attention to the illegitimate
Turkish military operations within Syrian territory,
launched under the pretext of combatting Islamic State
ofIraq and Syria (ISIS) without prior coordination with
the Syrian Government and the Russian operations
command, which is a crime of aggression according
to the Charter of the United Nations and the Council's
provisional rules of procedure. It is a violation of
Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity. That is in
line with remarks made by Turkish officials indicating
that their Government wanted to deliver humanitarian
assistance to the city of Aleppo without coordination
with the Syrian Government or the United Nations.

My country is ready to resume intra-Syrian
dialogue without preconditions and according to the
decisions and foundations that launched this dialogue
in order to reach a political solution decided by Syrians
and Syrians alone, without foreign intervention or
interference, so that Syrians can decide their future
and their options through their own leaders in a manner
that would ensure Syria's sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Syria will not become another Libya or
Iraq - we will never allow it.

In that regard, we reaffirm that the success of any
political process in Syria will require engagement,
cooperation and full coordination with the Syrian
Government as the main partner in any related domain.
No committee, meeting or conference organized to
resolve the crisis can succeed while some international
parties seek, willingly or unwillingly, to exclude or
marginalize the Syrian Government, cast doubt on its
cooperation with the United Nations or undermine the
success it has achieved in promoting and upholding
national reconciliation based on the voluntary
disarmament of foreign fighters and accompanied
by the normalization of their status, the issuance of
pardons and their departure to other areas. That, in
turn, will allow normal life to resume to in the areas
they vacate and State institutions to restore the services
they once provided.

I have a final question. Can we allow hundreds
of armed groups and tens of thousands of terrorists to
continue their terrorist attacks against my Government,
my army and Syria's infrastructure, as they have done
for over five and a half years? Can they continue
without external support? That is a legitimate question,
and I believe it should be acknowledged. We should not
be misled into believing that the situation in Syria is a
civil war.

