Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Botswanajoins others,
Madam President, in congratulating you on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. We extend our support
and cooperation in your efforts.

We deeply appreciate Lithuania's initiative to
convene this very important debate on the protection
of journalists in conflict situations. With the
unprecedented number of conflicts across the globe and
the frequent attacks against journalists, which threaten
media freedom, today's debate could not be more timely.
In addition, as the Secretary-General notes in his
synthesis report on the post-2015 development agenda
(A/69/700), sustainable development can be achieved
only where freedom of press, access to information
and freedom of expression prevail. This is largely
because these elements provide for multifaceted and
multidimensional platforms for informed discussions
across a wide range of issues, which in turn contributes
to democratic and inclusive governance and sustainable
human development.
We are cognizant of, and deeply troubled by, the
increasing risks and dangers faced by journalists
working in conflict situations. The recent spate of
beheadings of journalists by terrorist organizations
is all too real a reminder of the brutality that media
professionals are often confronted with. It is also deeply
disturbing that they are being directly targeted simply
for doing their job, which not only keeps us informed
but invariably makes for a safer world.

The Security Council's adoption of resolution 1738
(2006) reflected a recognition of the need for a more
concerted international effort to ensure the safety of
journalists and to fight impunity against the crimes
committed against them, some of which constituted
crimes against humanity. While it is well understood
that the very nature of their work predisposes them to
highly dangerous situations, it is the rising number of
deliberate acts of violence against them - including
kidnapping, arbitrary imprisonment and torture, that
are of particular concern, and which are in direct
contravention of international humanitarian law. The
Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts explicitly provides that journalists
are entitled to all the rights and protections granted to
civilians in international armed conflict. Resolution
1738 (2006) thus recognized the imperative for States
in conflict to bear the primary responsibility to protect
their civilians.

However, the implementation of the resolution has
been mediocre if not dismal. For example, we continue
to see very low levels of accountability for attacks on
journalists. Perpetrators of crimes against journalists
are escaping justice, and States are obviously failing in
their responsibility to protect. It is therefore imperative
that the international community step up and build up
the required capacity to assist States in shielding their
populations from harm. Greater effort should be made
towards accountability and the prevention of impunity,
which - as we are all well aware - is the most
important deterrent.

The willingness on the part of States at a
national level in that regard is critical and cannot be
over-emphazised. The tough question before us is
this: Is this how it can be achieved? How can we as
responsible members of the international community
make this world a safer place forjournalists to do their
work? We may not have a definitive answer, or cover
everything that could be said in today's interventions,
but Botswana remains firm in its conviction that
freedom of expression and an independent media are
fundamental for sustainable development. Information
is power, and it is information thatjournalists risk their
lives to gather. It should urgently be translated into
national development policies and interventions for the
betterment of humankind.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana's
support for efforts by the international community
aimed at protecting the lives of innocent civilians,
including journalists, without whom the world may
well be less stable, less secure and much less equipped
to transition to the new development agenda that we
look forward to in 2015.

