The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Guatemala.

We are grateful for the information provided by
the President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
The Honourable Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, and by the
Court's Prosecutor, Brenda Hollis. We also appreciate
the presentation today of Her Excellency Mrs. Ebun Jusu,
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone, and we thank her for her
statement.

We are pleased to hear of the achievements of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone over the years, and we
wish to commend its members on their important work.
Guatemala, which is also emerging from an armed
conflict, recognizes the important and valuable role
of such a court in fighting impunity and in enforcing
justice in the country.

We recognize the important contribution of
the Special Court for Sierra Leone to national and
international criminal justice through its legal
proceedings against those individuals who bear the
greatest responsibility for the serious violations of
international humanitarian law and of Sierra Leone's
national law committed since 30 November 1996.

We also underscore the Court's contribution to
national reconciliation and to the restoration and
maintenance of peace in Sierra Leone and in its region.

We applaud its historic contribution to the
understanding of the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, reflected in its jurisprudence and its treatment
of survivors as participants in post-conflict justice.

We look forward to the final outcome of the Charles
Taylor case, a paradigm case in the international criminal
justice sphere, expected to conclude by 30 September,
2013.

We recognize the complex work that the Court has
been conducting since its establishment in 2002 and
look forward to the successful completion of its duties
in September 2013. In that regard, we urge that the
transition process is orderly and effective and that the
Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone performs its
duties in a timely and efficient manner.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council expresses its warm
appreciation to the President and Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone for their briefing to
the Security Council on 9 October 2012.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the Special Court and commends the
progress the Special Court has achieved. The
Security Council particularly notes the contribution
of the Special Court to strengthening stability in
Sierra Leone and the subregion and bringing an end
to impunity.

"The Security Council congratulates the
Special Court on the completion of the trial
proceedings in the case of Charles Taylor on
30 May 2012. The Security Council takes note of
the commencement of appellate proceedings in the
case of Charles Taylor and the projected schedule
for the completion of those appellate proceedings
by 30 September 2013.

"The Security Council also acknowledges the
Special Court's progress towards completion. The
Security Council underlines its expectation that all
organs of the Special Court will do their utmost to
finish the remaining work of the Court, including any
contempt cases, in accordance with the completion
strategy.

"The Security Council commends the
important outreach activities of the Special Court
in bringing its judicial work to the attention of the
people of Sierra Leone and Liberia, and thereby
contributing to the restoration of the rule of law
throughout those countries and the region.

"The Security Council commends the Special
Court for the important contribution made to
international criminal justice concerning the crimes
within its jurisdiction, namely, crimes against
humanity, serious violations of article 3 common to
the Geneva Conventions and of Additional Protocol
II, and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law, as well as certain crimes under
Sierra Leonean law, and recognizes its work in
the areas of women, peace and security, and the
protection of children affected by armed conflict,
including through its outreach and witness support
programmes.

"The Security Council recognizes the need to
address residual matters after the closure of the
Court, including the supervision of the enforcement
of sentences for convicted persons, the protection
of witnesses, and the preservation of the archives
of the Special Court. In this regard, the Security
Council welcomes the Agreement between the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone on the Establishment of a Residual Special
Court for Sierra Leone.

"The Security Council urges the international
community to continue to support the Special
Court as it moves into its final stage of work.

"The Security Council in particular takes
note of the Special Court's ongoing and urgent
need for financial support. The Security Council
emphasizes the vital need for further pledges of
voluntary contributions in order to allow the Special
Court to complete its mandate in a timely manner.
The Security Council calls upon Member States to
contribute generously to the Special Court and for
the implementation of the Agreement establishing
the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, and
encourages the Secretary-General to cooperate
with the Registrar of the Special Court in order to
find practicable solutions to address the needs of
the Residual Special Court in the most efficient and
effective manner.

"The Security Council will continue to offer
strong support to the Special Court as it nears

the completion of its mandate and to the Residual There are no more names inseribed on the list of
Special Court as it commences its functioning." speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its

This statement will be issued as a document of the
agenda.

Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZO] 2/21.
The meeting ruse at 12.10 p.m
