As France has assumed the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June, it is a great pleasure to preside over today's Security Council meeting on Mali. France thanks the Secretary-General for honouring us with his participation in today's meeting. I also welcome the presence at this meeting of the High Representative of the African Union for the Sahel and Mali and of numerous Ministers. It is a sign of our collective interest in the situation in Mali and, beyond that, in the Sahel. First of all, I would like to discuss the progress made over the last eight years, for we must remember where we are coming from. In 2012, the north of Mali was occupied by terrorists, and a political vacuum had set in. In 2013, at the request of the Malian authorities, France intervened to stop the advance of jihadists towards Bamako. The African force, the International Mission of Support in Mali, and then the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) were deployed to secure the territory, and elections were held. Under the auspices of Algeria, the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was reached. Since then, significant progress has been made in the implementation of that agreement. This year, for the first time in five years, a thousand soldiers of the reconstituted Malian army, which includes former rebels, returned to the northern cities, including the symbolic city of Kidal. Progress on other aspects of the peace agreement is still ongoing, whether it be on decentralization, development of the north or the participation of women in the peace process. However, despite these sometimes-hard-won gains, the situation in Mali and the Sahel remains extremely fragile. Terrorist groups are continuing their acts of harassment. The civilian populations and armies of the countries of the Sahel, whose courage and commitment I salute, are paying a heavy price. The humanitarian situation, aggravated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, continues to deteriorate, leading to an increase in the number of internally displaced persons and refugees. Reconciliation between different communities remains a challenge. Finally, climate change has made Mali and the whole region particularly vulnerable. But France is confident. We are working with the States of the Sahel, some of which are weakened but committed, and the international community has increased its support with the launch this year of the Coalition for the Sahel, which will hold its first ministerial meeting tomorrow. On the ground, this dynamic has resulted in the establishment of a joint command mechanism between the 5,100-strong French force, Operation Barkhane, and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) Joint Force. The results are in, with victories in the fight against terrorism, including the neutralization last week of Abdelmalek Droukdel, leader of the Organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. Task Force Takuba, which brings together various European special forces, has also been launched. Finally, we have continued our efforts on governance and the return of State authority with the Partnership for Security and Stability in the Sahel, launched together with Germany, and development actions, all within the framework of the Sahel Alliance. The month of June is of major importance for Mali, as it is the month of MINUSMA's mandate renewal. Against the backdrop of persistent challenges facing the country, MINUSMA remains the best tool available for the international community to support the Malians on their path to peace and security. MINUSMA's adaptation plan, which I invite all Member States to support, should further improve the Mission's capabilities. In the negotiation of the new mandate, which will begin in the coming days, our priorities will be to confirm MINUSMA in its priority tasks: implementation of the peace agreement, support for the redeployment of the State, and the protection of civilians in the centre of the country. But we will also seek to set out in the new mandate the expectations we have for the Malian parties, both the Government and the armed groups. Five years after the signing of the peace agreement, the international community is still waiting to see significant progress from them. The actions of certain actors in blatant substitution of State authority in the north are not acceptable. They must continue to disarm under conditions agreed by the parties. Furthermore, we are still waiting to see the political and institutional reforms provided for in the agreement come to pass. In this context, let me reiterate that the peace agreement resulting from the Algiers process must remain our compass, and we must strive for its full and complete implementation. Those who oppose it, on whatever side, will face sanctions. The renewal of the MINUSMA mandate must also be an opportunity to recall our demands with regard to the protection of civilians, respect for international humanitarian law, humanitarian access, the upholding of human rights, and the fight against impunity. The Malian Government has announced investigations into several allegations of serious human rights violations, some of which have been alleged against members of the defence and security forces. It is essential that those responsible for these unacceptable acts be brought to justice, as the Malian Government has pledged to do. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda this year, I also recall the importance of the full, effective and meaningful participation of women, without whom there can be no lasting peace. Because MINUSMA acts in conjunction with other security entities on the ground, it is also important that adequate synergies be established. For the sake of the unity of the Security Council, we will advocate the extension of MINUSMA's support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, as well as a clarification of how that support is provided beyond Malian territory. MINUSMA is doing an excellent job in one of the most challenging environments. I commend the commitment of the Secretary-General and that of his Special Representative, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, as well as that of the peacekeepers. Aware of its responsibility in this matter, France is eager to work closely with each member of the Security Council to reach a consensus on the renewal of the mandate.
