The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Jamaica.

I wish to join previous speakers in expressing my
delegation's appreciation to Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
introductory remarks and to the Secretary-General for
his report, which provides an excellent overview of the
present situation in East Timor, covering political
developments, the status of refugees, governance,
public administration, security and humanitarian
affairs, as well as relations between East Timor and
Indonesia.

When the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and head of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, briefed the Council last
month, my delegation paid tribute to him and to the
men and women of UNTAET for their dedicated and
dynamic service, which had seen the transformation of
East Timor since the start of the mission.

We noted the positive developments, which
included the increasing involvement of the East
Timorese in creating and building institutions of
governance, the cooperation which had developed
between UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia,
and the commitments received from the international
community in support of East Timor's reconstruction
and rehabilitation process. We welcome the further
developments described in the report of the Secretary-
General, including the formation of the interim Cabinet
and the graduation of the first batch of East Timorese
police. At the same time, we expressed our deep
concern about the status of refugees and the attacks on
staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and on United Nations
peacekeepers by suspected militias.

It is therefore with deep regret that my delegation
must express its sincere condolences to the
Government and people of New Zealand and to the
family of Private Leonard William Manning, who was
killed on 24 July while on duty in East Timor. The
perpetrators must speedily be brought to justice.

The death of the young peacekeeper, as well as
the continued attacks on UNHCR staff, which have
forced the closure of the UNHCR office in the border
town of Betun and the withdrawal of its international
staff there, highlight the continued security problems
on the border between East and West Timor,
occasioned by the operation of armed militia groups.
The Indonesian authorities must act quickly and firmly
in cooperation with UNTAET to deal with these
incidents, which clearly endanger the security
presence, as well as the lives of the 85,000 refugees
who remain in camps in West Timor. Moreover,
UNHCR must have free and unhindered access to these
camps to enable refugee registration in order to
determine those who wish to be resettled or returned to
East Timor. The prospect of a possible withdrawal of
UNHCR would have devastating effects on this
process.

The reported harassment and intimidation of
religious and ethnic minorities is also disturbing. There
are reports of the intimidation of groups and parties
outside the National Council of Timorese Resistance.
We believe that the inclusion of all groups and parties
is fundamental to the process of democracy in East
Timor. The gains which have been made so far must be
consolidated, and not destroyed. Tolerance of various
groups on different sides of the political, religious and
ethnic divide must be one of the foundations for an
independent East Timor.

UNTAET's role in promoting peaceful
coexistence and stability is evidenced in the recently
launched programme on the future of democracy in
East Timor. We welcome this programme, and would
like to hear more about its achievements and strategies
in future briefings. My delegation strongly supports
this venture, as we believe it can promote a culture of
tolerance and peace.

My delegation also wishes to acknowledge the
role of UNTAET, in collaboration with the
humanitarian agencies, in ensuring country-wide
provision of humanitarian assistance. This is
demonstrated in the establishment of a coordination
centre to support the work of non-governmental
organizations. The development of the capacity of local
development organizations is an important facet of this
centre's work. In addition, the handing over of the
centre to the East Timorese is very positive, as we
believe that local groups and organizations are at the
core of local community development initiatives and
that in the long run this will contribute to sustainability.

The Secretary-General's report notes that there
has been some improvement in the economic situation,
particularly the moderate expansion of business
activity and the strong recovery in the agricultural
sector due to the good coffee crop and domestic
demand. The projects being implemented by the United
States Agency for International Development, the
Japanese International Cooperation Agency and the
Australian Agency for International Development, as
well as those funded by the United Nations Trust Fund,
have made a significant contribution to creating jobs
and improving the overall unemployment situation. We
recognize, however, that these programmes will come
to an end, leading to a possible reduction in
employment. This could have negative effects on the
situation in East Timor, where the unemployment rate
still far exceeds 50 per cent. It is therefore vital for an
enabling environment to be created to encourage
private sector investment.

Jamaica fully recognizes the daunting tasks which
remain. The process under way in East Timor has to be
examined from a long-term perspective, each
development being seen as an incremental step forward
in the creation of an independent territory.

My delegation supports the benchmarks set out
by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative as a means of providing the East
Timorese with a sound basis for independence. These
include arrangements for the security of an independent
East Timor; the establishment of a credible system of
justice, an efficient system of law and order and an
effective public service; and the eventual adoption of a
constitution and the holding of democratic elections.
UNTAET has, in less than one year, demonstrated
measurable successes in difficult circumstances, and
we again salute the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the men and women of UNTAET
and the people of East Timor, and assure them of our
continued solidarity and support.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of New Zealand. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

