I thank Special Envoy Xia Huang for his briefing. We are encouraged to hear of the positive developments in the Great Lakes region over the past six months, including diplomatic efforts made by regional leaders to enhance cooperation and steps taken to implement commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation (PSC) Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. China applauds the positive momentum in the region. In the face of long-standing challenges in the region, comprehensive approaches still need to be employed to achieve sustainable peace and development. We encourage countries of the region to enhance cooperation and political trust and make further progress in implementing the PSC framework. China welcomes continued steps taken by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to improve relations with neighbouring countries, and diplomatic efforts made by him and the Presidents of Angola, Uganda and Rwanda on the fourth quadripartite summit to facilitate the normalization of relations between Rwanda and Uganda. We should step up efforts to promote regional peace and stability, taking both military and non-military measures to eliminate threats posed by armed groups. The meetings of chiefs of intelligence and security services of signatory countries of the PSC framework laid a good foundation for further coordinated operations. We call on all parties to respond actively to the Secretary-General's ceasefire appeal. We call for increased attention by the United Nations and regional organizations, including the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region, to push forward the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process of former combatants to stop the vicious circle of violence. More efforts should be made to address the root causes of conflict by dealing with poverty and underdevelopment. China supports Special Envoy Xia's urge to advance efforts made towards regional economic integration and cooperation to overcome development challenges and his endeavour to reach out to financial institutions, notably the World Bank Group and the African Development Bank, and international community to attract investment. We note that the Great Lakes Investment and Trade Conference has been postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and we look forward to its prompt convening when conditions allow. We agree that the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic is alarming. The countries of the Great Lakes region are among the most vulnerable amid this crisis. China hereby echoes the full support, expressed by the guarantors of the PSC framework via a video-teleconference convened by the Special Envoy's Office earlier this month, for coordinated efforts and joint decisions by countries of the region in fighting the pandemic. China has offered its hand to regional countries in various forms, providing medical supplies, sharing experience and assisting with commercial procurement. On 10 April, a general hospital built by China in Haut Katanga province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo was handed over by Chinese Ambassador to the national Government. We will continue to do our utmost to provide assistance to our friends in the Great Lakes region and the whole African continent. There is still a long way to go in achieving long-term peace and security in the region. China wishes to reaffirm its strong support for the Special Envoy and his Office in delivering on his mandate. We will continue to support regional countries, the African Union and other regional organizations to implement the PSC framework.
