Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
abstained in the voting on resolution 2333 (2016).

We commend the outstanding progress achieved
by Liberia since the signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in 2003. For the past six months,
the Liberian authorities have been fully responsible
for maintaining security on their own terrority. In that
regard, I hail the leadership and vision demonstrated
by President Ellen John Sirleaf. Following a long
period of peacekeeping, Liberia has entered the
peacebuilding phase. That is why the Security Council
today recognized that the situation in Liberia no longer
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
We congratulate the Liberian authorities and people yet
again on that success.
Yet while the Security Council recognizes that the
situation in Liberia no longer threatens international
peace and security, it has, sadly, not learned its lesson.
In substance, the resolution poses two major problems.

The first is that it maintains Liberia's culture of
dependency on the Blue Helmets. By extending the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) for 15 months, the Security Council
paradoxically maintains the presence of a military
peacekeeping force in that country just as it recognizes
that there is no further threat to peace and security
there. The Security Council thereby risks preserving a
culture of dependency and preventing the development
of Liberian national capacities.

France has always stressed that the Security
Council should take account of the prospects of the
third presidential elections in Liberia since the signing
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, to be held
in October 2017. We recall that it is precisely for that
reason that, in June, the Security Council authorized in
resolution 2295 (2016) the quick reaction force - which
is currently stationed in Cote D'Ivoire and will soon
be deployed to Mali - to be deployed temporarily to
Liberia if required. The early deployment of the quick
reaction force ahead of the autumn elections, as it did
successfully in the Central African Republic early this
year, would have been a solution well adapted to the
needs and circumstances. But that proposal was not
heeded. This year, the Council noted with satisfaction
the success of the United Nations Operation in C6te
d'Ivoire, whose imminent scheduled withdrawal it
approved. Liberia is another success story for United
Nations peacekeeping, which we believe the Security
Council should have recognized.

The second problem with the resolution is that
wastes valuable peacekeeping resources. For the past six
months, the police and military contingents of UNMIL
have had no tasks to carry out. By artificially maintaining
more than 700 military and police personnel, as well
as numerous United Nations helicopters, in Liberia for
the next 15 months, the Security Council will deprive
the United Nations of valuable resources to respond
to serious crises elsewhere, particularly in Africa.
The Security Council is keeping five United Nations
helicopters even as the Blue Helmets in Mali, who are
deployed in the most deadly peacekeeping operation
in the world, are crying out for resources to protect
themselves and undertake medical evacuations.

With regard to working methods, we can only regret
the absence of genuine negotiations among Council
members. Our proposals, as well as those submitted
by many of our partners, were barely into account.
We consistently offered solutions that would have
allowed us to strike a compromise among the various
positions. With other States, we introduced solutions
that were quite different from our initial positions. In
particular, we were open with respect to the timetable
and modalities for the UNMIL drawdown, but our
proposals were never taken into serious account.

We hope that we shall all find lessons to learn
from this episode, and that in the future we are able to
strengthen the Council's unity on this key topic.

