Mr. Dauth (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address an open meeting of the Security
Council. I have been here so often during your
presidency that I am starting to feel quite at home.

I also thank my friend Danilo Tiirk for
introducing the Secretary-General's excellent report
today. We listened to him with great interest.

As members of the Council know, Australia has
been a strong and consistent supporter of the peace
process in the last five years through its leadership of
the four-country regional Peace Monitoring Group. As
they also know, the Group has supported the United
Nations Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) in
its activities, particularly in implementing the agreed
weapons disposal plan. Most recently, Australia agreed
to fund the withdrawal of the final Papua New Guinea
Defence Force elements from the province, which, of
course, is a key provision of the Peace Agreement.

Since the Bougainville Peace Agreement was
signed in August 2001, much progress has been made
towards weapons disposal and autonomy, and
agreement has been reached on the provisions of
amnesty and pardon. We particularly welcome the
unanimous Papua New Guinea parliamentary vote for
the provisions of the Agreement this time last year and
recent moves by all parties to engage with those who
remain outside the peace process.

In recent weeks, the constitutional drafting and
weapons disposal processes have drawn closer to their
conclusion. The parties have agreed to establish an
Interim Joint Supervisory Body to smooth the
transition to autonomy. It is essential that all parties
push towards the finish line. The significant challenges
to the peace process of late last year have, to a large
extent, been overcome and the process must not be
allowed to falter at this late stage.

The recent unfortunate shooting incident near
Morgans Junction, which resulted in one person being
killed, reminds us of the tensions that remain. At this
stage, though, there is no indication that this incident
reflects any efforts to undermine the peace process, nor
have there been any reported retaliatory acts, which
demonstrates the commitment of Bougainvilleans to
the peace process. Though regrettable, such incidents
must not be allowed to derail the process or to distract
parties from the urgency of achieving key peace
process targets.

Weapons disposal remains the key issue.
Australia welcomes the update provided by Assistant
Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk. We also welcome
Mr. Sinclair's recent trial of stage II verification in
Siwai district. In Australia's view, time is fast running
out; stage II verification needs to be completed
promptly. Every effort should also be made to ensure
that a decision on the final fate of the weapons - stage
III of the agreed weapons disposal plan - is reached
as soon as possible and there is a credible process in
place to ensure weapons are permanently removed
from circulation. In order to make best use of the
current logistical and organizational assets and
expertise of the Peace Monitoring Group, it is essential
that these decisions be made before 30 June, when
Australia's participation in the Peace Monitoring
Group will cease.

It is clear that the majority of people on
Bougainville want to have their effective containment
of weapons formally recognized and to move forward.
This must also be the international community's
objective. Firm timelines and benchmarks should be
set. All parties must redouble their efforts to conclude
both stage II and stage III of the weapons disposal
process. Without the verification of stage II, the draft
Constitution, and with it Bougainvillean autonomy,
cannot come into being. Bougainvillean autonomy
would therefore be held up by a minority of interests if
verification lags. The peace agreement requires that
UNPOB verify that weapons registered as being
collected are in secure, double-locked containers. We
would urge Mr. Sinclair not to allow the issues of the
long-term security of weapons, and of Bougainville
more generally, to become distractions from the
parties' achieving the more limited goals of the stage II
verification process. As noted in the agreement itself,
assessment on these matters would be more appropriate
in the context of preparations for autonomous
elections.

Australia will, of course, I need hardly say,
remain engaged in Bougainville beyond the Peace
Monitoring Group. Our focus will then be on
supporting economic development, service delivery
and the establishment and functioning of the
administration and autonomous government in
Bougainville. It will be far more effective if our
investment in economic and social development takes
place in a weapons-free, secure and autonomous
Bougainville, which only an effective and timely
weapons disposal program can achieve.

