Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank the sisterly State of
Kuwait for convening this meeting, and to congratulate
it on its non-permanent membership of the Security
Council. We wish the delegation of Kuwait every
success in assuming the presidency of the Security
Council in February. We also thank Mr. Ian Martin for
his objective and exhaustive briefing.

The concept note (S/2018/66, annex) that you
circulated, Sir, contains important references to
previous attempts to review the working methods of the
Security Council, in particular note by the President
S/2017/507, which highlights many ways to improve the
working methods of the Council. Those include, most
notably, ensuring that consultations are more objective
and interactive, and adapting the work of the Security
Council to permit non-Member States to participate in it
as appropriate, as well as reinforcing the accountability
of the Council and the transparency of its work. The
items on the agenda should be more detailed, as well as
convening more open consultations.

We would like to reaffirm the importance of
convening open debates on a regular basis on the
working methods of the Security Council, as this
is an issue in the interests of all Member States that
aspire that the Council works in the best possible way.
The working methods of the Council should adapt to
the continuous changes, progress should be evaluated
as well as shortcomings identified, while different
proposals and points of view ought to be heard so that
they can be addressed.

In that regard, I must commend the work carried
out by the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions to increase the
transparency of its work. We also underscore the
contents of presidential note S/2016/619, on the work
of the Chairs of the subsidiary organs of the Council.
Indeed, the Chairs - including Chairs of the sanctions
committees - must present informal periodic briefings
to all Member States on their activities, specifying
when and where such meetings will take place.

It is very important to step up coordination,
cooperation and interaction among the main organs of
the United Nations, namely, the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Secretariat and other United Nations bodies,
including the Main Committees. There is also a need
to strengthen coordination between the Council and
regional and subregional organizations, as stipulated
by Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
on the maintenance of international and regional peace
and security.

It is also necessary to strengthen approaches
that would enable the Council to prevent conflicts,
particularly through negotiation, investigation,
mediation, conciliation and arbitration, as well as other
peaceful means stipulated in Chapter VI of the Charter
and options enabling the Council to support the good
offices deployed by the Secretariat with a view to
achieve peace and stability and maintain human rights.

With regard to the holding of closed informal
meetings, the question of addressing the details of such
meetings at briefings for Member States continues
to be a point of discussion. Nevertheless, such
transparency must also be guaranteed in press releases
and presidential statements, as mentioned in note
S/2017/507. Indeed, such practices help to build trust
between Council members and other Member States.

Nonetheless there is a need to hold consultations
in open meetings to enable all Member States to listen
to different opinions on the issues discussed within the
Council pertaining to international peace and security.
We are all aware that political trends play a significant
role in those discussions, especially in times of crises
or in rapidly developing situations.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain
acknowledges the importance to continue discussions
on the working methods of the Security Council. We
hope to work with other Member States to develop the
working methods and to guarantee enhanced coherence
between United Nations organs, as well as introduce
the necessary changes to ensure that the Council can
fulfil its mission in the best possible way.

