Mrs. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): We wish to thank and
commend you, Mr. President, for your timely initiative to
hold an open debate on the role of the Security Council in
the prevention of armed conflicts. We fully welcome this
debate as a first step in a continuing process which we
hope will contribute to the enhancement of the capacities of
the Council to fulfil its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. It is clear that prevention
must be a key element in the work of the Council. Indeed,
Article 1, paragraph 1 of the Charter mandates that
"effective collective measures for the prevention of
threats to the peace" be taken in order to achieve the goal
of maintaining international peace and security.

Prevention has thus been given a key position in the
conceptual framework of the maintenance of international
peace and security by the founders of our Organization. At
the same time, it needs to be said that in the practical work
of the Council, as well as of other organs of the United
Nations, it has so far played only a minor role. The past
few years have brought about an increased awareness that
addressing root causes must be a crucial consideration in
areas such as human rights violations, refugee protection,
natural disasters and others. A brutal wake-up call in
connection with the importance of prevention was the
genocide in Rwanda, where prevention was feasible, but
inaction led to the horrific events of 1994. One impetus -
maybe the decisive one - to launch the ongoing debate
was given by the Secretary-General in his thought-
provoking and ground-breaking report on the work of the
Organization. We would like to thank the Secretary-General
once again for his courage and commitment and to recall
the far-reaching role that he is given under Article 99 of the
Charter.

The ideas offered by the Secretary-General make it
clear that prevention is important with regard not only to
armed conflicts but to a wide variety of other areas; hence
the call for a culture of prevention. It is of course
appropriate that our debate today is focused on the
prevention of armed conflicts, given the role of the
Council in the area of peace and security. The context
within which this debate is taking place, however, is a
larger one. Prevention means acting in a timely manner in
order to avoid disasters such as armed conflicts
altogether, or to minimize their adverse consequences. It
requires certain tools, such as effective and reliable early
warning mechanisms. But first and foremost it requires
political will and the readiness and willingness to realize
that prevention is often the best way - sometimes even
the only way - to tackle a problem. If it is carried out at
an early stage and based on relevant expertise, prevention
can be achieved with discretion, efficiency and at low
cost. Furthermore, the disastrous consequences of armed
conflicts can often be irreversible, and preventing their
occurrence is thus the only way to provide effective
protection to potential victims.

In the cases where the Council has taken preventive
action in the past, it has been quite successful. The United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force is a brilliant
example of the effectiveness of preventive action and is
usually hailed as the first preventive United Nations
mission ever. There are, however, some other small
missions mandated by the United Nations which have
been operational for a long time and have had a
considerable preventive effect. Prevention has also been
one rationale behind the establishment of the ad hoc
Tribunals by the Security Council. The most important
goal of the fight against impunity is always the avoidance
of the commission of further violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. International law
must have an important function in the area of conflict
prevention, and the Council has made a significant
contribution to this end, not least by helping pave the way
for the establishment of an International Criminal Court.
Once operational, the International Criminal Court will
have a major preventive effect worldwide. Preventive
action taken by the Security Council has been selective in
the past, but the success connected with these efforts
should encourage the Council to expand its activities
based on a preventive approach.

We would like to offer several thoughts on how to
further enhance the capabilities of the United Nations in
the area of the prevention of armed conflicts. The need
for enhanced cooperation and coordination with regional
organizations, stated many times in the past in various
contexts, becomes particularly obvious in connection with
the prevention of armed conflicts. It is clear that regional
organizations can and should play a major role through

 

preventive activities if their capabilities in this area are
developed accordingly. Avoiding competition between their
activities and those carried out by the United Nations, and
adapting a pragmatic approach, must be key elements in the
joint efforts in this respect.

An enhanced role of the Secretary-General seems to us
a further key element of successful United Nations action
in the area of prevention. Article 99 of the Charter, which
I have already mentioned, gives a legally and politically
sound basis for such an enhanced role. The Secretariat
should be able to provide the Council with relevant early-
warning information collected from various sources,
including regional organizations, and with independent
assessments on regions and areas where conflicts are
emerging. In many cases, most of the relevant information
is already available within the United Nations system, but
needs to be presented in a compact and meaningful manner
and in the right context.

As a final element, we believe that more work needs
to be done to provide effective tools to address the root
causes of such conflicts. The past few years have been
marked by a sharp increase in internal armed conflicts, and
tensions among communities and between communities and
central governments have time and again proven to be the
reasons for these conflicts. We think therefore that it is very
timely and necessary for the international community to
develop, and indeed to offer, tools by means of which
situations of this kind can in the future be addressed more
effectively and at an early stage. Liechtenstein presented
ideas on the effective and flexible application of the right
of self-determination quite some time ago. Those ideas are
designed specifically to address such situations in a
preventive and pragmatic manner; they are based on
existing international law and on dialogue between the
parties concerned, and can be carried out, if desirable and
requested, with international involvement. This could
obviously be done in a very flexible manner and within the
framework not only of the United Nations, but also of other
intergovernmental organizations which are seized of issues
of peace and security. We very much see our ideas in this
regard as an element of the ongoing process of enhancing
the role of the Organization in the area of prevention.

Creating a culture of prevention is a process requiring
a concerted effort by the United Nations membership as a
whole, and indeed a change in our collective mindset,
which is so deeply immersed in a responsive approach to
crisis management. To this end, we should adopt a flexible
notion of the term "prevention" comprising activities as
diverse as early warning, disarmament measures and post-
conflict peace-building. More often than not, prevention
will be most successful if it goes almost unnoticed and is
carried out with discretion and efficiency. On the one
hand, this lack of limelight and headlines connected with
effective prevention is probably one of the psychological
obstacles which must be overcome. On the other hand, it
also constitutes a major strength in that the discretion that
comes with it should help overcome the reluctance of
those who perceive prevention as intrusive. Collective
responsibility for, and thus action on, the consequences of
disasters through burden-sharing is, after all, one of the
foundations upon which the United Nations is built.
Prevention simply means the logical expansion of this
collective responsibility to the causes of such disasters, in
full accordance with the spirit and the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. It seems to us that we can no
longer afford not to address the causes of conflicts, and
it is our hope that this debate will constitute one of the
early stages in a new era of United Nations activities.
