Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude
to Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, for his briefing, We also
take this opportunity to reiterate to him our support
in his difficult responsibilities. In addition, we thank
Ambassador Irina Schoulgin Nyoni for her briefing on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. We also thank
Ms. Hajer Sharief for her briefing and the information
she provided to us. Her candidness, strength and
commitment regarding the destiny of her country fills
us with hope for the future of Libya.

My delegation highlights the commitment to and
readiness for political dialogue shown by the parties at
the meetings of the joint drafting committee, held in
September and October 2017, to reach joint agreements
that provide for the implementation of the Libyan
Political Agreement. We believe that such willingness
should be maintained and reflected in concrete results
that will make it possible to stabilize Libya.

In that regard, we look forward to the holding of
the national conference to be held in February. We
hope that it will be a space for encounter, reflection
and reconciliation that will allow the Libyan people
as a whole to move forward decisively in resolving the
structural problems facing them.

Moreover, we firmly believe that progress must
continue to be made on the results achieved by the
constituent assembly and that the constitutional
framework must be strengthened in order to develop the
complete normative infrastructure for the establishment
of reliable and capable institutions to strengthen the
Libyan political process.

Likewise, we acknowledge that the progress made
by the Libyan High National Electoral Commission in
voter registration is a fundamental step that will make
it possible to hold the elections planned for this year.
We call for such efforts to continue steadily until all
voters are registered.

In that regard, we pay tribute to, and emphasize
the efforts being made by, the various regional
organizations and stakeholders, such as the African
Union, to strengthen, support and cooperate in the
implementation of the Libyan political process and the
action plan established by the Special Representative.

However, we note with great concern that the
situation with regard to migrants and refugees has not
improved, since, according to the report of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
of 10 January, in the first days of the year, the Libyan
Coast Guard recovered the bodies of 443 people who
lost their lives trying to cross the Mediterranean Sea.
Unfortunately, those Victims must be added to the more
than 5,000 deaths registered during 2017 off the coast
of Libya.

In addition, we are very concerned about the
ongoing reports of violations of the rights of migrants
who end up being held indefinitely in detention centres
under appalling conditions and are often subjected to
degrading treatment, torture, the denial of medical
assistance and sexual violence, not to mention the
disturbing reports of the existence of slave markets. In
that regard, we call on the parties to make all necessary
efforts to prevent abuses and violations of the human
rights of migrants in centres under their control. We
remind them that they must meet their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure
respect for the rights of those people. We once again
reiterate our call on the Libyan authorities to begin the
relevant investigations to make it possible to identify
those responsible for such Violations so that they can
be immediately brought to justice and answer for
their actions.

Moreover, we regret the reports of armed clashes
in the city of Tripoli on Monday, 15 January, in which
at least 20 deaths were recorded. We note with deep
concern that there are still outbreaks of violence to the
detriment of the security and integrity of the civilian
population. In that context, we again call on the parties
and local stakeholders to lay down their weapons and
to avoid all calls to violence, since such attitudes not
only threaten the lives of hundreds of innocent people
but also disregard and violate the progress made to
date in implementing the Libyan Political Agreement.
We remind all stakeholders and parties involved that
the only option for resolving the conflict is through
compliance with the Libyan Political Agreement as
recognized by resolution 2259 (2015). We reaffirm that
its implementation is crucial to completing the political
transition, as the Council stated in the presidential
statement of 14 December 2017 (S/PRST/2017/26).

In conclusion, it is important to reiterate and to
bear in mind that the impact that the Libyan conflict
has had on the security situation in the region is a direct
consequence of the interventionist practices and the
regime-change policies, which have had repercussions
for the Sahel, leading to the outbreak of chaos, terrorism
and violence with unfortunate results that continue to
play out to this day.
