Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its profound gratitude to the members
of the Security Council for this opportunity to offer
Djibouti's perspective on the unresolved border dispute
with Eritrea and the heightened tension and insecurity
following the withdrawal of Qatari forces on 13 June.
It further wishes to thank Mr. Kairat Umarov, Chair of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and to
commend the United Kingdom for its efforts leading to
the adoption today of resolution 23 85 (2017).

On Somalia, I would like to underline Djibouti's
strong concern that Al-Shabaab continues to pose a
serious threat to the peace and stability of the region.
We have in particular witnessed a worrying trend of
incredibly vicious multiple attacks this year. According
to some reports, Al-Shabaab has been involved in more
than half of all the violent events attributed to militant
Islamist groups in Africa in the first three quarters
of 2017.

We applaud the political agreement reached on
16 April for a national security architecture to integrate
regional and federal forces, as well as the Security Pact
agreed at the London Conference, and we look forward
to the security conference to be held in Mogadishu in
December. We firmly believe that it is only through
viable political settlement that we can help chart an
agreed pathway towards creating professional national
security forces.

To realize our common goal of defeating and
degrading Al-Shabaab, it is important to underscore
that continued and enhanced support will be required
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
forces. International partners must enhance their
support for AMISOM. by providing the Mission with
vital capabilities - in particular, force multipliers and
enablers i to help face the challenges to achieving its
mandated tasks. Finally, Djibouti reiterates its enduring
commitment to peace in Somalia and its readiness to
contribute in any way possible.

On Eritrea, Djibouti expresses serious concern
that for the fifth consecutive mandate, the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea was not permitted to
visit Eritrea. Similarly, the mission proposed by the
Chair of the Monitoring Group could not take place
due to conflicting schedules - an excuse that is
frequently cited by Eritrea for not cooperating with
monitoring missions.

We continue to believe that Eritrea has never ceased
arming and providing support to Al-Shabaab, and we
have shared evidence of that with the Monitoring Group,
as contained in its report to the Council (S/2017/945).
As the monitoring missions were prevented from
carrying out their mandates in Eritrea, they were
obviously unable to draw any conclusions on Eritrea's
behaviour. Eritrea should commit to full cooperation
with the Monitoring Group, including by allowing full
access to all information and records that the mission
deems necessary to review and all personnel it deems
necessary to interview.

The resolution just adopted by the members of the
Council underscores the importance of cooperation
with the Monitoring Group. There must be a change in
the behaviour of the State of Eritrea, and we hope that it
will not again - in defiance of the Council - publicly
vow to obstruct the work of the Monitoring Group, as
it unequivocally did in this Chamber in April, when
its representative said: "Eritrea does not see any added
value in a visit by the Monitoring Group to the country"
(S/PV. 7925, p. 17).

It has been almost 10 years since Eritrea breached
international law by illegally moving into our territory
and occupying Ras Doumeira and Doumeira Island. It
has also been 10 years since Eritrea took Djiboutian
prisoners of war and refused to provide a list of names
and identification numbers for those prisoners and other
missing persons in its custody, or to otherwise account
for the Djiboutians in its custody, held incommunicado
and in the most inhumane and degrading conditions.
It has been 10 years since Eritrea started recruiting,
equipping and arming groups to destabilize the region
and incite violence and civil strife in Djibouti.

The report of the Monitoring Group offers
compelling evidence of Eritrea's ongoing attempts to
exacerbate the conflict by fomenting armed rebellion
against the Government of Dj ibouti. We have consistently
demonstrated a persistent and keen interest in the
peaceful resolution of this crisis. We have left no stone
unturned in our quest for the resolution of the crisis.
Following the end of Qatar's mediation efforts and the
departure of Qatar's personnel from the international
border, Eritrea moved its military personnel to Ras
Doumeira and Doumeira Island, thereby contributing
to heightened tensions and insecurity, and threatening
a new outbreak of violence.

Alarmed at the possibility of the resumption of
hostilities, the African Union decided to deploy a
fact-finding mission to both Djibouti and Eritrea.
Djibouti has cooperated with and facilitated the work
of the African Union mission in its endeavour to
accomplish its mandate. Characteristically, Eritrea is
yet to cooperate with the African Union's fact-finding
mission. As called for in the resolution just adopted by
the Council, Djibouti fully commits to continuing to
cooperate with the Chair of the African Union.

Four months have elapsed since the withdrawal
of Qatari observers, and Eritrea continues to illegally
occupy Djibouti's sovereign territory. Now that the
unresolved border dispute is no longer subject to third-
party mediation, Djibouti is ofthe view that the Security
Council must urge Eritrea and Djibouti to accept - as
a matter of urgency and in order to avoid the further
escalation of violence - the peaceful settlement of
the border dispute in conformity with Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

We thank the members of the Security Council
for their assessment of the situation, and in particular
we note paragraph 40, which urges the two parties "to
seek all available solutions to settle their border dispute
peacefully in a manner consistent with international
law". To fulfil the Security Council's resolution,
Djibouti would agree to submit the dispute for final
and binding determination by the International
Court of Justice or an international arbitrary tribunal
established in conformity with the applicable rules of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration.

Even though the Qatar-led mediation broke down
as soon as it began because Eritrea refused to appoint
its member to the mediating body, Djibouti has invested
in peace from a very early stage. It has submitted a
legal memorandum and a comprehensive statement of
pertinent facts and legal principles applicable to that
matter and other matters that form part of the dispute.
We have cooperated and devoted time, resources and
energy to achieving a peaceful settlement. In return,
we have encountered only obfuscations in bad faith
from Eritrea.

Thirteenremainingprisonersofwarareunaccounted
for and remain in Eritrea's custody. Our prisoners of
war are human beings, not numbers. The release of
our remaining prisoners of war from the cruelties of
captivity has been uppermost in our thoughts. We will
work tirelessly to ensure their repatriation. Eritrea's
self-serving claims that it released all the Djibouti
prisoners of war in its custody have no credibility
whatsoever. Even after two Djiboutian prisoners of war
escaped in 2011, Eritrea refused to acknowledge that
it had ever held them. Indeed, for eight years, Eritrea
denied the existence of the four prisoners of war that it
did release.

The African Union, in its statement issued in
March 2016, was compelled to say the following:

"While acknowledging the March 2016 release
of Djibouti prisoners of war, nonetheless we call
on Eritrea to clarify the fate of any remaining
prisoners and to release them".

In contrast, the Government of Djibouti has authorized
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
review all the individual histories of Eritrean prisoners
of war held in Djibouti since the clashes of 2008, and to
make recommendations with respect to their status and
need for protection.
Djibouti's overtures were rebuffed and its offer
of dialogue was refused. Instead of looking for peace,
Eritrea preferred to make war. Instead of cooperating
with the African Union's fact-finding mission, Eritrea
is yet to provide a date. By renewing the sanctions, the
Security Council has sent a clear political signal that
Eritrea has only itself to blame. Indeed, any objective
and impartial analysis would reach the conclusion that
the responsible party is Eritrea itself.

At the same time, today's resolution offers Eritrea
a reasonable pathway. Eritrea is legally obligated to
comply with the resolutions of the Security Council
because, as the United Nations fact-finding mission
noted in its report of 12 September 2008 in regard to

Eritrea's defiance of the Security Council,

"no country should be allowed to disregard the
decisions of the Security Council with impunity,
as this would not augur well for peace and security
in the region and globally" (S/2008/602, para. 56).

The meeting rose at11.10 am.
