Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Farid Zarif for the briefing he has just given
us. I also welcome His Excellency Prime Minister Ivica
Dacie of the Republic of Serbia to today's meeting of
the Security Council. I have listened attentively to the
statement made by Mr. Thaci.

The situation in northern Kosovo has remained
tense. The number ofvoluntary returns among displaced
persons has declined markedly, and we express our
concern in that regard. Relations among ethnic groups
in northern Kosovo are sensitive and complex. We
hope that the parties concerned will adopt a prudent
approach aimed at promoting national reconciliation
and the stabilization of the situation by resolving their
differences through dialogue, while avoiding any action
that may further complicate or serve to escalate the
situation.

China has always maintained that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Serbia should be fully
respected. On the question of Serbia, a mutually
acceptable settlement plan should be agreed by the
parties themselves through dialogue and negotiation, in
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999).

China congratulates Serbia on the establishment
of its new Government. We hope that Belgrade and
Pristina will continue and move forward the process of
dialogue. That is not only in the interests of the parties
themselves and to the benefit of the well-being of the
people, but also in the interests of peace and stability in
the Balkans and the whole of Europe.

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recently visited
the Balkan region, including Serbia and Kosovo. The
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has made unremitting efforts to
promote regional peace and stability and to advance
dialogue. China expresses its appreciation in that
regard. We support UNMIK's ongoing efforts to
undertake activities in accordance with the Security
Council's mandate. We hope that UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo Force will
strengthen their coordination and play a positive and
constructive role in promoting the settling of relevant
issues.
China is deeply concerned about the illicit trafficking
in human organs. No acts that violate the norms of
international law and international humanitarian law
should be condoned. Serbia's concern in that regard is
justified. We support the United Nations in investigating
the relevant cases.

