Mr. Khare: We last provided an update to the
Security Council on the situation in cote d'Ivoire on
3 March. Since then, the security situation has further
deteriorated with security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo
using heavy weapons against civilians in Abidjan,
particularly in the Abobo, Adjame', Atte'coube,
Koumassi, Treichville and Williamsville
neighbourhoods, which are known as strongholds of
President Ouattara and which are shown on the map
distributed to the members of the Council.

Allow me to mention a few of the most egregious
incidents of the use of excessive force against civilians.
On 3 March, in Abobo, security forces loyal to
Mr. Gbagbo used heavy machine guns against a group
of women demonstrating peacefully in support of
President Ouattara, killing seven women and seriously
wounding many others.

On 7 March, the Ebrie ethnic community in
Anonkoua-Koute', located outside Abidjan, which is
believed to support Mr. Gbagbo, was attacked by
armed individuals, allegedly partisans of the so-called
invisible commandos supporting President Ouattara.
The attack resulted in the displacement of most of the
community's some 5,000 inhabitants. On 8 March, at
least four people were killed in Treichville when
security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo and armed
individuals supporting President Ouattara clashed
following a demonstration by women commemorating
those who had been killed on 3 March.
2

On 11 March, in Abobo, eight civilians, including
three children, were killed when elements of the forces
loyal to Mr. Gbagbo used heavy weapons, including
rocket-propelled grenades and mortars. On 15 March,
unidentified persons threw a grenade into a heavily
populated area of Attecoube, killing one person and
wounding at least 18. On 17 March, more than
25 people were killed and more than 40 wounded when
security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo fired several
mortar shells at a market building in Abobo. On
19 March, the village of Akeikoi, near Abidjan, which
is predominantly inhabited by the Attie ethnic
community believed to support Mr. Gbagbo, was
raided by armed men who were allegedly partisans of
the so-called invisible commandos.

Yesterday, on 24 March, the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'lvoire (UNOCI) received
information that civilians had been shelled from Camp
Commando in Abobo-Samanke. A UNOCI patrol
attended the scene. Upon reaching the location, the
patrol observed security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo
firing mortars. UNOCI opened fire at the mortar
position and the security forces consequently fled their
position.

Numerous smaller-scale incidents also continue
to take place in these areas. Many of the wounded
civilians are being brought to the headquarters of
UNOCI, which has been providing medical treatment.
To date, UNOCI - the mission authorized by the
Security Council - has treated 254 wounded persons,
of whom 131 had gunshot wounds, 77 were wounded
by grenades and 46 by machete or had burn injuries.
The capacity of the mission's level-l plus hospital is
seriously overstretched and immediate support in terms
of a surgical team would help the mission to address
that challenge.

Many Clashes between the Young Patriots and
supporters of President Ouattara have also occurred in
the Yopougon neighbourhood of Abidjan. There have
also been attacks by both the Young Patriots and the
armed forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo targeting nationals
from West African countries. Business premises owned
by nationals of Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) countries have been vandalized and
looted in Abidjan. Forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo also
vandalized and looted residences of several Ministers
of President Ouattara's Government in Abidjan
between 3 and 5 March. In retaliation, youth groups
loyal to President Ouattara looted two houses
11-27744
belonging to senior officials of Mr. Gbagbo's party in
Bouake and Abidjan.

Meanwhile, fighting between elements of the
defence and security forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo and the
Forces nouvelles, in violation of the Comprehensive
Ceasefire Agreement signed on 3 May 2003, remains a
major issue of concern. Both sides are reportedly using
heavy weapons, while continuing to recruit, train and
arm their forces. On 6 March, the Forces nouvelles took
control of Toulepleu, a key town on the border with
Liberia, after heavy fighting with forces loyal to
Mr. Gbagbo, capturing a multibarrel rocket launcher -
known in military parlance as a BM-Zl - abandoned
by the Forces de defense et de securite (FDS). From
there, the Forces nouvelles advanced towards Guiglo.
Fighting was reported in Daloa and Bonoufla, with the
Forces nouvelles reportedly taking control of the
villages of Doke and Zaibo, as well as Blole'quin, after
heavy fighting on 20 March.

While President Ouattara signed a decree on
17 March unifying the Ivorian defence and security
forces and the Forces nouvelles under a single
command, called the Forces re'publicaines de Cote
d'Ivoire, on 19 March the leader of the Young Patriots,
Mr. Charles Ble Goude, called on the Young Patriots to
report to FDS headquarters on 21 March to enrol in the
army in order to "liberate" the country.

The deteriorating security situation and the
escalation in the use of heavy weapons have taken a
serious toll on the lives and well-being of the Ivorian
people. The human rights situation is very grave, with
a high number of human rights Violations reported.
UNOCI reported 462 killings between mid-December
and 23 March, of which 72 victims were ECOWAS
nationals; at least 520 cases of arbitrary arrest and
detention, some involving torture; and at least 72 cases
of disappearances.

I am also very concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation and its potential to exacerbate
the situation in Cote d'Ivoire and in the subregion,
particularly in Liberia. To date, over 93,000 people
have sought refuge in Liberia, while up to 1 million
have been internally displaced, of whom some 300,000
are in Abidjan, while many are leaving the city. In that
regard, I would stress that the emergency humanitarian
flash appeal for Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia remains
seriously underfunded, hampering the ability of the
United Nations to provide much-needed services to
11-27744
those forced to flee their homes. Access to those
affected by the ongoing crisis remains a serious
concern. It is essential that all sides allow unhindered
access for humanitarian actors to reach those in need.

Meanwhile, the Young Patriots and security
forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo continued to obstruct
UNOCI operations, including by blocking access by
UNOCI patrols to areas where clashes between forces
loyal to Mr. Gbagbo and supporters of President
Ouattara were ongoing. In addition, a number of
attacks against United Nations personnel were
reported. For example, on 12 March, Young Patriots
attacked a UNOCI staff member in the parking lot of a
supermarket. He was wounded and robbed, while the
United Nations vehicle was set on fire. On 15 March,
one peacekeeper was reported missing, allegedly
abducted by Young Patriots; he is still unaccounted for.
On 16 March, a UNOCI supply convoy was fired upon
by forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo in the area of Abobo in
Abidjan. On 23 March, in Guiglo, armed elements
forced their way into the premises of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
several times, removing equipment and a number of
vehicles. A crowd of Young Patriots prevented a
response by UNOCI forces.

On the political front, as Council members are
already aware, the High-Level Panel met in Addis
Ababa on 9 March to develop its recommendations to
the African Union Peace and Security Council. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit was
present. On 10 March, the African Union Peace and
Security Council met at the level of Heads of State to
receive the recommendations of the Panel, in the
presence of President Ouattara and representatives of
Mr. Gbagbo, and endorsed the Panel's
recommendations. The African Union Peace and
Security Council requested the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission to appoint a high
representative to facilitate the implementation of the
Panel's recommendations.

In an address to the nation on 15 March,
President Ouattara stated that he had accepted the
decisions of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and outlined his vision, with an emphasis on
national reconciliation, including the formation of a
Government of national unity and a truth and
reconciliation commission, as well as the
implementation of the unfinished tasks in the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement.
3

However, Mr. Gbagbo's "cabinet" met and issued
a communique on 17 March stating that the African
Union had made its decision without a proper evaluation
of the elections, and adding that an inter-Ivorian
dialogue would be the only way to resolve the crisis.
The communique further demanded that "the rebels"
disarm. As mentioned earlier, that cabinet statement was
immediately followed by a call from the leader of the
Young Patriots to mobilize the youth to "liberate" Cote
d'Ivoire.

Let me now turn to the actions that UNOCI has
been undertaking to protect civilians, including
investigating and documenting abuses and violations of
human rights under very challenging circumstances.
For example, on 12 March, in Attecoube in Abidjan,
the FDS blocked a patrol responding to calls by shop
owners and civilians that were being attacked by
Young Patriots. UNOCI reinforced the patrol, which
forced its way through the barricades and reached the
area, where it helped to put out fires in shops that had
been set alight and evacuated the wounded. UNOCI
has also increased the number of patrols to vulnerable
communities or neighbourhoods under attack. UNOCI
has made arrangements for a permanent patrol to be
stationed on a 24/7 basis in the high-risk
neighbourhood of Abobo. We believe that these
measures have prevented additional killings in Abobo,
Attecoube and Koumassi from taking place.

Aerial reconnaissance is being conducted in
Abidjan and in the rest of the country, using the armed
helicopters temporarily redeployed from the United
Nations Mission in Liberia to UNOCI to deter Violence.
Meanwhile, the new Force Commander, General
Berena, assumed his responsibilities on 20 March, and
we would like to convey again our appreciation to the
former Force Commander, General Hafiz, for his
service.

UNOCI has now been able to access some of the
sites of alleged mass graves that the Mission had
previously been prevented from visiting. Efforts are
under way to investigate reported sites of mass graves.
The Mission received information about alleged
killings of 200 ECOWAS nationals in villages in the
Duekoue area and is preparing to send a team to
investigate these allegations. The Mission continues to
record all reported human rights Violations. At the
same time, UNOCI is making every effort to keep
channels of communication open with both sides.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
appreciation to the leaders of ECOWAS, who met over
the past two days in Abuja and took very important
decisions on Cote d'Ivoire. Special Representative
Djinnit was invited to the summit. As members of the
Council are aware, in their resolution they strongly
condemned the ongoing violence against civilians and
deplored the deliberate targeting of ECOWAS citizens
and other foreign nationals and attacks on United
Nations personnel. They made it clear that the
deteriorating security situation and the escalating
violence are a "direct consequence of the refusal of
out-going President, Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, to cede
power to Mr. Alassane Ouattara, the universally
recognized winner of the 28 November 2010 election".
The resolution states that the time has come to enforce
the decisions to ensure the transfer of power to
President Ouattara with out any further delay. To this
end, ECOWAS requested the Security Council to
authorize the immediate implementation of previous
ECOWAS decisions.

The summit also directed the President of the
ECOWAS Commission to explore all avenues to
provide President Ouattara's Government with the
necessary legal and diplomatic means to exercise its
authority. It further requested the Security Council to
consider the situation in Cote d'Ivoire with a view to
strengthening UNOCI's mandate, and to adopt more
stringent international sanctions against Mr. Gbagbo
and his associates. Finally, it urged the international
community to ensure an enabling environment for the
population and UNOCI to implement its mandate,
including the protection of civilians, and invited the
African Union Commission to urgently implement the
10 March decisions of the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

I should like to conclude here by again noting
that the Mission is making every effort, in the
challenging circumstances it faces, to enhance its work
and to ensure that the mandates provided by the
Security Council are implemented on the ground.

