Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, Ambassador Van
Bohemen and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for your
respective briefings. The three Ambassadors have been
actively promoting the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee; the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities; and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to implement their mandates
and coordinate international counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation efforts. China commends the three
Committees on the substantial progress they have made
in their respective work.

The 1267 (1999) Committee is an important
anti-terrorism mechanism of the Council. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and other
terrorist forces pose a serious threat to international
peace and security. The international community
should use a variety of political, economic and
cultural means to design comprehensive measures and
effective responses. China supports the efforts of the
1267 Committee, within its mandate under Council
resolutions, strengthen the communication with the
relevant countries, to strengthen the review of listings
and delistings and periodically review the sanctions list;
strengthen cooperation with monitors and monitoring
groups; and make greater contributions to the cause
of international anti-terrorism. We hope that the
work of the Committee will be further improved and
that all Members States will, in accordance with the
Committee's rules of procedure, continue to support
and facilitate its work and fully uphold the authority
and efficacy of the sanctions mechanism.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
represents an important platform for strengthening the
capacity-building of the Member States and international
cooperation in combating terrorism. At present,
terrorist organizations are using the Internet and social
media as important means to carry out their activities.
China supports the efforts of the CTC and the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) to improve
the assessment of the implementation of anti-terrorism
resolutions, carry out country visits, organize meetings
and undertake activities that are designed to fight the
use of the Internet to incite and finance terrorism, in the
framework of implementing Council resolutions, and to
offer necessary technical assistance to Member States.
China hopes that the CTC will continue to strengthen
communication with Member States and promote its
coordination and cooperation with relevant United
Nations agencies in order to strengthen the capacity of
Member States and promote international cooperation
in the field of anti-terrorism and maintain international
peace and security.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) is an important mechanism in the
field of non-proliferation. In the future, the focus
should be on the comprehensive review of the status
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
comprehensive review is an important measure to
ensure the effective implementation of the resolution
and helps to further strengthen the awareness and
capacities of countries against proliferation. We need
to come to grips with the major threats outlined in
the resolution and prohibit non-State actors from
engaging in proliferation activities, especially for
terrorist purposes. We must also avoid introducing
other complex issues that do not fall within the purview
of resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee must play
its major role in assisting in the implementation of the
resolution, strengthen its assistance mechanism and
satisfy the assistance needs of the countries. Moreover,
all relevant activities carried out by countries should
further the work of the Committee.
China is an important member of the international
campaign against terrorism. The terrorist forces of the
East Turkestan Liberation Organization, represented
by the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, seriously
threaten not only China's national security but also
regional security and stability. China supports the fight
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
We believe that anti-terrorism strategies should
comply with uniform standards and not be linked to
a specific ethnicity or religion. The United Nations
and the Security Council need to play a major role in
anti-terrorism efforts, in compliance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
need to strengthen our effective coordination in order
to wage a high-intensity campaign against terrorism.

We attach great importance to international
cooperation in the field of anti-terrorism. As the
President of the Council in April, China convened
an open debate against terrorism (see S/PV.7670)
that served to strengthen the political resolve of all
parties against terrorism and devised a series of new
anti-terrorism measures and recommendations, lending
new impetus to the coordination and cooperation of
international efforts against terrorism.

China firmly opposes the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs). We insist on resolving
proliferation problems through political and diplomatic
means and on effectively preserving and strengthening
the international the non-proliferation regime by
fostering an international and regional security
environment of mutual confidence and cooperation in
order to remove the motivations for WMD proliferation.

China supports exchanges and cooperation among

the various parties in the field of non-proliferation. In
September 2015, China hosted a workshop for the 1540
national focal points in the Asia-Pacific region, which
has played a positive role in strengthening the capacity-
building of the Asia-Pacific countries in implementing
the resolution. China will continue to comprehensively
participate in and promote international cooperation in
the fields of anti-terrorism and counter-proliferation
in order to promote further progress in relevant fields.
China will continue to support the efforts of the 1267
Committee, the CTC and the 1540 Committee to ensure
the comprehensive implementation of the mandates set
forth in the Council resolutions, while making new
contributions to international cooperation against
terrorism and non-proliferation.

