Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish every
success to the United States as it discharges its
mandate as President of the Security Council for this
month. We also congratulate the United Kingdom on
the outstanding manner in which it steered the work
of the Council during the month of November. We also
thank the briefers for their presentations and for their
commendable efforts to promote stability, sustainable
development and peace in Iraq.

We would first express our concern at the volatile
situation and escalation of violence in south and central
Iraq since early October, which has claimed hundreds
of lives and injured thousands of people. We regret that
this situation has arisen barely a year after the current
Government was installed.

After years of conflict and a vigorous fight against
terrorism, the Iraqi people yearn to lead normal lives in
a functional and inclusive society, where young people
have opportunities for employment and sustainable
development and where impunity and corruption do not
prevail. Accordingly, we support their legitimate right
to peaceful protest, but we condemn the use of violence
by some demonstrators, as well as the destruction of
public and private property. Similarly, we call on the
authorities to respect the rights to freedom of expression
and protest and to refrain from using lethal weapons
and force against demonstrators. We strongly condemn
the acts of violence that have taken place, the excessive
use of force and the deliberate killing of demonstrators,
who did not represent a threat to the lives of others. We
also call for the integrity and protection of journalists
to be guaranteed, for their rights to be respected in the
performance of their duties and for the various media,
which are responsible for informing the nation and the
rest of the world of developments, to be permitted to do
their work.

We welcome the fact that, prior to the announcement
of Prime Minister Al-Mahdi's resignation, steps were
taken to address the demands of protesters, including
the creation of employment and housing opportunities
and the establishment of a high commission of inquiry
to identify and bring to justice perpetrators of violence
during demonstrations, which we see as the initial
step towards accountability. Furthermore, we support
the Government's proposal for structural reform that
includes, among other things, economic and legislative
measures, the appointment of new ministers, including
more women and young people, and the establishment
of a central court to combat corruption. We hope that
the appointment of the first woman Cabinet member
as Minister of Education will be the first step towards
the inclusion of more women in decision-making and
leadership positions in the country.

With regard to the unresolved issues with Kuwait,
we commend the efforts made by members of the
Tripartite Mechanism to move forward on the search
for prisoners and missing persons reported by Kuwait
and the return of human remains, assets and national
archives. We hope that the parties will continue to
strengthen their cooperation until the matter is resolved
and to provide the families of missing persons with as
much information as possible on the whereabouts of
their loved ones.

In conclusion, we underscore the need to respect
the sovereignty and integrity of Iraq. The primary tool
to resolve the current situation is dialogue, exclusively
between the Government, other political actors and all
segments of Iraqi society, a process we believe should
be supported by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq.

