Mr. Skraeic' (Croatia): At the outset, I should like
to thank Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg for
presenting the first report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2009/59), as well as for his
useful comments and remarks. My delegation should
also like to thank Ambassador Frank Majoor, Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission country-specific
configuration for Sierra Leone, and Ambassador
Shekou Touray, Permanent Representative of Sierra
Leone, for their interventions.

Croatia is pleased to note the successful transition
from the United Nations Integrated Office for Sierra
Leone to UNIPSIL, which brings together the whole
United Nations family, its programmes, activities and
funds in Sierra Leone. We are of the opinion that the
current UNIPSIL model has already started to bear fruit
and produce further positive results. We would like to
commend two major political parties, the All Peoples'
Congress and the Sierra Leone People's Party, for their
continuing interaction, which has been both constructive
and, as we have been informed by the Secretary-
General, cordial. This new climate contributes greatly to
the stability of the country and the prevention of further
conflict. However, it is a fact that Sierra Leone is still
divided along ethnic and geographic lines and that there
is an urgent need for further dialogue and cooperation
among all relevant stakeholders.

Croatia commends the Government of Sierra
Leone for having "made the fight against corruption a
key element of its reform platform". We welcome the

decentralization of the work of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and the opening of its offices in the
northern and eastern regions of the country. We find
particularly important the development of an action
plan whose main aim is to address the growing threats
from rising illicit drug trafficking and organized crime,
based on the Action Plan adopted at the Ministerial
Conference on Drug Trafficking held by the Economic
Community of West African States last year. It brings
various security agencies together under standard
operating procedures, with a clear division of work and
responsibilities. This is an approach that we fully
support.

We welcome the first report on the state of human
rights produced by the newly operational national
Human Rights Commission, as well as the programmes
and activities of the Commission. At the same time, we
encourage the Government to continue to implement
the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, including the reparations programmes for
victims of the civil conflict.

Croatia strongly supports security sector reform
in Sierra Leone since it is precisely the security
institutions that are the major guarantors of peace
consolidation and democratic governance. We
commend UNIPSIL for its substantial input into the
development of policing standards in the country and
for its efforts to strengthen partnership between the
police and local communities. On the other hand, it is
evident that, despite the progress reported, much
remains to be done. The main Challenges facing the
authorities of Sierra Leone - be they immediate or
short-term, like rising food and fuel prices, drug
trafficking and piracy, or medium- and long-term, like
underdevelopment or youth unemployment - all pose
serious threats to the gains achieved to date. The
degree of success achieved by the Government of
Sierra Leone in confronting these challenges will
largely define the future of the country.
In that regard, we welcome President Koroma's
Agenda for Change, which aims at a fundamental
transformation of the economy through economic
growth and human development. At the same time, it
clearly identifies the main priorities and proposes
avenues of action. It represents a major change in
attitude from aid dependence and recovery to growth
and development through the creation of an
environment conducive to private sector development
and a stronger inclusion of the diaspora.

There is no doubt that firm political leadership
and continued international support will be required to
implement that ambitious agenda. We also welcome the
development of the Joint Vision of the United Nations
Family for Sierra Leone, which reflects a strategic
framework outlining United Nations priorities in Sierra
Leone and effectively channels all available resources.
We hope that those mutually reinforcing documents
will significantly accelerate the socio-economic
recovery of the country and ensure permanent
stabilization of its peace and security.

Finally, we commend the Peacebuilding
Commission for the crucial role it is playing in Sierra
Leone in attracting continuous donor support to the
country. We welcome the second progress report on the
implementation of the commitments contained in the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework, as well as the
recommendations contained therein on the required
next steps.

