Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's meeting of the Security Council is
taking place without the traditional participation of the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We know that Mr. Radmanovic'
underwent an operation that prevented him from
coming to New York. We would like to wish him a
speedy recovery.

We listened closely to the statement made by the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Inzko. Unfortunately, his statement contained more
emotion than objective analysis of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That also applies to the two
reports presented by the High Representative to the
Security Council.

In order to gain a more objective view of the
processes under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
recommend that members of the Council read the letter
sent by the President of the Republika Srpska,
Mr. Dodik, to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council in response to the High
Representative's accusations that the leadership of the
Serb entity had violated the Dayton Agreement. We
hope that that document will be transmitted by the
President to members of the Council.

The main task of the international community at
this stage of a Bosnian settlement is, in our view, the
transfer of responsibility for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the Bosnians themselves. In practice,
that means replacing the Office of the High
Representative with that of the European Union
Special Representative and, to that end, returning to the
implementation of the 5+2 agenda set forth by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.

The process of forming a new Government
following the elections of 3 October 2010 is facing
serious complications. We believe that the current
crisis is caused by the shakeup of State institutions by,
first and foremost, the Bosniak leaders. Moreover, a
significant share of the responsibility lies with the
High Representative, whose measures, taken on the
basis of the Bonn powers, have consistently heightened
tensions in the country and hindered the quest for an
internal compromise. The main problem, in our View, is
the unwillingness to take into account the views of the
Serb and Croat representatives. We believe that only
the representatives of those parties that were Victorious
in the elections from each of the peoples would fully
reflect the choice of the population. Accordingly, the
formation by the ruling party of a coalition that does
not include the Serb party the Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats, the Croatian Democratic Union and
the Croat Democratic Union 1990, which is what the
Bosniak leaders are trying to achieve, could lead to a
violation of the interests of the Serb and Croat peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We have witnessed with concern the unilateral
actions taken by the Bosniak side to form a new
leadership of the federation that does not include the
leading Croat parties. This approach violates if not the
letter then the spirit of Dayton and is counterproductive
and dangerous. The legitimacy of these steps is not
only disputed by the Serbian and Croat political leaders
but was also rejected by the Central Election
Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina. For all intents
and purposes, the process of forming a new
Government has been undermined.

With respect to the decision taken by the
Parliament of the Republika Srpska to hold a
referendum on the legitimacy of the actions taken by
the High Representative - the subject of the special
report - we do not see a direct violation here of the
Dayton Agreement. The reference by the High
Representative to Violations by the Serb entity of
annexes 4 and 10 to the Dayton Agreement is not
justified. Annex 4 does not contain any reference to a
court and prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
annex 10 grants the High Representative only the
functions of interpreting the Dayton Agreements; it
does not give him the authority to impose any changes
which would interfere in the political process.

Moreover, the President of Republika Srpska
spoke very clearly about the absence of separatist
thought in the Serb entity. We believe that at this stage
the actions of the Republika Srpska leadership do not
go beyond their jurisdiction or violate the Agreement.

On that basis, we cannot agree with the decision
taken by the High Representative on 27 March that
overruled the Central Election Commission's decision
on the formation of a new Government by the Bosniak
entity. We see it as putting pressure on the leadership
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in favour of one of the
sides. The representative of the International Crisis
Group, Ms. Arbour, spoke about this very clearly,
saying that it was her View that the High
Representative had shattered State institutions and the
rule of law.

The continuing arbitrary use by the High
Representative of the Bonn powers is unacceptable.
Our principal position is that the application of the
emergency mechanism is justified only in exceptional
circumstances involving grave violations of the Dayton
Agreement that threaten to destabilize the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; the current actions cannot be
characterized in that way.

We call on the partners in the Steering Board not
to dramatize the situation with the referendum but to
focus on encouraging dialogue between the sides,
which would take into account the concerns of the
Serbian side about the activities of the Court and the
Prosecutor. We know the validity of the comments and
the dissatisfaction by the Serbian side with the
activities of the Bosnian courts, which have long
remained deaf to the international presence. Of the
overall number of convictions by the Bosnian courts,
80 per cent have been in cases against Serbs. We are
convinced that any vitally important decisions
regarding the future of the country should be taken by
the Bosnians themselves, on the condition that

agreement be reached among the three State peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosniaks, Serbs and Croats.
In this context, we consider any attempt to impose any
sort of constitutional reform on the Bosnian sides from
the outside unacceptable. Such unilateral actions could
worsen the situation in the country, as shown by the
sadly well known case of the Butmir initiative.

In our view, the only way to find a solution to the
political crisis is through dialogue leading to mutual
concessions by the sides. We believe that decisions on
the key questions of a settlement should be taken in the
international forums we have agreed upon, namely, the
Security Council and the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council.

