Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We also express our appreciation to the members of the Council for their efforts in adopting resolution 2510 (2020), although it is long-overdue given the events in my country for more than 10 months now. We welcome the confirmation by the Council that the only solution to the Libyan crisis is a political one. While we understand the reservations of some States with regard to certain paragraphs in the resolution, we hope to work together in order to bring our views closer together and overcome any differences, with a view to achieving full consensus as we saw at the Berlin Conference. That would free Libyans from the international restrictions, leading to self-determination. As we hear every single day, the solution should be a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. Today's resolution is undoubtedly an _ official acknowledgement of the failure of the militaryadventure embarked upon by the aggressor and his supporters, and of the failure of the attempted usurpation of authority by force, as well as the failure of the coup against legitimacy. We are here today trying again to return to dialogue and a peaceful solution, which was just around the corner last April. We hope that the States supporting the aggression that has led to the killing, displacement and deepening of the wounds of Libyans have been convinced of the fact that the era of imposing solutions by force is long gone. We welcome the resolution, which is committed to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya, and which reconfirmed resolutions 2259 (2015) and 2441 (2018), regarding the Libyan Political Agreement and other sub-agreements emanating from it. The resolution emphasizes the legitimacy of the Government of National Accord and its exclusive direct supervision of the sovereign institutions and the national oil facilities. It also condemns the closure of oil facilities and stresses the need for them to reopen. Their closure affects all Libyans and threatens an all- out economic collapse in the country. At the same time, we thank Germany for its efforts and diplomacy and reiterate our support for the outcomes of the Berlin Conference to reach a peaceful solution to the Libyan crisis. We hope that all the States that took part in the Conference will be committed to what was agreed upon and abide by the resolution. We also welcome the resolution's mention of the importance of the African Union (AU) and the outcomes of the recently held summit in Addis Ababa. We hope that the AU will play an active role under South Africa's chairmanship, especially when it comes to national reconciliation. Although we welcome this resolution, we are cautiously optimistic. We wonder why there are persistent violations of the truce and continued bombardment and killing of civilians. Why are there threats against civilian airports? Why is there a ban on the landing of aircraft, as experienced by the United Nations and the Special Envoy's team? That was mentioned in a statement issued by the team this morning. What are the guarantees for the success of the outcomes of Berlin Conference and the political track, including the discussions to be held in Geneva? What are the guarantees for the success of the Berlin Conference? Thus far, we have not seen any concrete results from what is known as the 5+5 Libyan Joint Military Commission when it comes to confirming a ceasefire? Some parties have not yet given the names of their representatives for the political dialogue process. Others are apprehensive regarding the selection and representation mechanism, and about repeating past mistakes. Those are legitimate questions that need to be answered. The resolution has raised our hopes, and we remain hopeful that there might be a strong international will for its implementation. Will the Council this time be able to put an end to the obstructionists? Will it be able to end violations and war crimes and hold their perpetrators accountable? Will it put an end to the flow of mercenaries? According to the report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan (see S/2020/36), at least five Darfur armed groups have joined the Haftar militias, including the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army, the Transitional Council of the Sudan Liberation Movement/ Army, the Justice and Equality Movement, the Sudan liberation Forces and the Sudanese Revolutionary Awakening Council. There are thousands of mercenaries and materiel spread out in Al-Jufra, Al-Hone, Al-Qatrun and southern Tripoli, as well as in the oil crescent area.Sudanese mercenaries are intent on closing Libyan oil facilities. Some are trying to spread the rumour that those closures were carried out by Libyan tribes demanding equitable distribution of wealth. Many of those and others are contributing to the destabilization of the uncontrolled southern part of Libya, similar to what happened during the August 2019 massacre in Murzuq, which involved the killing nearly 40 citizens by direct air strikes. This information does not come from us; rather, it is derived from the relevant United Nations reports. Yet there are those who continue to call those people the Libyan National Army. In conclusion, we thank the States that have begun to reconsider their positions after understanding the aggressor's intentions. We would like to remind all present that we are eager to reach a peaceful solution, stop the bloodshed and work to find a platform for dialogue among all Libyans, without exception. We will spare no effort in working towards achieving that goal. We will, however, remain vigilant and prepared for ill-intentioned actions. For as we say, according to the Hadith, "Once bitten, twice shy". The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.
