Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We,
too, thank the High Representative, Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling, for his briefing on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We welcome and thank the Prime
Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan
Terzic, for his latest report to the Council.

My delegation is encouraged by the breakthrough
that was achieved late last year when an agreement was
reached to create a unified, multi-ethnic national police
force to replace the separate forces operated by the
various entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Along with
the defence reforms and the broadcasting legislation,
the restructuring of the police force was one of the
prerequisites to the stabilization and association
agreement negotiations with the European Union. On
the decertified police officers, we urge expeditious
consultations to be held by the various parties
concerned in order to find a solution to that
outstanding issue.

We note with satisfaction that the European
Union's foreign ministers have given their approval for
talks on the stabilization and association agreement to
begin. Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way
since the 1995 Dayton Agreement. It is our hope that it
will stay on course during the negotiations for
membership in the European Union and the Euro-
Atlantic structures.

In the meantime, however, it is necessary that
efforts be redoubled to capture the two most wanted
war-crime indictees - Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic - and to hand them over to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague to
face charges.

We welcome the commitment expressed by all the
political leaders to bring constitutional changes aimed
at streamlining the three-member presidency and
Parliament in preparation for elections later this year.
We urge the parliament to examine the plan when it
comes before it.

We also welcome the pledge made by the Prime
Minister to introduce economic and social reforms,
fight corruption and move the country closer towards
European integration.

Lastly, we commend the European Union Force
and the European Union for their efforts and
commitment to assist the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to overcome years of conflict in their
country. We support the efforts of the High
Representative to facilitate full ownership of political
responsibilities by the Government and the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is critical for the
sustainable political and economic stability of the
country.

