Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to participate in this debate on
counter-terrorism, an issue that lies at the very heart of
the mandates of the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004).

I should like to take this opportunity to express to
the Council and to the Secretary-General Morocco's
gratitude for the statement of support and solidarity
following the terrorist attack that struck my country on
28 April.

That cowardly attack, far from weakening the
resolve of the Kingdom of Morocco, strengthened the
country's commitment to continue its efforts to
consolidate the rule of law and reform. The
spontaneous, energetic and unanimous response of the
Moroccan people in the face of that criminal act
remains the main bulwark with respect to this
challenge and made clear the absolute rejection by the
entire Kingdom of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its perpetrators or aims.

The three Committees set up by the Security
Council resolutions, which I mentioned earlier,
represent important elements of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture. My country is pleased
to be able to engage in exemplary cooperation with the
three Committees and their Groups of Experts.

My delegation supports the overall approach of
the 1373 Committee, which is aimed on the one hand at
continuing to deploy strategic and transparent efforts
and, on the other, at strengthening its role in
facilitating the provision of technical assistance for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), so as to build up the capacities of Member
States in the fight against terrorism, in close
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and bilateral and
multilateral donors.

Turning to the 1267 Committee, my country has
followed with interest the efforts undertaken to
implement the provisions of resolutions 1822 (2008)
and 1904 (2009), aimed at improving the quality of the
consolidated list and the effectiveness of the sanctions
system. My delegation continues to advocate greater
cooperation with Member States in the listing and de-
listing procedures so as to ensure that they are
considered partners in the decision-making process.
The Committee would benefit from taking into account
the lessons learned from the first review of the
consolidated list, carried out under paragraph 25 of
resolution 1822 (2008), with a view to beginning,
under the best possible conditions, the reviews to be
conducted under paragraphs 23 and 42 of resolution
1904 (2009).

In that respect, we have taken note with interest
of the proposals contained in paragraphs 44 to 46 of
the eleventh report (S/2011/245) of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. My
delegation also shares the concerns set out in paragraph
56 of the report on the lack of clarity regarding certain
entries on the consolidated list that yield false positive
matches during screenings by private financial
institutions. These lead to practical difficulties and
complications that can have a very real impact on the
social status and state of mind of the law-abiding
individuals and members of their families who are the
victims in this respect. We would like special attention
to be devoted to this issue.

My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the programme of work for 2011 of the 1540
Committee and welcomes the activities that have been
planned with a view to strengthening cooperation with
Member States and to assisting them in their efforts to
implement their commitments under resolution 1540
(2004).

We also support the overall approach of the
Committee, which is aimed at facilitating the provision
of technical assistance so as to overcome the
difficulties experienced by countries in the full
implementation of the resolution.

At the national level, the Kingdom of Morocco
has continued its efforts aimed at bringing its
legislation in line with its commitments, pursuant to
the international conventions and agreements it has

ratified as well as resolution 1540 (2004). Morocco,
which has an export-control system for dual-use
materials, is on the verge of adopting new legislation in
the area of external trade that will incorporate recent
developments in this field, including dual-use
materials.

