Ms. Ni'ifiez Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation joins others in congratulating Indonesia
for organizing this timely open debate.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.

The celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the
inclusion ofthe protection of civilians as a specific item
on the Council's agenda and the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions is, as has already been
said, a timely moment to reflect on how far we have
come. In hindsight, this protection has made significant
progress, but despite that observation, there is a chasm
between what has been achieved and the real situation
that civilians on the ground continue to endure.
The discouraging data contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/373) irrefutably demonstrate
that, and indicate that we are facing enormous
challenges. We must therefore take advantage of this
opportunity to strengthen our collective determination
to move forward with the effective implementation of
this agenda.

Among the actions needed to be taken is reducing
the proliferation of weapons and the use of explosives in
densely populated areas, which cause civilian fatalities
and injuries and impact critical infrastructure, such as
hospitals and schools. Uruguay believes that, in addition
to global initiatives, it is imperative to encourage
regional ones. In that regard, I would highlight the
regional meeting on the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas to discuss the protection of civilians,
held in Chile in December 2018.

The Secretary-General's report points out that,
in 2018, armed attacks continued to be carried on
hospitals and medical personnel, which urgently calls
for the implementation of the Geneva Conventions
and resolution 2286 (2016), on health care in armed
conflicts. Accordingly, Uruguay supports the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General
concerning its implementation. Attacks on and the
military use of schools should also be condemned.
My country is a party to the Safe Schools Declaration,
which was developed through State consultations
led by Norway and Argentina and will hold its third
international conference in Palma de Mallorca, Spain,
next week. Uruguay will be pleased to participate.

Furthermore, my delegation believes that
investigations into crimes perpetrated against civilians
and ensuring accountability play a key role in deterrence
and ending the culture of impunity. Member States must
therefore adopt and implement national legislation to
bring perpetrators to justice. In particular, Uruguay has
fully integrated the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court into its domestic legislation. We
are also of the View that the Security Council must
assume its responsibility to ensure accountability and
implement the instruments at its disposal, such as
sanctions regimes and its authority to refer cases to the
International Criminal Court.

My delegation believes that, in order to reduce
the vulnerability of civilians, all actors must share
good practices that have been applied successfully in
order to reproduce positive results in other contexts
and develop strategies that strengthen the effective
protection of the population. As a troop-contributing
country, Uruguay has valuable experience in that
area to share in the framework of peace operations.
In that regard, my country reaffirms its commitment
to the undertaking and to the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians.

For Uruguay, the protection of civilians by peace
contingents has multiple dimensions and must be subject
to constant review and improvement to enable them to
adapt to developing situations in time. In that regard,
several days ago, Uruguay co-hosted a workshop with
Australia and Senegal, together with the organization
Nonviolent Peaceforce, in which authorities from
the Secretariat and experts from various delegations
participated in order to analyse non-armed strategies
that could be highly beneficial in providing security to
defenceless populations.

Given our experience on the ground, we are able to
say with confidence that the ability of the Blue Helmets
to carry out protection activities depends largely on
their ability to forge bonds of trust and communicate
with the local population. In that regard, our contingent
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo carries out
community support, recreational and sports activities. It
also provides ongoing support for orphanages and other
charitable associations, and organizes videoconferences
between primary schools of the Congo and Uruguay,
in which children in the same grade and their teachers
communicate and exchange teaching experiences,
thereby fostering respect for diversity and familiarity
with diverse experiences and cultures.

In order to improve the professionalization of
the protection of civilians, predeployment training is

provided by the National Peace Operations Training
Institute of Uruguay in the areas of both human rights
and the gender perspective, as well as areas specific to
the military, while always emphasizing the welfare of
the civilian population and encouraging the inclusion
of women troops.

As always, it is worth noting that if sufficient
financial resources are not provided for the overall
functioning of peace operations, whatever additional
efforts made will not produce the expected results. In
that regard, Uruguay expresses its concern about the
trend towards budget cuts that has been evident in
recent years and its negative environment effects on the
fulfilment of mandates, which could to lead to gaps in
critical mission tasks.

In conclusion, if the past 20 years have been
a period of reflection on establishing norms and
strengthening the agenda, the next 20 must involve
concrete action and effective implementation. There
will be no immediate or easy solutions, but we cannot
cast our gaze aside indifferently and continue to ignore
the suffering of millions of civilians - the innocent
victims of the scourge ofwar. Only the political will and
the joint work of all actors and the implementation of
traditional, as well as innovative, strategies, will make
it possible to achieve peaceful coexistence in which the
fundamental values of human dignity are respected.

