Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to commend the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its tremendous
effort in preparing today's draft resolution on the
extension of the mandate of African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for a
further 12 months, until 31 July 2009. We express our
deep gratitude for the United Kingdom delegation's
sterling conduct of the consultations on the draft
resolution. My delegation participated in the
consultations based on the general understanding that
the basic purpose of the draft resolution was to extend
UNAMID's mandate, taking into account the technical
aspects relevant to completing the effective
deployment of the mission, as expected and as
stipulated in resolution 1769 (2007), without going into
the new elements that are to be considered on their
own tracks.

From the beginning of the consultations, the draft
resolution contained elements referring to the
principles of justice and combating impunity for the
crimes committed in Darfur - principles on which all
members of the Council agree. However, the content of
those elements were conflated with recent measures
taken by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The implications of those measures and
the fears and concerns that they have aroused within
and outside the Sudan have been expressed by several
regional organizations, including the African Union,
the Organization's main partner in UNAMID; the
League of Arab States; and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference. That is what led the delegations of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, South Africa and Burkina
Faso, with the support of the delegations of other
Council members, to propose amendments to the draft
resolution based on the positions adopted by those
regional organizations regarding the possible
repercussions of those measures, which could
undermine current peace efforts in Darfur and further
complicate the situation in the Sudan and the entire
region.

We asked that language be included in the draft
resolution requesting the Security Council to call on
the ICC to defer its consideration of the application
made by the Prosecutor on the basis of the provisions
of article 16 of the Rome Statute, which gives the
Security Council the authority to request the ICC to
defer any investigation or prosecution for 12 months.
The proposal was drafted to reflect the language set out
in the communique of the 142nd meeting of the African
Union Peace and Security Council, issued on 21 July
2008, which stated that the search for justice should be
pursued in a way that does not impede or jeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace and expressed
concern at the misuse of indictments against African
leaders, in conformity with its decision on the abuse of
the principle of universal jurisdiction, adopted at the
eleventh ordinary session of the Assembly of the
African Union, held at Sharrn el-Sheikh, Egypt, on
30 June and 1 July 2008.

The African Union Peace and Security Council
expressed its conviction that, in view of the delicate
nature of the processes under way in the Sudan,
approval by the Pretrial Chamber of the application by
the ICC Prosecutor could seriously undermine the
ongoing efforts to facilitate the early resolution of the
conflict and the promotion of lasting peace and

reconciliation in the Sudan as a whole, which could
ease the suffering of the people of Darfur and promote
the destabilization of the country and the region.
Furthermore, the Peace and Security Council stressed
the need for international justice to be pursued in a
transparent and fair manner in order to avoid any
perception of double standards, in conformity with the
principles of international law, and expressed concern
at the threat that such a development could pose to
efforts aimed at promoting the rule of law and stability
and at building strong national institutions in Africa.

Despite all the reasons that we put forward to
justify our proposed amendments to the draft
resolution, we did not receive the hoped-for response
from certain Council members. In addition, because the
resolution concerns a very important and sensitive
issue - extending UNAMID's mandate within the
required time frame - and because we were keen to
ensure the continuity and effectiveness of the mission,
we accepted the consensual language of the ninth
preambular paragraph, which gives the Council the
opportunity to further consider the issue of invoking
article 16 of the Rome Statute of the ICC regarding the
situation in Darfur. We hope that that will be done as
soon as possible, because the main objective remains to
ensure security and stability in the Sudan and the
region, as well as peace and security for the Mission, in
order to guarantee its success in Darfur.

We therefore voted in favour of the resolution.
We believe that we did not sacrifice our substantive
proposals in vain, because we garnered the support of
14 Council members, which was a victory for the entire
Council. However, I wonder if, at the request of more
than two thirds of the membership of the international
community, the Security Council does not invoke
article 16 of the Rome Statute, when will it do so?

