I thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation to brief the Security Council today. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) greatly welcomes the Council's engagement on this subject and its continued recognition of the relationship between conflict and food production and supply. As Council members will recall, Mark Lowcock, David Beasley and I briefed the Council on this topic in April (see S/2020/340). Many members emphasized the value of early warning with early action. Well-established agrifood systems are crucial for durable peace, as has been proven by the great success of green revolutions and the adoption of proper policies in many parts of the world. Since we spoke five months ago, the situation has not improved, and the risk of famine looms over Yemen, South Sudan and other countries due to natural and man-made disasters, including conflicts. In Yemen, the continued presence of desert locusts has further threatened food availability. The FAO urges all those concerned to work towards granting access for control operations to prevent the pest from further worsening the deteriorating situation, in Yemen and beyond. We note with great alarm the situation in Burkina Faso, where the number of people experiencing crisis or worse levels of acute food insecurity has almost tripled. We are deeply concerned by the most recent Integrated Food Security Phase Classification analysis, which shows that the Democratic Republic of the Congo now has the highest number of people experiencing crisis, or worse levels of acute food insecurity ever recorded in a single country. Today 21.8 million people are unable to access enough food on a daily basis. In northern Nigeria, between June and August 2020, the number of people in crisis and emergency levels of acute food insecurity increased by 73 per cent as compared to the 2019 peak figure, and reached almost 8.7 million people. Tragically, there are many more situations where conflict and instability, now also exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), are drivers for more serious hunger and acute food insecurity. This is particularly visible in areas where conflict and other factors, such as economic turbulence and extreme weather, are already driving people into poverty and hunger. In Somalia, 3.5 million people faced crisis or worse levels of acute food insecurity between July and September 2020. This increase of 67 per cent, as compared to the 2019 peak, is due to the triple shocks experienced this year - COVID-19, floods and the desert locust upsurge. While much progress has been made in controlling the locusts, the FAO is making every effort to sustain control operations. In the Sudan, the number of people in urgent need of humanitarian assistance rose by 64 per cent between June and September 2020, reaching around 9.6 million people, the highest level ever recorded in the country, with serious floods further exacerbating the situation. Worldwide, those hardest hit include the urban poor, informal workers and pastoral communities, as well as people who are already particularly vulnerable - children, women, the elderly, the sick and people with disabilities. We need first and fast aid to stop hunger, we need prevention and production locally, we need political will, and we need collective action, as the forecasts for food security in 2020 continue to worsen. To be effective in combating acute food insecurity, we need to put a package of solutions in place. Humanitarian-development-peace actions must be well coordinated and complementary. Our actions must be mutually reinforcing across global, regional, national and local levels. Humanitarian actors can provide first aid. Agrifood systems can perform a more sustainable function for better production, better nutrition, a better environment and a better life. The good news on major harvested crops in 2020 is that we will have a bumper harvest globally. The FAO estimates we will have an all-time high year, and 58 million tonnes above the 2019 outturn. This is thanks to enabling policies; innovation - new cultivars, agri-inputs and marketing channels; investment; and the hard work of millions of famers. Lasting peace and harmony can be achieved through good policies and investment in agriculture infrastructure and capacity-building in rural development, especially in conflict areas. I firmly believe that the Council can play a pivotal role in addressing the threat of conflict-induced acute food insecurity at crisis or worse levels by advancing dialogue between parties to find political solutions and innovative approaches to end conflict and violence. This would allow us to scale up urgent life- and livelihood- saving operations and to deliver better-integrated humanitarian and development responses that address the multiple drivers of acute food insecurity. Once again, let me assure the Council of the FAO's continued support through policy advice, technical assistance, our Big Data platform and concrete services on the ground.
