Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving my delegation the
opportunity to make a statement at this very important
briefing. Because a lot has already been said, I intend
to be very brief.

We will not be asking questions of Mr. Lubbers,
so I am sure that after my statement he will have no
reason to take the floor again to answer questions.

Let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of your responsibility to direct the affairs
of the Council during the month of March. May I also,
through you, express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the representative of Tunisia, for his
leadership during the month of February.

We applaud the High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mr. Ruud Lubbers, who, in a way, got his
feet wet in his new job by visiting the West African
subregion to see for himself the magnitude of the
humanitarian tragedy that has been unfolding in that
part of our continent. My delegation would also like to
thank him for giving the Council a clear picture of the
situation and of how the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
international community can, and should, respond to
that tragedy.

Allow me to pay tribute to the Government and
the people of Guinea, who have hosted Sierra Leonean
refugees over the past several years. Like Sierra Leone,
Guinea is a poor country, but, against all odds, it has
managed to cope with a large influx of people from
across the border. We do not know what we would have
done without the generosity of Guinea.

The High Commissioner and all others who have
spoken this afternoon have emphasized that the
underlying problem is one of safety and security for the
innocent civilians in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia.
The Government of Sierra Leone has already presented
the High Commissioner with details of the problem and
our views about how we believe the Mano River Union
States and the international community can cooperate
in alleviating the situation.

Allow me to put the situation in a nutshell:
thousands of our people would like to return home.
That wish and expectation to return is of course linked,
first of all, with the level or intensity of hostilities
along the borders of the Mano River Union States.
Even if there is a lull in the area and the guns are silent
for a while, there is still the threat of hostilities hanging
over the refugees who want to return. That is not all.
There is also the question of whether the villages and
towns within Sierra Leone are safe for them to resettle.
What guarantees do they have that the rebels who are
still occupying towns and villages will not attack them?

We have already expressed support for the idea of
"safe corridors", but that is only one side of the
equation. Another related issue is the capacity of the
Government of Sierra Leone to accept the returnees. As
the High Commissioner can attest, we are already
overwhelmed not only by the large number of
returnees, but also by the thousands of internally
displaced persons. The situation is complex and needs
concerted efforts on the part of all concerned-
including those who are waging and directing
aggression and banditry within and across our
countries.

We welcome the visit of the High Commissioner
and look forward to the substantive results of that visit.

