Ms. Van Ardenne-van der Hoeven (Netherlands):
The Netherlands fully aligns itself with the statement
just delivered by the Austrian Minister on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

We finally have a peace deal on Darfur. I would
like to pay tribute to some of the parties that
relentlessly fought for that deal: Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim and his African Union team, President Obasanjo
of Nigeria, Deputy Secretary of State Zoellick of the
United States and Hilary Benn of the United Kingdom.
I would also like to congratulate the Sudanese parties
that signed the Darfur peace agreement last Friday.

The Darfur peace agreement is a milestone. But,
at the same time, this peace deal is only a piece of the
puzzle. Not all of the feuding parties are on board yet.
The rebel factions that have still not signed the Abuja
agreement should do so soon. There is another peace
deal - the Comprehensive Peace Agreement between
the north and the south - that also has to be
implemented.

The Sudanese Government bears the primary
responsibility for the well-being of its own citizens,
and has to ensure unhindered access for humanitarian
organizations to the camps for internally displaced
persons (IDP) and to others in need.

The international community has a responsibility
of its own. It includes providing more emergency aid to
keep the people on the run alive. Last week, the
Netherlands made another €10 million available for
that purpose. I call on all other donor countries, both
inside and outside the Council Chamber, to also put
their money where their heart is.

Security is a precondition for development and
reconstruction. The Council can help to make Darfur
safe for development by deploying a robust
peacekeeping mission to the area. I call upon the
Sudanese Government to allow the United Nations to
start the necessary planning work in Darfur in the
coming days.

But before the Blue Helmets arrive at the scene,
the men, women and children of Darfur will count on
the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to
protect them. In turn, the African Union Mission will
count on us, on the international community, to support
it. The workload of AMIS will increase in the short
term, because of the additional tasks assigned to it in
the Darfur peace agreement, such as ensuring safety in
and around the IDP camps and disarming the
Janjaweed and other armed groups opposed to peace.
The Netherlands will provide an additional
contribution of €15 million to our African partners,
who are valiantly paving the way for a United Nations
mission.

Having a United Nations mission on the ground is
a strong signal of international commitment. It is vital
that the parties to the Darfur peace agreement
communicate the results of the negotiations in detail to
the people in Darfur as soon as possible. In addition,
other confidence-building measures also need to be
taken, such as quick-impact programmes and capacity-
building efforts, to help the parties to implement their
commitments. After the necessary level of security is
restored, we should get reconstruction going right
away. At the request of the parties, this weekend in
Abuja the Netherlands will chair a meeting of the Core
Coordination Group, which will be composed of the
Sudanese parties and representatives of the
international community. We are not wasting any time:
early next month there will be a workshop in The
Hague to plan reconstruction activities for the short
term as well as for the long term. And in September,
upon finalization of the Darfur recovery plan, the
Netherlands will host a donor conference to back up
these plans with financial clout.

Finally, breaking the cycle of violence and
rebuilding the province of Darfur is also about the
credibility of the Security Council and the international
community as a whole. Can we overcome international
indifference and make a difference to those who are
most in need? And can we, at the highest political
levels, keep our eye on Darfur and on the Sudan as a
whole, even as in the long run other crises take over
the headlines? The Netherlands will make every effort
possible to ensure that the answer to those questions is
a loud and clear "Yes, we can".

