Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals, and its Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz,
for today's reports and briefings.

I would like to start by commending the Mechanism
on its work and progress over the past year. It was only
12 months ago that the Mechanism fully assumed its
responsibilities for both the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). During that
time, its mandate has remained the same - to carry
out the residual functions of the ICTY and the ICTR,
thereby ensuring their legacy. Yet within that period,
the Mechanism has been faced with significant
challenges following the General Assembly's approval
of a significantly reduced for the 2018-2019 biennium.
That has led to reduced staff and resources. However,
the Mechanism has been determined to continue to
fulfil its mandate effectively and efficiently, and we are
pleased that it has taken the steps necessary to make
that possible.

All three principals have demonstrated their drive
and determination to ensure that the Mechanism
remains on track to deliver its mandate. Through
various initiatives, the Mechanism has adapted to deal
with several setbacks and has subsequently achieved
a great deal with a relatively small number of staff.
Among the initiatives implemented by the Mechanism,
we take note of its expenditure reduction plan. As
developed by the Registry, the plan has enabled the
Mechanism to continue to fulfil the core elements of
its mandate - particularly judicial functions - as
fully as possible. It has done this by reducing non-post
resources and general operating costs, revising delivery
arrangements for important services and limiting
premises enhancements to essential needs. These
measures have undoubtedly enabled the Mechanism to
manage budgetary constraints. However, looking ahead,
we need to be mindful of how to balance cost-savings
against effectiveness, in particular if the Mechanism is
to continue to fulfil its mandate.

The United Kingdom will continue to support
the Mechanism for the remainder of its mandate. We
also request that Council members and Member States
continue to provide the Mechanism with the support it
needs, whether financially, logistically or politically.

We also commend the Mechanism for its efficiency
in dealing with cases often involving complex and
challenging issues and its practice of remote judging,
which so far has worked without any prejudice to
the defendants. We note that cases have proceeded
expeditiously, and these include the recent Turinabo
et a]. contempt case. This was the first hearing for
the Mechanism's branch in Arusha, and it shows that,
when seized of important matters, such as contempt
or false allegations, the Mechanism will act swiftly.
We look forward to developments in this case, as
well as the related Ngirabatware sentence review. We
also welcome progress in the Stanisie and Simatovie
retrial and note the recent judicial appointments in the
Karadzic and Mladic' appeals. We have heard from the
President and Prosecutor this morning with regard to
the completion of these important cases and are pleased
that there will not be any significant delay to them
caused by recent motions.

While cases have been progressing, we however
remain deeply concerned about genocide denial in
Rwanda and the denial of crimes and the glorification
of war criminals in the Balkans. In addition, the lack
of regional judicial cooperation among the countries of
the former Yugoslavia is concerning. The Mechanism
can successfully complete its mandate and deliver
justice to Victims only through collective efforts of the
international community.

We remind the countries of the region of the joint
declaration on war crimes signed at the prime ministerial
level at the London Western Balkans Summit this year,
which underlined the importance of recognizing and
respecting verdicts from international and domestic
courts related to war crimes and other atrocity
crimes, as well as rejecting the use of hate speech, the
glorification of war criminals and the provocative use
of symbols. We therefore urge countries to work closely
with the Mechanism, in particular with the Office of the
Prosecutor, to ensure accountability through effective
cooperation. We believe that this will help to reduce the
instance ofthe denial of crimes, including genocide and
the glorification of war criminals.

While attention tends to focus on conviction and
acquittals, we would like to recognize the development
of best practices by the President and the Registry,
including the revised Rules Governing the Detention
of Persons Awaiting Trial or Appeal Before the
Mechanism or Otherwise Detained on the Authority
of the Mechanism and the directions on the procedure
for the determination of applications for pardon,
commutation of sentence and early release of persons
convicted by the ICTY, the ICTR and the Mechanism.
We are aware that the Registry is also reviewing various
draft policy instruments related to professional conduct
for defence counsel and on the support and protection
of victims and witnesses. These policies are essential
to the Mechanism's transparency and clarity and to the
legacy it provides to current and future tribunals.

We note the elections later this month to fill two
judicial posts. Ensuring that the Mechanism operates
with a full roster is necessary for it to complete its
mandate and we fully support the Mechanism in filling
these two vacancies. We do, however, regret the lack of
women candidates.

Lastly, but certainly not least, through you,
Mr. President, and on behalf of the United Kingdom, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank Judge Meron
for his invaluable work over the past two decades. The
whole international community should recognize the
meaningful and long-lasting contribution he has made
to international law and justice, particularly through his
judicial rules. We are immensely grateful to him for his
efforts, his persistence and the leadership he has shown,
and in particular the very positive impact that this has
had on the functioning of the Residual Mechanism. We
Wish Judge Meron the very best for the rest of his time
at the Residual Mechanism and with his future pursuits,
which I have no doubt will be numerous. We would also
like to congratulate Judge Agius on his appointment
as President and look forward to working with him on
carrying out the Mechanism's mandate.
