Mr. Sc'epanovic' (Montenegro): We thank you.
Mr. President, for organizing today's important
open debate and congratulate you on your country's
presidency of the Security Council in the month of
August. We also thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their valuable briefings. We also welcome
the adoption of resolution 2171 (2014) today. We would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the High
Commissioner for her outstanding work during her
tenure in office.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

Conflicts have a devastating impact on the world.
At least one fifth of the world's population continues
to live in violent or conflict-affected countries. It is
striking that conflict hits the most vulnerable the
hardest. It is our duty to help resolve conflicts, and we
must share the burden and provide new generations
with a safer environment. Conflict resolution and the
building and maintenance of sustainable societies are
the greatest challenges of our time.

With the many real challenges that remain to be
addressed in the current, ever more fragile international
peace and security context, we must recognize that we
have a long way to go before we truly have an effective
system. Turning understanding into action and moving
from a culture of reaction to one of prevention is a
demanding task. We all know, from many examples
across the world, that prevention and early intervention
can and do work and is cost-effective. That is why I
would like to underline the importance of United Nations
early-detection and early-warning mechanisms. Our
focus should definitely be directed towards preventive
measures in order to prevent crises from developing and
escalating and to mitigate the possible repercussions
thereof. To that end, Montenegro, as a member of
the Group of Friends of Mediation, advocates that
mediation be truly established as a core function of
the United Nations, as prescribed in Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The responsibility to protect and its further
operationalization must also remain a priority. In this
era of accountability, perpetrators of crimes against
humanity should not go unpunished.

Regional and subregional organizations could play
a positive and valuable role in facilitating the beginning
of dialogue and the establishment of a conciliatory tone
when approaching conflict resolution, as we have seen
in many instances in Africa. When the regional or
subregional approach does not bear fruit, it is for the
United Nations and the Security Council to step in and
assert ownership. In order to make sure that the United
Nations maintains its rightful place as the central
mechanism for global governance, the Organization has
to assume a modern, reformed profile that recognizes
new geopolitical realities and the world's evolving and
multifaceted conditions and environments.

Let me point out that threats today must be tackled
through joint efforts and in an integrated manner
across the entire nexus of development, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, the rule of law and human rights.
Proceeding in that manner, we can achieve societies
that live in enduring peace. Given its vast accumulated
expertise and knowledge, the United Nations is well
positioned to provide such holistic and tailored support
to nationally led undertakings by Member States.

In order to have peaceful and conflict-free
societies, there has to be an enabling environment
for inclusive institution-building, which assumes the
active engagement of national and local authorities,
parliaments, communities, civil society, academia and
women's groups. Only in that way will political reforms
be able to take root and open space for the development
of national dialogues, reconciliation efforts and other
initiatives.

Equal focus also needs to be placed on transparency,
accountability and effective management and oversight,
with a View to strengthening the legitimacy and
integrity of security institutions. In combination, all of
those aspects will contribute to our common objective
of maintaining international peace and security.

