Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate once again in the Security
Council's deliberations on Timor-Leste. I would like to
thank Special Representative Haq and Deputy Prime
Minister Guterres for their presentations. The Deputy
Prime Minister's presence is especially valued. I would
also like to commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her very strong start in her role,
and to note that her good offices role in particular will
remain very important into the future.

The recent visit of the technical assessment
mission led by former Special Envoy Ian Martin was
particularly welcome and has provided an especially
valuable assessment for the Council.

Australia welcomes the ongoing positive
developments in Timor-Leste, which are detailed in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/85) and to
which the Deputy Prime Minister referred this
morning. But, as we all know of course, there is still a
significant amount of work to be done by the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste, assisted by
their partners, before we can confidently say the
country will be remain stable and secure over the long
term. Australia sees the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) as continuing to
have a decisive role to play in that and remains
committed to strong partnership with the United
Nations mission and of course, as a close neighbour
and friend, with Timor-Leste and its people
themselves.

I want to be brief; these efforts by Australia are
outlined briefly in my statement as distributed. One
area I would like to particularly flag, which needs
serious attention - and quickly - is the critical issue
of youth unemployment. Disaffected young men in
particular remain a potential threat. As the Secretary-
General's report itself notes, finding a place for youth
in the country's economic life, civic institutions and
democratic processes is absolutely critical to stability.
Much more needs to be done by all of us to help create
job opportunities for youth.

There have of course been a number of
noteworthy developments since the Council last
considered the situation in Timor-Leste. Timor-Leste's

recognition of the problems of corruption and lack of
capacity in the public sector and the introduction of
measures taken to address them are welcome. We note
the recent appointment of an Anti-Corruption
Commissioner, who will head up the new Anti-
Corruption Commission. We have also been pleased to
support the Government in its efforts to establish a new
Civil Service Commission.

In the security sector, we note in particular the
further progress in the process of resumption of
policing responsibility by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL). We acknowledge the very natural
desire by the Timor-Leste Government that this process
be expedited, but we would encourage both the United
Nations and the Government to pursue the process
within the agreed framework requiring benchmarks to
be reached prior to resumption. There is a lot of work
to be done if the resumption process is to be completed
by the end of the year, including by the Government in
ensuing the PNTL has the supporting infrastructure
needed to undertake its work. My own Government, as
a donor, is very prepared to continue working with the
Timor-Leste Government in that process. We also
support the assessment mission's recommendation that
there be a reconfiguration within UNMIT to enable
deployment of United Nations police with skills
directly relevant to their new role, following
resumption, as mentors and monitors. For our part, our
bilateral Timor-Leste Police Development Program
continues to work with its PNTL counterparts to
strengthen systems and procedures.

Other major developments include the
commencement of the force-wide promotions process
for PNTL officers, the ongoing consideration by
Parliament of draft laws on the national security
framework, and additional consultations on the draft
national security policy. Work in this latter area is
critical to ensuring that there is a clear understanding
of the respective roles of the security forces and an
established framework for civilian oversight of these
institutions. There have also been several security
incidents involving PNTL officers that have given
some cause for concern, and we encourage the relevant
authorities to deal with those issues appropriately and
swiftly so as to ensure that community goodwill and
trust in the PNTL are strengthened.

The Australian-led International Stabilisation
Force (ISF) has continued its shift in focus from
security support to helping to develop the capacity of
the Timor-Leste military. The past few months have
seen a reduction in ISF numbers to approximately 540
Australian and New Zealand Defence Force personnel.
That reduction, of course, does not mean any reduction
in our commitment to supporting Timor-Leste and the
United Nations Mission. On the contrary, the ISF
restructure allows for an enhanced capacity-building
effort while maintaining the ability to respond to
security threats and the needs of UNMIT, consistent
with the level of security in Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, Australia supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
UNMIT mandate be renewed for another 12 months,
with some modest reductions in staff numbers and
some reconfiguration based on the technical
assessment mission recommendations.

