Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, the members of the Security Council,
Ms. Zerrougui, and in particular Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh, who today put a face and a smile on the story
of so many others in places, such as Colombia, where
so many children have experienced these difficulties.
(spoke in Spanish)

Ibelieve it is especially significant that the first time
that I am participating in a Security Council debate, we
are dealing with the very delicate subject of children
in armed conflict. That is why I should like to express
my gratitude, on Colombia's behalf, for this invitation
to participate in this open debate. For a country such
as my own that has faced tremendous challenges as a
result of armed conflict, this is a valuable opportunity
to share experiences and lessons learned on an issue
that we unfortunately know all too well.

Security Council resolutions on this subject not only
enjoy the firm support of my Government, but also carry
institutional weight, since, as established in resolution
1612 (2005) and resolution 2143 (2014), adopted today,
the primary role of States in protecting and assisting
girls and boys in armed conflict and developing
the necessary corrective measures is recognized.
Colombia agrees with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, that in the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established under
resolution 1612 (2005), any dialogue between special
representatives, the United Nations team in our country
or the task force of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism will be possible only with the prior express
agreement of the Government of Colombia, and we
were thus able to work jointly.

After the visit by Mrs. Graca Machel to Colombia
in 1996, almost 20 years ago, to share her report on
the impact of armed conflict on children (A/51/306), we
adopted a law prohibiting and punishing the recruitment
of children under 18 years of age by the armed forces.
Our commitment is also evidenced in the voluntary
acceptance of the mechanism, the ongoing dialogue at
the political and technical levels between the national
Government and the United Nations system, and the
establishment and implementation of comprehensive
policies to protect children from recruitment.

Allow me to share with the Council that the
fundamental strategy of the Colombian State includes a
policy to prevent the recruitment and use of girls, boys
and adolescents by illegal organized armed groups
and criminal groups. Since 2010, we have been able
to dedicate a significant amount - $190 million to
date - to implementing that initiative. Colombia has
established an intersectoral committee that, since 2007,
has been working to reduce the recruitment of youth by
illegal armed groups. The committee brings together
23 national, regional and local entities that address the
prevention of sexual violence against girls and boys.
That strategy has produced encouraging results. We
have not achieved everything we wanted to, and we are
not able to declare a complete victory, but at least 3,400
children have been dissociated from illegal groups.
Some 1,160 investigations have been opened since 2003
by the country's general prosecutor concerning the
rights of forcibly recruited children and the childhood
of which armed groups deprived them.

Colombia believes that the United Nations role in
the issue of children in armed conflict deserves our
attention due to the gravity and importance of the issue.
The focus should be on cooperation, prevention and the
development of national capacities to prevent, combat
and respond to this kind of problem, which confers on
us the moral obligation to provide a brighter future for
any society that calls for it.

In 2013, the National Centre for Historical
Memory, which was established by the Government of
Colombia as part of the peace process and through the
law for victims and the restoration of land, published
a heartrending report entitled "Enough already: a
memoir of war and dignity", which recounts the very
valiant way in which women in particular demanded
that illegal groups return their children, who had been
tricked into being recruited or had simply been recruited
against their will. I therefore want to emphasize, as our
Ambassador indicated to the Council last year (see S/PV.6980), we believe that the implementation of the
mechanism set out in resolution 1612 (2005) should
also be sharply focused on strengthening the existing
international pressure brought to bear on illegal armed
groups to put an end to their violent actions and the
recruitment of minors. Similarly, we also believe that
we should always bear in mind that in dealing with
this issue, the Council should consider the situations
and focus on those where there are armed groups that
indeed threaten international peace and security, and
establish distinctions with those situations that are
not on its agenda. Every case must be analysed on an
individual basis and the appropriate response to the
circumstances, as well the specific context, of each
situation should be found.

The Government of Colombia is working with the
full conviction that the rebuilding of society in post-
conflict situations, if we are to achieve the peace
that we so deeply desire as Colombians, should be
established on the basis ofprotection for boys and girls.
As underscored by President Santos Calderon himself,
Colombia seeks genuine peace - peace that will
ensure non-repetition, contribute to an environment of
reconciliation and heal the wounds of confrontation,
and give my country its first generation in a long time
of children who grow up in an environment of peace,
security and prosperity.

