Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank you, Sir, and Spain for having initiated this very
interesting debate, bringing closer to the Council a
reality of which we need to take account, especially as
we are dealing with a region that is very sensitive.

I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who has just delivered the
point of view of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS). Mr. Ibn Chambas
is in that Office, newly created to respond to the
challenge, and I would like to thank him for his good
briefing. Similarly, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Paul
Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate; Ms. Monique Barbut, Executive
Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification; and Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim,
Coordinator of the Association des femmes peules
autochtones du Tchad, for bringing us so close to the
realities that she is living every day in the Sahel region.

The Sahel region is confronted with huge
challenges: extreme poverty, food and malnutrition
crises and conflicts, youth radicalization, violent
extremism, terrorism, transnational organized crime,
natural disasters and the ravages of climate change.

With regard to the security situation, owing to
the spike in armed conflict and violence throughout
the region, Governments have been forced to spend
additional resources to address security challenges, at
the expense of social development. In northern Mali,
which we just recently visited, the Lake Chad Basin
and other areas of the Sahel region, the actions of
armed groups, terrorists and transnational organized
crime are having a devastating impact on civilians.
As of December 2015, more than 4.5 million people
were displaced, seeking refuge in already highly
vulnerable communities. As violence and conflict
escalate in the Lake Chad region and in northern
Mali, millions of people are increasingly dependent on
the generosity of their vulnerable neighbours and on
humanitarian assistance.
Food insecurity, malnutrition and poverty
in the Sahel region require a concerted effort by
the international community in order to assist
people affected by severe hunger and malnutrition.
Humanitarian action in the Sahel is guided by the 2014-
2016 Sahel Regional Strategic Response Plan. The
three-year strategy aims at delivering coordinated and
integrated life-saving assistance to people affected by
emergencies, as well as at kick-starting a more tailored
response to the food and nutrition crises affecting
millions of people in the region.

Angola commends the humanitarian response
personnel engaged in providing assistance to populations
living in areas with very unsafe access, given the sheer
scale and complexity of the challenge and the potential
for further deterioration. While Governments of the
region continue to deploy efforts with the international
community to solve the humanitarian crisis, a new
sense of urgency and commitment is required for a more
effective response to the humanitarian threat. In that
regard, Angola also welcomes the joint coordination
by the countries of the region, especially the Group of
Five Sahel.

The impact of climate change and natural disasters
and the degradation of lands in the Sahel are other matters
of extreme concern. Over the past decades, growing
climate alterations and more frequent distress have
pushed the Sahelian people to the brink of humanitarian
disaster. Water for the region's agriculture, which
is 98 per cent rain-fed, is getting scarcer, and water
availability per inhabitant has dropped by over 40 per
cent over the past 20 years. Agriculture is affected by
climate change, desertification and also the insecurity
affecting the region, as areas suitable for agriculture
are being occupied by armed groups, terrorists and
transnational organized crime. That makes agricultural
activities impossible, resulting in the extreme scarcity
of food every year.

The shrinking of Lake Chad is a striking example
of the environmental degradation in the Sahel region.
Lake Chad, which previously straddled the borders of
Cameroon, Chad, Niger and Nigeria, has over the last
50 years shrunk to a small percentage of its earlier size,
making it more difficult for the people who depend on
it for their livelihood. That forces them to dislocate in
search of water and good land for agriculture, thereby
causing the rise of inter-ethnic violence between the
migrant people and the local communities residing in
the fertile areas. Ms. Ibrahim indicated clearly for us
the impact of climate change on the lands in this region
that we are discussing this afternoon.

With 60 per cent of the region's population under
25 years of age, lacking education and unemployed,
poverty and social exclusion provide fertile ground for
disenfranchisement, grievances and radicalization. The
perception that Governments neglect them easily draws
youth to recruitment by extremist and terrorist groups
operating in the Sahel region and beyond, making them
easy prey for groups like Al-Qaida in the Islamic Sahel
and Maghreb, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
in Libya, and Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region,
among others.

We commend the work of UNOWAS in the Sahel,
in collaboration with the United Nations agencies,
international financial institutions, regional and
subregional organizations, donors and partners, for
its contribution towards the implementation of several
projects in various Sahel member States in order to
materialize the United Nations Integrated Strategy Plan
for the Sahel. The international community, and the
United Nations in particular, should continue assisting
the Sahel countries in the fight against terrorism and
to overcome the challenges affecting the region. We
particularly commend the role played by France to fight
terrorism in the region, with special forces operating
in coordination with the national armed forces of the
countries of the region itself. The efforts of the Group
of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries to organize joint
security operations at the borders and their decision to
create a multinational task force to combat terrorism
and transnational organized crime in the Sahel translate
the determination of those countries to fight terrorism
in the region. The decision ofthe G-5 Sahel is similar to
that of the Multinational Joint Task Force created by the
Lake Chad Basin States and Benin, who joined forces
to fight Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region.

In conclusion, we call on the Sahel member
States to continue to join forces to decisively address
the challenges affecting the region. We urge the
international community to continue to support regional
efforts in the maintenance of peace and security for the
development and stability in the Sahel region.

