Mr. Sahovie (Yugoslavia): I would like to thank
you, personally, Mr. President, and all members of the
Council for your efforts to bring about the mission
whose results we are discussing today. I am also
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
analysis and presentation.

We View the discussions that the mission had in
Yugoslavia, in Kosovo and Metohija and in Belgrade as
very useful. The visit provided an opportunity for all
members of the Council to acquire first-hand
information on the situation on the ground and assess
challenges that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is facing
in the very complex period that is ahead of us. This
kind of active involvement of the Council is, we
believe, important and very helpful for the process of
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

Another equally significant aspect of the mission
is the Council's visit to Belgrade. The exchange of
views with President Kostunica, Minister Svilanovic
and other members of our Government was in our
assessment detailed, open and constructive. Yugoslavia
is committed to continuing to cooperate with the
international community, particularly with the Security
Council, UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
resolving difficult problems in Kosovo and Metohija.

We support the position of the Security Council
mission that the political process in Kosovo and
Metohija has to be further promoted in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). That indeed requires
substantial additional efforts by UNMIK, KFOR and
UNMIK police, as well as the full attention of the
Security Council. We also agree with the assessment
that basic obstacles to the creation of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo and Metohija are the lack of physical, social
and economic security for the population, as well as the
lack of freedom of movement and equal access to
public services. Furthermore, we recognize the
importance of the establishment of the new Pillar I and
UNMIK's recent measures to combat organized crime,
illegal weapons possession and terrorism.

Yugoslavia has repeatedly emphasized that it
supports in principle the elections in Kosovo and
Metohija and the creation of interim institutions in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), especially its
provision regarding respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Yugoslavia. Therefore, we have
called on the Serbian community to take part in the
registration process for the election.

However, whether Kosovo Serbs will actually go
to the polls will depend on whether the conditions for
free and fair elections really exist at that time.
Unfortunately, so far these conditions have not been
created: there is no minimum physical safety,
particularly for the non-Albanian population; the
remaining Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija cannot go
from one place to another without an armed escort. In
such conditions, we find it difficult to expect to even
hold an election campaign, let alone vote.

It is difficult to contend that participating in an
election is a precondition for a life in safety. On the
other hand, in the absence of safety, there are no
conditions for democratic elections. Minority
protection is not contingent upon the will of minorities
to take part in self-governing institutions, but their
safety will enable their meaningful participation in
these institutions.

As the situation stands now, Kosovo and Metohija
is on the way to being totally transformed into a mono-
ethnic community. Two thirds of the Serb population
and many members of other ethnic communities have
left for other parts of the country. Pristina has been
practically cleansed: of its 40,000 Serbs only 200 have
remained. The process of the return of displaced
persons to Kosovo and Metohija has not yet started.
Actually, flight out of the province continues on a daily
basis. The return of internally displaced persons should
begin immediately, at least to certain areas of Kosovo
and Metohija where that can be achieved in safety.
Such a step would be completely in line with resolution
1244 (1999), which calls for the return of all forcibly
displaced persons without any additional or special
conditions.

I will not elaborate on the issue of the
Constitutional Framework. Our position is well known,
and it was summarized in the letter I addressed to you,
Mr. President, earlier this month. It is our view that
relevant legislation should be enacted to improve the
content of the Framework and that additional
confidence-building measures be put in place to offer
the Serbs and other non-Albanians protection so that
they can live side by side with others in the province.

It is necessary to ensure institutional links
between Kosovo Serbs and the authorities in Belgrade.
In this context, we call for the establishment of
cooperation in the fields of education, public health
and in particular the protection of cultural heritage.
Furthermore, we believe that tax collection points
should be set up farther inside the territory of Kosovo
and Metohija, since their maintenance at the
administrative boundary with Serbia would create an
impression that Kosovo and Metohija is actually an
independent State.

Finally, we are of the View that taking into
account the good and useful cooperation existing
between the Yugoslav Army, the Yugoslav Ministry of
Interior and KFOR in southern Serbia, there is no
reason why similar cooperation concerning Kosovo and
Metohija should not be ensured. I should also like to
reiterate once again my Government's readiness and
commitment to further intensify cooperation with
UNMIK. In this connection, a status-of-mission
agreement regulating Federal Republic of Yugoslavia-
UNMIK cooperation is urgently required. It would
significantly facilitate cooperation and would be in line
with established United Nations practice for missions
of a similar nature.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
willingness of Yugoslavia to do everything in its power
to contribute to the improvement of the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, for the benefit of all its
inhabitants.

