Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
At the outset, I should like to express our gratitude
to the Russian presidency of the Security Council
for having convened today's debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
briefing on the situation on Afghanistan, and his
Special Representative, Jan Kubis, for his effective
management of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We take this opportunity to
express our full support for the activities of UNAMA
and to welcome the adoption of resolution 2096 (2013),
which extends its mandate.

Today, Afghanistan is at a critical juncture in
its historical development. We are witnessing the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and the transfer of responsibilities to the
Afghan National Security Forces. We are also witnessing

the implementation of the reconciliation process and of
international agreements on the economic development
of Afghanistan.

However, the situation in a number of provinces
remains unstable. Clearly, NATO must, with the
withdrawal of the military contingent, bring to a logical
conclusion its mission to establish the conditions
necessary for stability, development and security.

The transfer of security responsibilities must
be implemented gradually and systematically, while
maintaining an atmosphere of calm and trust. The
withdrawal ofthe ISAF force cannot be allowed to open
the way to destructive forces or to enable extremist or
terrorist groups to penetrate neighbouring countries;
that is of particular concern to us.

Afghanistan's peaceful development will not be
possible if the problem of opium production in the
country is not eradicated. The spread of that deadly
poison also affects the countries of Central Asia, which
are on the transit route towards the north to countries
of Europe and Asia. We believe that this calls for robust
action in the fight against illicit trafficking in drugs in
Afghanistan.

Efforts to achieve national reconciliation are
among the core conditions for ensuring lasting peace in
Afghanistan. Kyrgyzstan welcomes the activities of the
High Peace Council, chaired by Salahuddin Rabbani,
and believes that the process of reconciliation must be
implemented by Afghans themselves in the interests
of all Afghans. The comprehensive peace process
must be open to all stakeholders in Afghanistan who
are prepared to reject violence, break all ties with
international terrorism and respect the Constitution of
the nation.

An equally important component of political reform
in Afghanistan will be the April 2014 presidential and
legislative elections. The timely finalization of the
electoral law, the resolution of problems related to voter
registration and the establishment of safe conditions
for the holding the elections are critical. Kyrgyzstan
welcomes the resolve of the Afghan authorities to hold
free, fair and transparent elections, in accordance with
national legislation, which can serve as the basis for the
continued stable development of Afghanistan.

Afghanistan's involvement in regional cooperation
and the broadening of trade and economic ties with
neighbouring States is a key condition for the peaceful
development of the country. Kyrgyzstan, as a member
of a number of regional organizations and the current
chair of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, is prepared
to contribute to that process. We believe that it is
important to actively utilize the capacities of regional
organizations in addressing Afghanistan's problems.

I would like to inform the Council that Kyrgyzstan
is planning to hold a round table on Afghanistan in
Bishkek in the near future. In August, we will also
hold a scientific and practical conference on the topic
"Afghanistan 2014: prospects for development in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and challenges and
threats to the security of Central Asia in the context
of the withdrawal of the core contingents of the
International Security Assistance Force". We invite
interested parties to take part in those events.
We support the Istanbul Process and participate
in all the working groups on confidence-building
measures. We are prepared to actively advance issues
relating to the implementation of regional projects
on Afghanistan in the areas of energy, transportation
and agriculture. Kyrgyzstan will play an active role in
the upcoming meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the
parties to the Istanbul Process, which is to be held on
26 April in Almaty.

At the same time, stable development in Afghanistan
requires continued long-term international financial
support for the Government within the framework of
the pledges made at the Tokyo Conference last year.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm the constant support
of Kyrgyzstan for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity ofAfghanistan, as well as our genuine interest
in establishing peace and stability in that brotherly
country.

