Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
am grateful for your initiative, Mr. President, to convene
this ministerial debate at a time when the support of the
international community to the Iraqi authorities and
to the Iraqi people is more crucial than ever. I thank
Nickolay Mladenov, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and for his service
at the helm ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission in
Iraq (UNAMI).

I welcome the presence of Iraqi Minister for Foreign
Affairs Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, whom I had the pleasure of
meeting at the international reconstruction conference
for Iraq in Brussels in 2005 when he was Prime Minister
of Iraq. I would like to thank him for his compelling
and encouraging statement and to assure him of our full
support.

What has happened these past weeks is truly
horrifying. We all have before us the unbearable
images of victims in agony, the bodies of children
lined up, thousands of people trapped, without water
or food, in the desert mountains near Sinjar, and the
unspeakable, barbarous beheading of the two American
journalists, James Foley and Steven Sotloff, and of
British humanitarian worker David Haines.

We have all witnessed the massacres and atrocities
committed against civilian populations by the terrorists
ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) during
the fighting in Fallujah and Ramadi, the assault on
Mosul, the conquests of Zumar, Sinjar and Ta] Afar and
the seizure of Qaraqosh, Iraq's largest Christian city,
which forced hundreds of thousands of Iraqis to flee
their homes.

The violence has reached an inconceivable level,
magnitude and intensity. Children as young as 15, 14
or even 13 years old are compelled by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant to bear arms, arrest civilians
and commit suicide attacks. The jihadists commit war
crimes and crimes against humanity on a daily basis,
including enforced disappearances, torture, sexual
violence and deliberate attacks against schools and
hospitals. An ethnic and religious cleansing campaign is
targeting the minorities in the north of Iraq, especially
the Yezidis, the Christians and the Turkmen.

In the face of those crimes, the extremism of this
terrorist group, which is neither a State nor Islamic and
which seeks to destabilize Iraq and the entire region,
the international community must act. It must take the
necessary measures to help the Iraqi authorities to fight
the scourge of ISIL and to end the suffering it inflicts
on men, women and children in Iraq. We know what
those measures are, because we have debated them
right here, in the United Nations. On 15 August, we
adopted resolution 2170 (2014) to impose sanctions on
ISIL and to cut off its sources of financing. Next week,
in the framework of a global anti-terrorist strategy, we
will adopt a new resolution to counter the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters.

It goes without saying that we must also take
security measures to counter and defeat the terrorist
threat. We support the commitment of the coalition
launched by the United States at the request of the Iraqi
authorities and with the active support of the countries
of the region. We must also step up our efforts in terms
of humanitarian assistance and for the protection of
civilians. We must enhance the work of the United
Nations to halt the suffering of the Iraqi people. For
its part, Luxembourg is providing financial support
to the World Food Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
help displaced persons.

We believe that the improvement of the security
situation will first and foremost depend on the progress
achieved in the political sphere. The roots ofthe conflict
will not be eradicated by force. In that regard, we
welcome the inauguration of the new Iraqi Government
of national unity, under the authority of Prime Minister
Al-Abadi. It is now a matter of urgency to restart
the national dialogue and the national reconciliation
process, which are essential conditions for a return to
peace and social order. Only balanced development
that benefits all the ethnic and religious communities
in the country will be able eliminate the root causes of
injustice, violence and terrorism.

Arab culture and civilization is being violated.
Islam is being perverted from its philosophy ofpeace by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It is essential
that religious leaders continue to weigh in and promote
the values and humanism of Islam.

Allow me to also highlight the mention made
in passing, which is nevertheless important, of the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran.
Indeed, Iran can and must play a positive role in the
fight against extremism, whether in Iraq or Syria.

To conclude, I would like to pay tribute to
the exemplary work done by the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and the International Committee
of the Red Cross and their personnel on the ground. I
commend also the crucial activities ofthe United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq in terms of mediation and
the promotion of respect for human rights, especially
for people in detention and the protection of children's
rights. I can assure the Council that Luxembourg,
both bilaterally and through the European Union, will
continue to support the consolidation of the rule of law
in Iraq in order to contribute to full respect for human
rights.

