Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to address the Council today. Given
the hour, I will somewhat reduce the length of my
printed statement.

However, I would like to begin, as other have
done, by extending the condolences of my delegation
to the delegation, Government and people of Japan.
They are going through a very difficult time, but we
know that they will recover from this period because
that is who they are.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for
his presentation, and to commend the Special
Representative and head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for the important work he is
doing in partnership with the Government of
Afghanistan. Australia welcomes the opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to international efforts in
Afghanistan and supports the renewed UNAMA
mandate for a further 12 months.

11-2662]
This discussion takes place at an important time
for the partnership between the international
community and the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. Next week, the President of
Afghanistan, Hamid Karzai, we understand is due to
announce the first provinces to begin the transition of
responsibility for security to Afghan leadership. This
announcement will mark the beginning of a process to
fulfil President Karzai's goal for the Afghan National
Security Forces to take the lead in conducting security
operations across Afghanistan by the end of 2014. This
is a goal which the international community fully
supports, and 2011 is the lynch pin of that goal.

At the December debate on Afghanistan (see S/PV.6464), we welcomed the release of the final
results of the Wolesi Jirga elections. The National
Assembly performs a vital role within Afghanistan's
system of governance. Since that time, we have been
pleased to see the election of a Speaker to the Wolesi
Jirga, who we understand has made an excellent start in
his work. We note that further investigations into the
September 2010 parliamentary elections have been
referred to a special tribunal. It is vital that, if any
further investigations are pursued, they be in full
accordance with the Afghan Constitution and other
relevant Afghan laws.

The continued development of democratic
institutions based on the rule of law and the separation
of powers is crucial to a stable Afghanistan. We
encourage President Karzai and all who serve in the
Afghan Government as they work to continue to
rebuild their country and to strengthen the foundations
of sustainable peace and constitutional democracy.

Strengthening Afghan governance and
development will be critical to sustainable, irreversible
transition. The United Nations has a key role in the
international civilian effort to enable greater Afghan
capacity and leadership in support of transition,
including in responding to requests by the Afghan
authorities for support to the electoral process.

We have come a long way down that path, but
there is still a long way to go. Reconciliation and
reintegration are a part of Afghanistan's future, and
these processes must be Afghan-owned and led.
UNAMA is providing essential support to the Afghan
Government's efforts. For example, UNAMA's
logistical support, via the Salaam Support Group, has
enabled the High Peace Council to undertake an active
programme of regional and provincial visits. These
visits are improving local and regional support for
reconciliation and reintegration processes.

Afghanistan's neighbours and regional partners,
from whom we have just heard, play an important role
in supporting the reconciliation process. Australia
commends the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to promote regional engagement
in accordance with UNAMA's mandate.

I would like to briefly draw on Australia's
engagement in Afghanistan in the period since we last
addressed the Council on this issue.

As the Council knows, Australia is the tenth-
largest contributor of troops to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the largest non-
NATO troop contributor overall. Two weeks ago, my
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Kevin Rudd, visited
Afghanistan. His trip was focused on Kabul and on
Uruzgan province, where Australia is engaged as part
of the ISAF-flagged Combined Team-Uruzgan. Mr.
Rudd visited Australian soldiers and civilians working
in Tarin Kowt, in Uruzgan province, and saw first-hand
the positive effects of the international community's
efforts. To quote the Minister, there is "clear evidence
of progress being made in our mission". That is what
we believe.

We are also seeing progress in our development
and governance efforts. Australia will deliver
$123.1 million in development assistance to
Afghanistan this fiscal year, with the Australian
Agency for International Development's country
programme growing by 50 per cent, to $106 million.
During 2010, Australia tripled its civilian capacity in
Afghanistan to some 50 people. An Australian civilian
leads the provincial reconstruction team in Uruzgan,
where we are seeing slow but steady progress in
improving standards of governance and development.

It is heartening to see discussion of Afghanistan's
prospects for increased trade and investment. I refer in
this instance in particular to the Afghanistan
International Investment Conference, hosted by the
United Arab Emirates late in 2010, which was attended
by my Minister for Foreign Affairs. Improving the
economic well-being of Afghanistan is key to
improving the livelihoods of Afghans and, in turn, their
prospects for a safe and stable society.
Australia's engagement is but one example of the
international community's long-term commitment to
Afghanistan.

I would like to take a moment to remember those
civilians who have been killed or wounded in
Afghanistan since 2001. I refer to the recent report by
UNAMA and the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission, which urges all parties involved in
the armed conflict in Afghanistan to strengthen their
efforts to protect Afghan civilians.

Finally, I also take this moment to acknowledge
the dedication and sacrifice of UNAMA personnel
working in Afghanistan. Australia supports all efforts
to ensure that those who work in support of
Afghanistan's future are able to do so with the security
necessary to complete their challenging tasks.

