Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I want to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for their remarks and the updates regarding the latest developments in the Sudan. I would also like to welcome the progress made on the ground since the Security Council met in June (see S/2020/496) to authorize the creation of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). The United States commends the efforts of the civilian-led transitional Government, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation Army- Minni Minawi faction to reach an agreement that, if upheld an earnest and in a spirit of peace, reconciliation and development, could usher in a new era throughout the Sudan. It is now up to the parties to implement the agreement transparently and in a timely manner. We strongly believe the agreement can bring long- term peace, justice and stability to those who have endured cycles of widespread violence and been victims of atrocities committed with impunity. The next steps will not be easy but the United States is committed to supporting this agreement because we believe it can serve as a foundation for a new just and democratic Sudan. Similarly, the United States welcomes the declaration of principles recently agreed to by the civilian-led transitional Government and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North. We _ urge the parties to begin discussions based on_ those principles soon. The Juba peace agreement and the Addis Ababa declaration of principles build upon the tremendous momentum in the Sudan that began in late 2018 and early 2019 to achieve peace, freedom and justice, as well as equal rights and opportunities for all Sudanese. We call on the Sudanese Liberation Movement, led by Abdul Wahid, to without delay engage the civilian-led transitional Government to further the cause of peace. Comprehensive peace will need an _ inclusive and harmonized peace process. Now more than ever, UNITAMS is needed to support the Sudanese people, and we commend the efforts of the United Nations to lay the groundwork for an effective United Nations presence in the Sudan. We hope that, despite the delays in identifying a Special Representative of the Secretary- General, the United Nations will move quickly to hire and deploy UNITAMS personnel. The United States strongly believes that UNITAMS will be able to fulfil its mandate to support the political transition and peace process, assist peacebuilding, development and humanitarian assistance efforts and provide critical assistance for security sector reform, police training, the rule of law and inclusive civilian governance. At the same time, we are deeply concerned with the lack of accountability for recent violence in Darfur and other conflict-affected areas. We note the Sudan's steps to respond to this violence, including through developing its protection of civilians plan, the appointment of civilian governors and the deployment of a joint force. However, local authorities and the civilian-led transitional Government must do more to prevent further militia attacks on civilians, including internally displaced persons, and to hold those responsible for the horrific violence at Masteri and elsewhere. We urge the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and other United Nations agencies to continue to coordinate to protect civilians. The violence, which left hundreds dead and thousands displaced, is a reminder to us all that the protection of civilians must always be at the forefront of our deliberations and decisions with respect to the Sudan, including during our upcoming discussions on the future of UNAMID.
