The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Namibia.

Like other speakers before me, I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Prendergast for the excellent and
comprehensive briefing he has provided to us. It certainly
is timely, and it will assist the Council in doing its work
in terms of its overall mandate. I would also like to take
this opportunity to wish Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi a
speedy recovery.

The continuing war in Afghanistan, and, indeed, its
escalation, remains a very serious concern to my
delegation. We are in particular appalled by the long and
persistent suffering of the civilian population.

The recent reports about the dramatic deterioration
of the humanitarian situation because of the war should
convince the warring parties to cease hostilities
immediately and to return to the negotiating table under
the auspices of the United Nations. We find the reports
about forced displacements of civilians and the continuing
human rights abuses of women and children particularly
disturbing and call on those responsible to immediately
cease these practices and to adhere to international norms
in this sphere.

My delegation does not believe that the Afghan
problem can be comprehensively solved through military

 

means. In this regard, we agree that a permanent solution
and lasting peace can be achieved only through the
resumption of negotiations in order to resolve issues of
contention and by the adoption of a broad based and fully
representative government acceptable to all the people of
Afghanistan.

We therefore commend the work of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Brahimi, and the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, to achieve
peace and to facilitate national reconciliation and
reconstruction. To assist these efforts, the "six plus two"
group should be encouraged to reinvigorate their efforts to
find a common approach towards a settlement of the
Afghan conflict. In fulfilling this role, it has also become
necessary for the group to dispel the recent doubts raised as
to its relevance in the Afghan peace efforts. In this regard,
it is essential that the commitments of the recently
concluded Tashkent Declaration be implemented fully.

Finally, my delegation remains committed, together
with the rest of the international community, to implement
whatever means are necessary to assist the peace process in
Afghanistan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Finland. I invite her to take a seat at the
Council table and to make her statement.

