Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, it is my pleasure to extend
my congratulations to you, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I must also express our
appreciation to Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian
Federation for his successful leadership of the Council's
deliberations last month.

First, merely because two persons were suspected,
without any evidence, in connection with an incident that
took place many years ago and that did not threaten
international peace and security, the Security Council
adopted resolution 731 (1992) in clear contravention of
paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter, as well as of
Articles 32, 33 and 36.

Second, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya immediately
lodged a protest with the International Court of Justice in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

Third, the Security Council thereafter adopted
resolution 748 (1992) and then resolution 883 (1993),
which imposed an embargo on Libya, under Chapter VII
of the Charter, but in contravention of the Charter, and on
the basis of resolution 731 (1992), which is also in
contravention of the Charter.

Fourth, there have been many developments
regarding this matter over the past seven years. Libya has
continued to suffer from an embargo based on the law of
the jungle instead of on legitimate legal authority.

Fifth, as the international community sees the justice
of Libya's case, and since it cares enough about the
United Nations to prevent the Security Council from
being used for political purposes, particularly given the
absence of a balance within the Organization during this
decade - regional organizations put forward a number of
proposals and undertook a number of initiatives during
the past seven years. Those proposals and initiatives,

 
however, were completely disregarded by the other two
parties to the dispute.

Sixth, in the face of that disregard, regional and
international organizations have been compelled to develop
their positions, urging the Security Council - which under
the Charter acts on behalf of the international community
- to impose its will. On 27 February 1998 the
International Court of Justice issued a judgment against the
United States of America and Great Britain, reasserting its
jurisdiction over the case on the basis of the 1971 Montreal
Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie,
and rejecting the appeal put forward by the two other States
contesting that jurisdiction. Strong support for the Libyan
position was expressed by the international community
during the plenary meeting of the Security Council on 20
March 1998. Despite the complete disregard of all the
proposals, initiatives and appeals it had made over the past
few years, the Organization of African Unity issued a
declaration in Ouagadougou. The ministerial summit of the
Non-Aligned Movement held in Cartagena made a
recommendation on the issue.

Seventh, after all that time, in View of those
developments, the other side finally stated that it would
agree to a trial being held in a third country. Three days
ago, on Monday, 24 August, a draft resolution was placed
before the Security Council. On Wednesday, the draft was
formally introduced in the Council, and a vote was
requested for today.

Eighth, Libya received the text of the letter to the
Secretary-General from the other parties and the
accompanying documents on the evening of Monday, 24
August, three days ago. It was asked to express its
agreement even before those documents were translated into
Arabic.

Ninth, Libya and the international community had
been waiting for years for responses to their proposals.
When the other side finally agreed to our proposal last
Monday, it added a number of legal documents to it and
expected my country, the Security Council and the
international community to agree within hours to what had
been delayed for many years.

Tenth, on the basis of our experience with the other
side - experience going back well before this dispute -
we have had substantive fears ever since the declaration
made in The Guardian on 21 July 1998, which was
followed by formal declarations on the issue. We do not
say this today only. We said it that same week to the

 
President of the Security Council for July, Ambassador
Lavrov, and we said it to all the members of the Security
Council, with whom we requested a meeting and did meet
during that period. We said the same thing to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan during a meeting held for that
purpose alone. We also expressed this position in our
letter to the members of the Security Council and the
members of the five-, six- and seven-member committees
created by the Organization of African Unity, the Non-
Aligned Movement and the Arab League on the subject.
That letter expressed our major fears and concerns
pertaining to the Lockerbie issue. The United States and
the United Kingdom have expressed their official position
pertaining to the trial of the two suspects in The Hague;
however, the following comments are very important in
judging the seriousness of their commitment to justice.

Our major fears and concerns in connection with this
issue have to do with the Ouagadougou proposals that
were put aside, the Non-Aligned Movement summit in
South Africa, maintaining sanctions and alienating the
international community and regional organizations from
Libya.

The acceptance of a trial in a neutral country means
that judicial authorities in that country are empowered to
hold the trial because it is on a pure, technical legal issue.
In addition to the law and judges, there are many other
very complicated, detailed issues that must be taken up
from a strictly judicial point of view. The rights of the
two suspects must be maintained and defended at all
times. The two States concerned must arrange for
extradition. Investigation and trial procedures and judicial
background must be set forth. In the case of acquittal or
conviction, what are the responsibilities of the two
parties? There are yet other technical issues, and all the
judicial authorities in the countries concerned need to
come to agreement about these matters.

Further, the sanctions must be lifted or suspended at
least. No text of any Security Council resolution mentions
extraditing suspects to judicial authorities. Who is
responsible for such an extradition, and what are the
judicial procedures for it? Regional organizations,
particularly the Organization of African Unity and the
League of Arab States - the originators of various
proposals - must play an essential role in the subsequent
steps as well as witness all procedures. Finally, the
organizations concerned must maintain their positions in
order for the two suspects to be tried and sanctions to be
lifted. That is what we said last month before expressing
our formal position.

 
When expressing those concerns, and before the other
party in the dispute had expressed its formal position, it
was the intention of my country, as we repeatedly said at
the time to the presidency and members of the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General, to avoid any
difficulties or obstacles that would complicate the issue and
return it to the starting point. Our concerns were serious
and legitimate.

To insist on placing all the parties in a difficult
situation, and to impose a requirement for acceptance
within hours - despite the fact that there is surely a need
for all to have adequate time to examine all the legal
documents, which are very complicated - merely adds to
both our past and present doubts. The other party suspended
consideration in the Security Council of the two judgments
made by the International Court of Justice under the pretext
that it required sufficient time for experts to look into the
two judgments. The same argument applies today.

In the light of what I have said, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya would like to make several comments before the
Security Council. First, we welcome the acceptance by the
United States of America and the United Kingdom of the
proposals already made by the League of Arab States and
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and supported by
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and the
Non-Aligned Movement more than four years ago. We
believe that this acceptance is a positive step likely to result
in a satisfactory and just solution for all to this long-
standing dispute - a dispute from which our people, as
well as the families of the victims, have suffered.

Secondly, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya accepts that the
two suspects should be tried in a Scottish court in the
Netherlands by Scottish judges, according to Scots law. We
reaffirm this position today; we have already stated it, as
has been officially recorded in the Security Council. This
is a serious, irreversible position. We hope that the other
party is also serious in its position. There is still an
important issue that must be formally reaffirmed before the
Security Council - an issue we have taken up with the
Council and with the Secretary-General many times. From
today, the issue will return to its original status as a strictly
legal matter.

The judicial authorities in the two other countries
considered the legal aspect of all the documents
accompanying the letter from the two States to the
Secretary-General, and this was reaffirmed in the statements
made by various officials, particularly the statement made
a few weeks ago by Ms. Reno, the Attorney-General of the

 
United States of America. Likewise, the Libyan judicial
authorities now have the duty and right to consider the
different procedural and legal issues pertaining to the
different arrangements and judicial aspects. For our part,
we are prepared to undertake such considerations either
directly with the judicial authorities of the States
concerned or through the Secretary-General.

We look forward to closing the entire file on this
matter. Libya has proved its seriousness and flexibility
throughout every stage. We reaffirm to the Council that
we shall remain serious and practical during the next
stage.

I should like to make several cements about the
draft resolution before the Security Council, in order to
underline our seriousness and our legitimate concerns.
The language of the draft resolution gives legitimacy to
our concerns. By recalling previous Security Council
resolutions, the first preambular paragraph gives the
impression that the resolutions have been implemented
neither in part nor in their entirety, although my country
has fully responded to those resolutions. By referring to
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, the fifth
preambular paragraph again places the issue outside its
proper context, especially since the intervention of the
Security Council in this matter may be considered
procedural, taking into account the judgment of the
International Court of Justice.

Operative paragraph 1 of the resolution demands
once again that the Libyan Government immediately
comply with resolutions 731 (1992), 748 (1992) and 883
(1993) and makes no mention at all of Libya's actions in
the field of terrorism: its cooperation with the United
Kingdom on relations with the Irish Republican Army;
the denunciation and condemnation of terrorism; the
demand for the dispatch of an international commission
to ascertain that Libyan territory does not have any
terrorist training camps; the call for the convening of an
international conference on terrorism; and judicial
cooperation with France to bring to a close an
international issue through an investigative judge who
expressed his satisfaction for this cooperation in a letter
to the Foreign Minister of his country.

Operative paragraph 2 welcomes the letter from the
representatives of the United Kingdom and the United
States, and also refers to arrangements that took place
between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, in
which Libya did not participate. Paragraph 3 calls on the
Governments of the Netherlands and the United Kingdom

 
to undertake the necessary measures to implement the
initiative, without mentioning the United States of America,
which might therefore consider that it has not committed
itself to any agreement between the Netherlands and the
United Kingdom.

Paragraph 4 decides that Libya shall ensure the
appearance in the Netherlands of the two accused for the
purpose of trial and that it shall present any evidence or
witnesses; but it does not provide for any assurances or
special arrangements with regard to the two accused or the
witnesses.

Paragraph 5 requests the Secretary-General to assist
Libya with transferring the two accused from Libya to the
Netherlands. However, there are no guarantees or
arrangements pertaining to the period of the trial itself.

Paragraph 6 does not set out the tasks of the
international observers, state how many of them there
should be or mention the effect that their views may have
on the trial. Paragraph 7 does not mention Libya or any
arrangements with the Netherlands on transferring the two
accused; it does not mention their safety or residence or
provide any guarantees to them. Paragraph 8 refers to the
appearance of the two accused before an appropriate court
in the United Kingdom or the United States at any time.
While the United States is not party to the agreement with
the Netherlands, article 16 (2) of the agreement does
provide for the possibility of extraditing the two accused to
the United Kingdom.

Paragraph 9 pertains to additional measures that may
be undertaken; this is particularly worrying, as no dialogue
or consultations have taken place with Libya to date.

In conclusion, my country reaffirms its seriousness and
eagerness to close this file and open a new page in its
relations with the United States and the United Kingdom,
based on mutual respect, non-interference in internal affairs,
and dialogue and mutual benefit, instead of embargo. We
hope that the other party will now show the same
eagerness, desire and earnest.

We salute the international community and thank it for
its consistent and ongoing support. In particular, we thank
the international and regional organizations, especially the
League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-
Aligned Movement and all its members, as well as all the
States and organizations that supported us within and
outside the Security Council.

 
We thank you, Mr. President, and the members of
the Security Council for this opportunity to convey our
position and concerns before the Council. In particular,
we thank and salute the members of the Security Council
that stood by my country in its legitimate stance against
injustice and offer them our wholehearted gratitude.

We cannot fail to convey our thanks and
appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
continuing efforts to find a solution to this issue. We
reaffirm the importance of his role and reiterate our
readiness to cooperate with him in seeking appropriate
and practical means to close the file under consideration.

