Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this
exchange of views on issues related to resolution 1540
(2004) on this, the tenth anniversary of its adoption.

In 2007, three years after the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004), South Africa affirmed the fundamental
principle underlying security from weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) - that as long as such weapons
exist, the world will always be threatened by a weapons-
of-mass-destruction catastrophe. Today, 10 years after
that adoption, South Africa seeks to remind all States
that there are no safe hands for these weapons. We
also remain of the View that the challenges facing the
international community in the area of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems can be effectively
addressed only through inclusive multilateralism and
reinvigoration of the relevant multilateral instruments
and organizations. The relevant international regimes
provide a clear recognition of the inextricable link
between disarmament and non-proliferation, and set
out the obligations of those possessing such weapons
concerning their elimination, while upholding the right
of all States to the peaceful use of relevant technologies.
The threat posed by these weapons to international
peace and security cannot be eliminated through
non-proliferation measures alone.

South Africa submitted its first report on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on
31 January 2005. This and subsequent reports
included a comprehensive overview of South Africa's
domestic legislation relevant to the control of material,
equipment and technology related to weapons of mass
destruction. While we are proud of our control system,
we realize that no system is foolproof or can be static
in a world of rapid technological advances. Reviewing
and implementing additional measures is therefore an
ongoing process. At the same time, we recognize that
such measures should under no circumstances impose
any unwarranted restrictions on the inalienable right of
States to utilize material, equipment and technology for
peaceful purposes.

One of the primary requirements of resolution 1540
(2004) is the submission of national reports. Given the
challenges that have been experienced in this regard,
in resolution 1977 (2011) the Security Council called
on all States that had not yet submitted a first report
to the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) on steps they had taken, or intended to
take, to implement resolution 1540 (2004), to do so.
In the past three years, South Africa has played its
part in facilitating progress towards the resolution's
implementation, including by chairing the 1540
Committee, during our non-permanent membership
of the Council. In 2012 and 2013, South Africa hosted
and participated in workshops in Pretoria and Addis
Ababa on the implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004).
This year we hosted another workshop in Pretoria,
following Gabon's successful hosting of a similar
event for French-speaking African countries in March.
Another workshop is planned for Portuguese-speaking
countries, to be held in Togo in June. Those efforts were
all geared towards helping African States to meet their
reporting obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).

Although no African State possesses these
weapons and most do not export or produce material
and equipment that fall within the scope of resolution
1540 (2004), South Africa recognizes that any State
could potentially be used as a point of transit or
trans-shipment of goods that could be intended for
non-State actors. However, it should be noted that there
exists little incentive for such States, some of which
are underresourced and overburdened in other areas
of their development, to commit to onerous reporting
standards. States should therefore identify any gaps
they may have in their domestic controls and call on
relevant international expertise if required.

In this regard, it is important to note and respect
the domestic legislation already in place in countries
that effectively regulates all items related to weapons
of mass destruction in accordance with their own
particular circumstances. It is also important that
in countries where such legislation is lacking, best
practices can be drawn upon to empower them to
take sovereign control of WMD non-proliferation, in
conformity with their domestic legislation and in the
interests of their development.

South Africa notes that there are regional and
subregional efforts to implement resolution 1540
(2004) and that activities have taken place within
the Caribbean Community, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Central
American Integration System. In that regard, South
Africa welcomed the submission, in August 2011,
of the African Union Commission's point of contact
for resolution 1540 (2004) and of the Commission's
statement on 1 May 2014 reiterating the Commission's
commitment to the implementation of the resolution on
the continent.

South Africa continues to support the African
Union's mandate as the primary international
organization with the authority to oversee such matters
on the continent.

