Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
congratulate the delegation of France through you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June. I also thank Judge Theodor Meron,
Judge Carmel Agius and Chief Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their respective briefings.

As we reflect on the milestone achieved last year
with the closure of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), it is with satisfaction that we
recognize that the 93 individuals indicted for genocide
by the ICTR were the primary masterminds of that
crime, in addition to the national and local leaders who
were beyond the reach of Rwandan justice, as they were
international fugitives. The Tribunal represents an
immense contribution to the jurisprudence of the crime
of genocide and to post-genocide reconciliation and
healing in Rwanda.

It is regrettable, however, that eight ICTR indicted
fugitives, as well as other suspects on whom we have
ample and undisputable evidence, remain at large. We
reiterate our call on all Member States, especially those
still harbouring fugitives responsible for genocide, to
honour their moral and legal obligations to the Charter
of the United Nations and the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
There is no legal justification whatsoever for the fact
that those individuals have neither been tried nor
sent to where they can be tried. Our collective efforts
should be focused on ensuring that every suspect
must have his or her day in court at the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, in the
countries where they now are or extradited and tried
in Rwanda's specialized international crimes chamber
of the High Court. Rwanda will not rest until each one
of them has been tried. We owe that to the millions of
victims and countless survivors. It is our hope that the
Chief Prosecutor's clear commitment and willingness
to engage fellow prosecutors in national capitals
harbouring those fugitives will lead to eventual arrests,
extraditions and trials.

We remain extremely concerned at the delays
encountered in the investigations and proceedings in the
case against Laurent Bucyibaruta. Equally important
is the trial of Octavian Ngenzi and Tito Barahira in
the Paris Criminal Court. It must be expedited and
conducted in an impartial and independent atmosphere.
In addition, we remain extremely concerned by last
year's decision of the French prosecution to drop
charges against Father Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, a
decision that contradicts the nature and scale of the
crimes committed in the light of available evidence.
On our part, we continue to meet our obligation with
regard to cases referred to Rwanda, including the recent
conviction of Jean Uwinkindi for genocide and crimes
against humanity.
Allow me to return to the issue ofthe ICTR archives,
which is an important matter to the Government of
Rwanda and its people. The ICTR archives are the
most comprehensive account of the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi. It is our painful history - a piece
of history that Rwandans will never stop demanding
for relocation to Rwanda. The primary beneficiary
should first and foremost be the people concerned as
the sole proprietors of such history. We recognize that
they are United Nations property, but there should
be no ambiguity in our understanding of the matter.
Those archives should be relocated to Rwanda upon the
completion of the Mechanism's mandate. The presence
of the ICTR archives in Rwanda would continue to
be a reminder to Rwandans of what happened in our
country and to preserve the country's historical records
of that particularly catastrophic occurrence. It is of the
utmost importance that we preserve them for future
generations and that the archives act as a tribute to
those who suffered.

In conclusion, let me also concur with the Chief
Prosecutor on the danger of genocide ideology and
denial. Such a danger, as we witnessed in 1994, is that
the genocide does not occur in a vacuum but is planned
and executed. It starts with an ideology and grows in
phases. That is why, when we have men and women
out there who still engage in genocide ideology, it calls
on all of us to embody the responsibility to educate
young generations and to fight anyattempts to further
dehumanize the survivors. Equally, the fact that we
have men and women out there who still engage in
ethnic division and who use it as their only stepping
stone for political relevance should serve as a call on all
of us to collectively assume responsibility to do what it
takes to uproot this evil through education, cooperation
and legislation.

