Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting the European Union (EU) to
participate in today's debate on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and, in
particular, on its future role.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

We have listened very carefully to the important
statements made by His Excellency Prime Minister
Bellerive and by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet.

Allow me first of all to pay solemn tribute to the
United Nations personnel in Haiti and, in particular, to
MINUSTAH staff, who unfortunately paid a all too
heavy price as a result of the earthquake of 12 January,
which devastated the country. I would like once again
to express my most sincere condolences to the families
of the victims and to the Government and the people of
Haiti.

Allow me also to congratulate Mr. Edmond Mulet
on his recent appointment as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti. I also wish to very
warmly thank him for the essential work he is doing. I
should also like to thank United Nations Special Envoy
Bill Clinton and his team for their equally outstanding
work.

Whether through its military component, clearing
rubble and opening up primary roadways, or through
its police component, supporting the Haitian National
Police - or in other areas such as justice, prisons,

human rights, protecting displaced persons, especially
women and children, in particular against sexual
violence, and awareness-raising campaigns -
MINUSTAH, working in close cooperation with the
Government of Haiti and other stakeholders on the
ground, has played a crucial role in ensuring stability,
security and social order under very difficult
circumstances.

At the New York donors conference on 31 March,
the Government of Haiti and the international
community committed themselves to the long-term
reconstruction of Haiti. We therefore meet today to
consider the role to be played by MINUSTAH in the
light of the recommendations made by the Secretary-
General in his report of 22 April (S/2010/200).

The EU welcomes the integrated approach
adopted by the United Nations, as set out in the report
of the Secretary-General, in the five areas proposed,
namely, political stability and elections; support for
humanitarian and reconstruction efforts; security,
human rights and the rule of law; State capacity and
decentralization; and human development. The
European Union also underscores the authority of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General over
all United Nations activities. Alongside United Nations
agencies, MINUSTAH has an essential role to play in
that approach. The EU hopes that MINUSTAH will be
provided with the means it needs to effectively
implement its mandate of responding to the country's
immediate needs, in particular in the areas of elections
and security.

However, we must take a more expansive view.
The Action Plan presented to us by the Government of
Haiti at the 31 March conference covers a span of 10
years. Our challenge is therefore to find the best
balance between the immediate priorities identified in
the report of the Secretary-General and the medium-
and long-term priorities set out in the Action Plan, so
as to build together a real future for the Haitian people.
In this way, and as the capacities of the Haitian
Government develop, we need to reexamine the tasks
of MINUSTAH so as to guarantee a gradual and
realistic transfer of responsibilities.

After the earthquake, the European Union
responded immediately to the appeals by the Secretary-
General and to the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 1908 (2010) aimed at strengthening
MINUSTAH by deploying troops and logistical
support, including helicopters, engineers and medical
supplies and personnel. At present, there are still many
troops from several European Union member States on
the ground, working in close cooperation with
MINUSTAH. Here, I wish to pay tribute to the four
Spanish soldiers who lost their lives in a helicopter
accident 12 days ago.

The EU, together with other actors, contributed to
the post-disaster needs assessment used in the
development of the Action Plan. On 31 March, during
the international conference in New York, the EU
announced one of the most significant contributions of
all of the donors present, totalling €1.235 billion.
Today, the EU is ready to continue working closely
with the Haitian Government, the United Nations
family and the main stakeholders to translate these
promises into a tangible reality.

In conclusion, the Haitian people need us, and we
need to be there by their side. But the Haitian people
are aware that it is up to them and to them alone to
chart and travel the path to their nation's future. The
country belongs to them, and the role of the
international community is to support them in building
back better for the future.

