Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): There were important developments
for the process of implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan during the period under review. We see as
positive the recent meeting between President Kiir
and Rick Machar, in which pending issues relating
to the formation of the transitional Government were
addressed. The commitment of both leaders to meet
regularly and participate in mediation efforts with
non-signatory rebel groups is an important step in
building trust towards lasting peace.

We hope that the mid-November date set for the
formation of the Government will be honoured, and
we urge the parties to resolve the critical matters
still pending, including the delimitation of states and
the cantonment and redeployment of combatants.
In that regard, we welcome the initiatives of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
international actors, which have allowed the peace
agreement to survive and created opportunities for
dialogue to make progress on pending issues.

Unfortunately, this very situation continues to be
threatened by unresolved cycles of violence, access
restraints on humanitarian personnel and the staff of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as
well as delays in the granting ofvisas. The parties to the
conflict must allow unhindered access to humanitarian
personnel, and the Government must expedite the visa-
issuance process.

We are concerned at the seriousness of the
humanitarian situation. The number of people facing
food shortages is higher than ever: 54 per cent of the
population is in a situation of severe food insecurity and
an estimated 1.3 million children will experience acute
malnutrition by 2020. This insecurity is exacerbated by
the effects of climate change and floods in some areas
of the country. It is crucial that we reduce violence
and improve agricultural activities, which would allow
displaced people to return to their livelihoods.

Beyond the political and humanitarian crisis, we
are concerned about the vulnerability of the civilian
population, especially children and women. Continuous
reports of sexual violence by the parties to the conflict
are unacceptable, as are those of the recruitment and
use of children. We call on the Government to establish
a process to hold perpetrators responsible, and we
advocate that comprehensive services be provided to
survivors of sexual violence. We also call for the setting
up of mobile courts and the deployment of prosecutors
in areas with insufficient prosecution capacity
to continue.

In that regard, we commend Rick Machar's
endorsement ofthe action plan on conflict-related sexual
violence, which envisages that concrete measures be
implemented, as well as his orders to his commanders to
form committees to investigate acts of sexual violence
and to release girls and women held against their will.
We hope that those orders will be implemented and
replicated in other parts of the country.

It is imperative that the momentum be used
to strengthen political will and that reconciliation
and peacebuilding efforts be stepped up, with the
participation of women and young people.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our support and
appreciation to UNMISS personnel and to the agencies
present on the ground for their efforts to achieve the
peace that the people of South Sudan so desire. It is
a long road. Crucial issues remain to be resolved, for
which the commitment of the political leaders and the
support of the international community are necessary.

