Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
your delegation, Madam President, for organizing
this important debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General
Herve Ladsous, High Commissioner for Human Rights
Navanethem Pillay and Director-General Yves Daccord
for their respective briefings.

As the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) for this
debate highlights, this year marks the fifteenth
anniversary of the Security Council's engagement on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, following
the landmark adoption of resolution 1265 (1999). Since
then, the international community, in particular the
United Nations, has adopted an array of strategies to
improve and implement the protection mandates. Also
over the past 15 years, the Secretary-General has put
forward more than 100 recommendations to the Security
Council in his successive reports on the protection of
civilians. The Council has taken many steps, both in
country-specific decisions and thematic resolutions, to
improve the protection of civilians on the ground.

The combination of that normative framework and
the continuing development of mission-wide protection
of civilian strategies has led to significant improvement
in the United Nations ability to conceptualize and
implement effective protection mandates. However,
significant work remains to ensure effective
implementation on the ground.
Challenges faced in the implementation of the
United Nations protection mandates can easily be
identified in cases such as those of South Sudan, where
the recent lapse into conflict cost thousands ofinnocent
lives.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations has been conducting peace operations
since 1999 through the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but violence
against civilians by the national army and by dozens
of armed groups, including the Forces democratiques
de libe'ration du Rwanda - a movement that includes
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi and
Rwanda - have continued unabated.

In the case of Syria, more than 130,000 people have
been killed, while the Security Council has failed to
act to protect innocent people - even failing to speak
with one voice with regard to access to humanitarian
assistance.

In the Central African Republic, where even with
clear warnings of imminent danger people were lynched
and killed before our eyes, we hope that the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, supported by French and, soon, by European
forces, will succeed in protecting civilians.

In any case, all those situations prove that there are
still gaps in the United Nations protection mandates
since the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, 20
years ago.

As the concept note puts it, the experience of the
past 15 years offers many challenges and opportunities
for modern peacekeeping operations with protection-of-
civilians mandates. We believe that such protection
can be achieved only through the concerted efforts
of integrated civil, military and police components
with peacekeeping operations. Those efforts take into
account the special protection needs of women and
children through the deployment of senior women and
children protection advisers.

We believe that the failure to protect civilians on
the ground begins at the earliest stages of planning. A
failure to match a peacekeeping mission's mandates,
strategies, structures and resources with the situation
facing civilians on the ground may not lead to desired
results. That is why we think that the success of any
peacekeeping operation requires enhanced cooperation
and better coordination between the Security Council
and other United Nations bodies and agencies, including
the Peacebuilding Commission. Such collaboration
is even more critical when it comes to the host State,
which retains the primary responsibility for the
protection of its citizens, as well as with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations on the basis of
their respective comparative advantage.

As one of the major troop- and police-contributing
countries to peacekeeping missions, Rwanda believes
that the Security Council and the Secretariat should build
upon the recent positive trend of holding consultations
with troop-contributing countries to seek their advice
and participation at the beginning of mission planning.

I should like to take this opportunity to again
commend troop-contributing countries that have
provided personnel in difficult and dangerous
environments to fulfil the protection-of-civilians
requirements in various peacekeeping missions around
the world.

The best way to protect civilians is to prevent
imminent conflicts from breaking out in the first place.
The prevention of conflicts requires political will by
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, which should renew its commitment to the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,
as recalled by resolution 1894 (2009).

In the same vein, as Rwanda commemorates this
year the twentieth anniversary of the genocide against
the Tutsi, we urge the five permanent members of the
Council to agree on a moral pact of conduct aimed at
refraining from using the veto in situations of genocide
and other mass atrocities. We thank France for its
important initiative in that respect.

In conclusion, Rwanda is grateful for the efforts
deployed by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in close consultation with the
Security Council and other relevant United Nations
entities to develop and update the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians. We believe that this document,
as recognized by presidential statement S/PRST/2014/3,
which was just adopted, is an important tool at the
disposal of the Security Council for identifying the key
protection of civilians concerned in armed conflict,
based on the Council's own experience.

