Ms. Rasi (Finland): It is a great pleasure for me to
see you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council today
when the Council is debating this very important issue. I
was very encouraged when you said that you would
continue to work for the world's children during your
forthcoming presidency of the General Assembly. You
have our full support in this.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of
the European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.

In our days, the victims of armed conflicts are
overwhelmingly civilians rather than soldiers. Civilian
populations are increasingly used as battle-tools, shields
and targets. Among civilians, children are particularly
vulnerable. It is unacceptable that children should be
among the principal victims of violent conflict and should
furthermore be directly exploited to serve the interests of
warring parties.

Recent studies, including that of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), have shown that the use of
child soldiers is increasing. Several hundred thousand
have participated as combatants in recent armed conflicts.
Child soldiers suffer disproportionately because of their
young age. Others have fallen victim to disease,
deprivation, abduction, sexual abuse and gender-based
Violence connected with armed conflicts. Anti-personnel
landmines and small arms have a particularly devastating
effect on children. We must put an end to the terrible
suffering of children as the weakest group in armed
conflicts. Therefore we believe that concerted political
and diplomatic pressure must be exerted on, and legal
action taken against, those who in situations of armed
conflict violate the rights of children. Further attention has
to be given to the situation of girl children in armed
conflicts, and especially to protecting them against rape
and other forms of sexual abuse and gender-based
violence.

 

We must ensure that adequate resources are
devoted to the demobilization of child soldiers and to child
rehabilitation programmes as an integral part of planning
for post-conflict situations. Equally, we recognize the
importance of action to promote the physical and
psychological recovery and social reintegration of child
victims of conflict. The European Union's policies already
address the plight of children in armed conflicts; in some
specific situations we are focusing our efforts on the
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers.

Any meaningful effort to improve the plight of
children affected by armed conflict requires high-level
governmental and international attention. It requires the
mobilization of public opinion, it requires practical action
on the ground by Governments and armed opposition
groups, and it requires that Governments support the
activities of various organizations. The European Union
underlines the need for a close partnership among the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations
Children's Fund and other relevant actors such as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Representative of the Secretary-General for Internally
Displaced Persons, the World Food Programme and the
World Health Organization.

The European Union warmly welcomes the attention
given by the Security Council to the situation of children
affected by armed conflict through its formal debate on 29
June 1998 and through the adoption of a presidential
statement on children and armed conflict. We look forward
to the adoption of a Council resolution on this subject after
this debate. We also hope that the Council will persist in its
vigilance and will continue to keep this issue and other
issues of human rights in specific conflict and post-conflict
situations at the forefront of its agenda. In the View of the
European Union, it is important that the situation of
children in armed conflict should also be a part of the
Secretary-General's reports to the Council on individual
countries. Also, in preparing thematic reports to the Council
on subjects relevant to children in armed conflict he should
consult with UNICEF and other concerned actors of the
United Nations system.

The primary responsibility for protecting the rights of
the child under all circumstances rests with States. We urge
States to provide the necessary legal framework and
administrative measures to protect children's rights, and
furthermore to commit available human and financial
resources to the realization of their rights. However, this
is not enough. We must also reinvigorate international
efforts to protect children. The European Union supports
the work that is in progress to strengthen international
human rights standards and mechanisms for enforcing
international law in respect of children in situations of
armed conflict. We consider the classification of the use
of child soldiers as a war crime in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court to be a very important
step for the improvement of the protection of children. It
underlines the importance of the implementation and
enforcement of existing minimum age standards for the
recruitment and deployment of children in armed conflict,
as set by international law.

The Convention on the Rights of the Child must be
extended to provide adequate protection to all children.
Especially in View of the tenth anniversary of the
Convention, the European Union remains fully committed
to the aim of concluding successfully the negotiations on
the draft optional protocol relating to the involvement of
children in armed conflict. We wish to express our full
support to the chairperson of the working group in her
informal consultations to that end.

As a step towards improving the protection of
children, we welcome the adoption by the General
Conference of the International Labour Organization of
the Convention concerning the Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labour. These forms of labour include forced or
compulsory recruitment for use in armed conflict.

The European Union stresses the particular
importance of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which has been almost universally ratified, and of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols.
Unfortunately, not all States have ratified the Convention
on the Rights of the Child yet.

It is the responsibility of the international community
to monitor and to seek guarantees that all sides involved
in conflict - governmental and non-governmental -
should abide by the relevant provisions of international
law in their treatment of children. The European Union
gives its full support to the work of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child and to its mandate to monitor, with
the support of UNICEF, the implementation of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child in all States
parties, including those affected by armed conflict.
Human rights cannot be promoted in isolation. Also, the
Security Council should address the rights of the child -

 

for example when the Council is mandating a peacekeeping
mission with tasks to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate
combatants. We also recommend that whenever sanctions
are adopted in the handling of crises, their impact on
children be assessed and monitored, and that humanitarian
exceptions be child-focused.

The European Union would like to express strong
support for the role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, as advocate for the protection of
children affected by armed conflict. The European Union
also gives particular recognition to the long-standing work
of UNICEF for children in situations of armed conflict.
UNICEF has an extensive and permanent field presence and
a comprehensive mandate that allows it to be present and
operational before, during and after armed conflicts. The
European Union calls on all concerned to continue to
develop a concerted approach and to increase cooperation.

We fully support the efforts of the Special
Representative to raise awareness and mobilize official and
public opinion for action. We especially welcome his field
Visits to various countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations. These have highlighted the plight of children in
conflict situations. We commend the Special
Representative's efforts to seek concrete commitments from
all parties to conflicts to stop recruiting child soldiers, to
demobilize and rehabilitate ex-child soldiers and to ensure
children's access to humanitarian aid. We call upon States
concerned and other parties to ensure follow-up to the
recommendations resulting from the field visits of the
Special Representative and to heed the commitments they
have undertaken. It is vital that the implementation of these
commitments be monitored.

The European Union also welcomes efforts in
situations of peacemaking and peace-building being made
to integrate a child perspective in post-conflict policies. The
"peace and security agenda for children", presented at an
earlier occasion to the Security Council by the Executive
Director of UNICEF in her statement, contains a
comprehensive set of measures on which the Council may
wish to be updated at an appropriate time.

Most landmine Victims are civilians. Many are
children. The European Union is fully committed to the
total elimination of anti-personnel landmines. We welcome
the entry into force of the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-
personnel Mines and on Their Destruction. The European
Union continues to contribute significantly to mine-action
programmes in many countries. Of particular importance
is the extension of mine-awareness training to all children
in mine-affected areas.

Among the factors which lead to a steady increase
in the use of children as soldiers, we particularly wish to
underline the excessive and uncontrolled accumulation
and spread of small arms and light weapons. Semi-
automatic rifles are light enough to be carried by children
even below the age of 10. In this manner, children
become perpetrators as well as victims of violence. We
welcome international, regional, national and subregional
efforts to curb the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of small arms and light weapons. The
European Union has already adopted a Joint Action on
small arms and the Code of conduct on arms exports. We
welcome the recommendations of the Panel of
Governmental Experts on Small Arms to develop
guidelines for disarming combatants with respect to small
arms, light weapons and ammunition.

To conclude, let me reiterate our full commitment to
working together in all bodies of the United Nations to
urgently meet the needs of all the child Victims of armed
conflicts so as to pave the way for rehabilitation,
reconstruction and development. The European Union
would like the United Nations system to place the issue
of the rights, protection and well-being of children
affected by armed conflicts within the mainstream of
United Nations policy-making and programme activities.
The European Union continues to devote considerable
effort to addressing the needs of child victims in all parts
of the world, both in terms of resourcing for and to
promote a durable solution to the crises. However, the
humanitarian efforts must be accompanied by broader
political efforts aimed at addressing every step and aspect
of the conflict. Therefore, a political solution to these
crises should be rigorously pursued so as to prevent
further suffering and destruction.

