Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
his briefing on the latest situation in Afghanistan, as
well as Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his comprehensive
statement.

We highly appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in promoting peace and stability in the country and
assisting the Afghan Government in the realization of
its priorities, especially in light of the challenges of the
transition process. We underline the necessity adequate
funding ofthe Mission in order to enable it to effectively
carry out the tasks mandated by resolution 2096 (2013).

Since the Council last considered the issue in
March (see S/PV.6935), Afghanistan has continued to
progress towards the achievement of the objectives of
the transition period, which is to be completed by the
end of 2014. We positively assess the Government's
increasing assertion of ownership over peace and
reconciliation in the country, as well as the ongoing
efforts by the High Peace Council and its work with
political parties and civil society. UNAMA's support
for the Council's activities, the implementation of the
Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme and
the regional dialogue is critical in advancing a broad and
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
process as a basis for overall stabilization and durable
peace in the country.

In general, the implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework requires the Government
and the international community to undertake a
vigorous and sustained engagement in order to deliver
on their respective commitments. We note with
concern that, compared with last year, security-related
incidents, such as unabated armed clashes, insurgent
attacks and the use of improvised explosive devices,
have increased, including in areas under the control of
the Afghan security forces.

In this period, two reprehensible attacks by
anti-Government elements also took place against
United Nations-affiliated organizations and other
humanitarian actors. It is incumbent on all parties
in Afghanistan to take maximum measures to avoid
civilian casualties. Insurgents must renounce their
tactic of targeting civilians, which contravenes
religious and humanitarian tenets and seriously
undermines the ongoing reconciliation efforts. We hope
that the incipient contacts between the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the Taliban will
help reverse the current situation.

The country's stability requires full-fledged
cooperation between Afghanistan, its neighbours
and other counterparts on a wide spectrum of issues,
including peace and reconciliation, regional security
challenges, development and humanitarian assistance.

We welcome Afghanistan's increased interaction
with its various partners within the bilateral and
multilateral frameworks. As we have noted previously,
the Istanbul Heart of Asia process is a unique regional
platform for dialogue andpartnership aimed at promoting
security, confidence and cooperation. The adoption of
the implementation plans of all confidence-building
measures at the Almaty ministerial conference on
26 April marked the conclusion of the first phase
and a shift towards more practical steps within each
confidence-building measures. It is essential that these
plans be implemented in a timely, effective and result-
oriented manner, including through the development
of concrete projects, by securing necessary funding
and through the continued engagement of supporting
countries and organizations.

Azerbaijan strongly supports the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the unity of Afghanistan. We
stand by the Government of Afghanistan and the proud
Afghan people in their legitimate aspiration to become
a self-sustaining country. In our bilateral relations,
we will continue to attach high priority to assisting
Afghanistan through the implementation of existing
programmes and the elaboration of new capacity-
building and training programmes. My country will
continue to be a part of the international efforts in
Afghanistan. In the post-2014 period, we will remain
actively engaged within the Istanbul Heart of Asia
process, and stand ready to contribute in the framework
of other regional initiatives.

