Judge Pillay: It is my honour to present to the
Council a report of the activities of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and I thank the
Council sincerely for giving me this opportunity to
address it.

At the ICTR, we have had excellent cooperation
from States with respect to the execution of warrants.
Therefore, my focus on behalf of the ICTR will be on
the work of the Tribunal. Thereafter, I shall address the
Council on the need for an increase in the judicial
capacity of the ICTR.

I am pleased to report that since my last address,
a number of judicial, administrative and prosecutorial
steps have been taken to prepare the ground for holding
uninterrupted trials this year. These endeavours have
included a change in management, the finalization of
pre-trial litigation and disposing of the backlog of
some 200 motions.

As a result, there has been a significant increase
in the number of trials. Seven trials involving 17
accused persons are presently in progress. All three
Trial Chambers are engaged in simultaneous trials on a
twin- or multi-track system, with two of the Trial
Chambers each conducting two trials and the third
holding three trials. This is the result of the judicial
pre-trial decisions and measures taken in previous
years. We are now seeing the impact of this preparatory
work in the ongoing trials. Three of these trials are
joint trials of three to six accused and, by virtue of
their complexities and magnitude, will necessarily take
a long time to reach finality. Nevertheless, during the
years 2002 to 2003, the Council may expect
judgements in the cases of a very large number of
accused.

I want to assure the Council that all the judges of
the ICTR are resident on a full time basis in Arusha
and are working full time. Our court hours are regular,
and when judges are not in the courtroom, they are
deliberating, issuing rulings and drafting judgements.
In the past, there have been periods of time when cases
were unexpectedly delayed or not ready for trial as
anticipated, which caused gaps in the work schedule of
judges. This is no longer the case. The ICTR schedule
for court hours and recess is the same as that of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Visiting judges from national
jurisdictions have commented on the taxing nature of
our schedule, which is compounded by the hardship
conditions under which we work.

I will now briefly review the status of ongoing
trials to illustrate some of the factors that have caused
delay in these proceedings, as well as some of the steps
we have taken to expedite them.

Trial Chamber I is currently conducting two
trials. One is the media trial, which commenced on 26
October 2000, in which 34 prosecution witnesses have
testified, from a list of 97. The list has, after several
status conferences, been reduced to fewer than 50
witnesses, and the prosecution is expected to close its
case by May next year. However, this case, because of
its complexities, is not expected to end before
December 2002. The second case, involving father and

son - this is the case of Pastor Elizaphan
Ntakirutimana, who was transferred to us from the
United States - is expected to be completed before

June 2002. Here also, we have heard 19 prosecution
witnesses, and we limited the number of witnesses that
needed to be called.

Trial Chamber II has had some setbacks. It is
proceeding with a big case, called the Butare trial,
covering six accused, and two other trials, involving
Government ministers. These trials had commenced in
March and April this year but were brought to an
abrupt end by the death of the Presiding Judge, Judge
Lai'ty Kama, on 7 May 2001. However, as a result of
the expeditious election of two new judges by the
General Assembly on 24 April 2001 and the
appointment of a third judge by the Secretary-General
on 31 May 2001, the trials were able to begin, albeit de
novo, without further delay. So the heavy caseload of
this Chamber means the judges will not be able to
undertake new cases for at least two years.

Trial Chamber III has the big case of Cyangugu,
involving three accused, and the Semanza case. Here
also, the judges actively intervened to limit the number
of witnesses that are necessary. The short case is
expected to conclude by February 2002, and the long
case of Cyangugu will go on. But since February 2000,
Trial Chamber III has been getting the military case of
Colonel Theoneste Bagosora and three others ready for
trial. Twenty-seven pre-trial decisions were delivered,
each decision taking the case closer to the trial stage.
So, given that the Chamber is about to conclude one of
its two other cases, while the second one is well
advanced, it will begin the military trial on 2 April
2002.

With regard to judgements of the ICTR, on 7 June
this year Trial Chamber I delivered the Tribunal's first
judgement of acquittal, of Bourgmestre Ignace
Bagilishema. This judgement has been appealed by the
Prosecutor, and so the Chamber ordered his conditional
release to France.

The Appeals Chamber has rendered decisions in
appeals involving five appellants. All of these
decisions confirmed the convictions and sentences,
although in the Musema case the rape conviction was
quashed on the basis of additional evidence led by the
appellant before the Appeals Chamber. However, these
decisions of the Appeals Chamber, in my View, are
significant endorsement that the trials conducted by the
ICTR are fair and that the standard of proof beyond a
reasonable doubt to sustain a conviction is being
observed.

The question has been asked of us by many
members of the Council as to why the output of
judgements is so low - a single judgement this year
and just eight in the four years since trials started, in
1997. The fact is that only one case was ready for trial
in the autumn of 1999. Other cases that were ready for
trial by both the Prosecutor and the defence in the year
2000 are the ones ongoing now. However, I shall
briefly refer to some of the difficulties obstructing
expeditious trials, and also the efforts and
developments that the judges have made towards
reducing the delays and increasing efficiency.

It is important to recall that judicial proceedings
at the international level are far more complicated than
judicial proceedings at the national level, and unlike
national courts we rely on many factors beyond our
control. Cases at the ICTR are legally and factually
complex because of the alleged rank, status and roles
of the accused.

The Prosecutor's strategy has, from the outset,
focused on those suspects who are alleged to have been
in the highest positions of leadership and authority and
those who are alleged to have taken the most prominent
roles in the events in Rwanda in 1994. Consequently,
many of the accused persons who have been indicted,
some of whom are currently standing trial, include the
former Prime Minister of Rwanda, Government
ministers, high-ranking military officers, senior media
personnel and public figures. Trials of accused persons
who are alleged to have been the architects of killings
are far more complicated and take longer because
command responsibility has to be established and the
range of facts at issue is far greater. Thus these trials,
which I submit are particularly applicable to the ICTR
rather than the ICTY, take longer than the trials of
accused persons with lower levels of alleged
responsibility.

Other factors that contribute to lengthy and
protracted trials are the voluminous documents and
translation requirements, the large number of witnesses
and the interpretation of testimonies involving three
languages: Kinyarwanda, French and English. The
Prosecutor and the defence are engaged in ongoing
investigations. It is also important to note that, unlike
national courts, witnesses and counsel are not within
geographical proximity to the ICTR and so are not
within easy reach. Witnesses for both the prosecution
and defence are located in Rwanda and in countries all
over the world. They have to be persuaded to volunteer
as witnesses. Negotiations have to be undertaken with
Governments for their travel, travel documents and
protective measures. All these things are time-
consuming and often result in adjournments of the trial.

Added to those factors are the handicaps of
having to function out of a hardship "C" duty station.
In the past year, six staff members have died of illness
or accident. Simple communications that would take
one hour in The Hague may take days, or even weeks,
in Arusha. This is a reality that we must contend with.

On the other hand, the judges have taken
measures to expedite proceedings. I shall mention a
few of them. They involve expedition at the pre-trial
stage, which Judge Jorda referred to. We decide most
of those motions on briefs, which saves court time and
the costs of travel to bring defence counsel. Motions
are dealt with by a single judge. We also now engage in
long-term planning of court schedules, and we exercise
greater control in the courtroom in order to minimize
loss of time. Our interest in efficiency, however, must
be subject to our interest in ensuring fair trials, and the
defence must be given sufficient time for preparation
and cross-examination. In some cases, judges have
imposed sanctions for time-consuming tactics, for
instance by denying costs for frivolous motions. The
level of communication and cooperation between the
various branches of the Tribunal, such as the Chambers
and Registry, has also improved. Of course, we also
have the fact that there are now precedential rulings
and appeal decisions that provide a guide to the parties,
which in turn curtails motions.

Issues of efficiency were discussed at length by
the judges of the two Tribunals at seminars at Ascot
and Dublin. There was broad consensus that the delays
experienced by both Tribunals needed to be addressed
and that there was a need for greater control over the
presentation of evidence by the parties. We are now
implementing greater controls over the number of
witnesses, the length of their testimony, and so on.
These measures have already had an effect and are
among the reasons for the significant acceleration of
our trial activities. However, there are limits to what
can be achieved with the present three Trial Chambers.

The Council may recall that, when I addressed it
last year, I expressed our commitment to complete as
many cases as possible of persons awaiting trial in our
detention facility within the present four-year mandate.
As already mentioned, the trials of 17 persons are
underway and 26 detainees are awaiting trial, of whom
four were transferred to the ICTR in the last three
months. A further 22 suspects have been indicted and
are still at large. If the present capacity of nine judges
remained unchanged, the Tribunal will not be able to
complete the trials of the current detainees before the
year 2007. The judges find this to be unacceptable, as
some of the detainees have been awaiting the
commencement of their trials for considerable periods
of time. International standards require that accused
persons be tried without undue delay.

Those difficulties are further compounded by the
fact that the Prosecutor has informed me that she
anticipates indicting up to 136 new accused persons by
the year 2005. The Tribunal's capacity must be
increased in order for us to try those cases in
accordance with international fair-trial standards. It
was for this reason that on 9 July 2001 I submitted a
proposal to the Security Council for the creation of a
pool of ad litem judges, similar to the solution that the
Council found for the ICTY by virtue of resolution
1329 (2000). If the judicial capacity is increased with
ad litem judges, and if the Prosecutor drastically
revises her investigative programme, I believe that the
ICTR can complete its work by 2007, rather than the
projected date I gave in my report, of 2023.

The request for ad litem judges is presently under
consideration by the Security Council. I hope that this
remedy will be provided for the ICTR, as it was for the
ICTY when it faced a similar situation. The progress of
trials since my request of 9 July 2001 now enables me
to present to the Council an updated plan for the
immediate use, once elected, of nine ad litem judges by
two of the Trial Chambers, splitting into five sections.
These five sections would be able to begin five new
trials involving between 14 and 17 accused between
April and June 2002. So, with the three current
Chambers and these five subsections, we would have
eight trials going on simultaneously.

Each section would generally have a mix of
permanent and ad litem judges, which would help
ensure the consistency of the Tribunal's jurisprudence.
Even in those exceptional cases where ad litem judges
might serve alone, we believe that consistency would
be maintained through the established jurisprudence of
the Tribunal. It is important that the ad litem reform be
decided as soon as possible, with two aims in mind: to
supplement the present trial capacity in relation to
currently detained accused, and as an essential measure
for future indictments and arrests by the Prosecutor.

Together with the ICTY judges, we have reflected
on the lifespan of the Tribunals. We are concerned that
the passage of time may affect the quality of the
evidence and that long delays raise human rights
concerns. We recognize that this is a political decision
that can be taken only by the Security Council. The
ICTR judges are of the opinion that the target date for
completion of our mandate should be 2007, and we
hope we will get the support we need to make this
possible. Meanwhile, I would urge that other avenues
of justice be pursued as well, such as the
encouragement of trials at the national level in
jurisdictions where suspects are located.

In conclusion, I wish to place on record the
Tribunal's appreciation to States for their cooperation
over arrests, transfers of indicted persons and travel of
witnesses, and for receiving acquitted and convicted
persons. I particularly thank the following
Governments: Ireland, for its contribution to hosting
the judges' seminar; the French Republic, for receiving
and agreeing to monitor an acquitted person, and the
Republic of Mali, for receiving convicted persons. Five
convicted persons, including Jean Kambanda, Prime
Minister of the interim Government of Rwanda, will
begin serving their sentences of imprisonment for 25
years to life, in Mali starting this month.

I am optimistic that many of the factors impeding
our progress to date have been and are being addressed
effectively. I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his support in this regard. However, we need the
Council's further support. The ICTR and the ICTY are
engaged in a historic endeavour and should both be
supported, and supported equally. We have a long way
to go in establishing the rule of international law to
safeguard the principles of peace and justice, which are
so fundamental. Despite the many setbacks and daily
frustrations, we are making progress.

