Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): On behalf of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of my country, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
the honour that was done him by inviting him to this
high-level meeting. However, owing to scheduling
constraints, he is unable to take part in this meeting
and has therefore instructed me to convey his regrets
and wishes of every success in our work.

I would first like to welcome this Security Council
initiative under the Japanese presidency. It provides
us with a platform for exchange and the opportunity
to share our experiences in the area of peacebuilding
with a view to promoting a stable and lasting peace,
especially in African States that have been riven and
weakened by crises.

One of the keys to the success of an effective
peacebuilding process remains the existence of a
common strategy that enjoys national ownership and has
clear priorities. In cote d'Ivoire, which endured nearly
a decade of unrest that undermined the strength of its
main institutions, the authorities were able to refocus
on progress, relying on the Ivorian people's capacity to
develop resilience and achieve peace. For the Ivorian
Government, social cohesion, national reconciliation
and the normalization of political life are fundamental
factors in building a climate of lasting peace conducive
to development.

With the support of the United Nations system,
my Government has put in place the national
Peacebuilding Priority Action Plan, which centres on
several programmatic areas, including the restoration
of State authority and community safety; support for
national reconciliation, social cohesion and conflict-
risk reduction; and identification of and support for
vulnerable populations. The first phase, covering
the period from 2011 to 2014, was funded by the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
amount of $11.15. The implementation of that phase
made it possible to rehabilitate several security and
administrative structures in urban areas, particularly
in the west of the country; to build the capacity of the
police and the gendarmerie; to register several hundred
thousand births; and to reform the Ivorian civil State.

In order to consolidate those gains and take into
account the remaining challenges, a second phase for
the period from 2015 to 2017 is under way, with funding
in the amount of $15 million, including $12 million
already mobilized by the Peacebuilding Support Office
and $3 million mobilized by the Ivorian Government.
The implementation of this phase will eventually make
it possible to iron out and resolve land disputes in rural
areas and difficulties linked to identification, among
other issues.

With regard to national reconciliation and
sustainable cohesion, in addition to creating the ministry
responsible for social cohesion and compensation
for Victims, in 2011 the Ivorian Government set up
a dialogue, truth and reconciliation commission,
which was recently superseded by the National
Commission for Reconciliation and Compensation of
Victims. Moreover, the high rate of implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process - around 94 per cent - and the promising
results of security sector reform help strengthen the
defence of territorial integrity and the establishment
of the rule of law. Furthermore, the creation of a high
authority for good governance contributes to promoting
the values of public management.

Ultimately, this plan has enabled the Ivorian
Government to achieve notable results, including the
smooth running of the presidential election of October
2015, the capacity of the Ivorian justice system to
operate independently, and the promotion of youth
employment. All these achievements of the Ivorian
Government headed by President Alassane Ouattara
led the Security Council to adopt resolution 2284 (2016)
on 28 April, extending the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire for a final term, until June 2017.

The Ivorian experience can be continued and
strengthened. However, I cannot conclude my
statement without reiterating the gratitude of the
Ivorian Government and people for the invaluable role
that the United Nations has played and continues to
play. Thanks to this serious support, Cote d'Ivoire has
resumed its forward march and is back on the path of
stability, growth and social and economic development.
