Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
appreciates and strongly supports the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We also
acknowledge the able assistance provided by their
respective expert bodies. A global effort is needed to
oppose terrorism effectively, and the United Nations
has the unique capacity to set and enforce international
norms and standards in this area.

Australia welcomes recent developments within
the Committees, including the commencement of the
review of all names on the 1267 Committee's
consolidated list and the conclusion of procedures for
drafting narrative summaries on the reasons for listing
each entry. The effectiveness of the 1267 Committee is
directly related to the relevance and currency of the
consolidated list. We remain committed to full
cooperation with the Committee.

We also welcome the recent attention given by
the 1540 Committee to institutional issues, including
the conclusion of its work programme, the completion
of its selection process for new experts and its decision
to instigate a comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution.

In order to capitalize on the unique role that the
United Nations can play in addressing terrorism,
Australia encourages the Committees and their expert
bodies to continue to explore ways to work more
closely together. We see scope for further cooperation,
especially in relation to streamlined reporting regimes,
assessment missions and the facilitation of technical
assistance. It is also important that the Committees
continue to cooperate with the General Assembly
through close engagement with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and with the broader
United Nations system.

Australia strongly supports the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). In
that context, we commend the work of CTED and its
energetic head, Mr. Mike Smith, in particular for the
Directorate's focus on effective technical cooperation
and assistance in its work with the Counter-Terrorism
Action Group.
Constructive relations with Member States -
particularly donor and recipient countries - are
critical to the success of the work of CTED. We look
forward to the upcoming CTED visit to Australia in
July and to the opportunity to share with CTED our
approach to counter-terrorism efforts domestically and
in the region.

An effective international legal framework is
fundamental to addressing the global terrorist threat. In
addition to fully implementing our obligations to freeze
terrorist assets, Australia has ratified 13 of the 16

international counter-terrorism instruments of universal
application, and we are currently assessing the
legislative changes necessary to implement the
remainder.

We have also signed 14 bilateral counter-terrorism
memorandums of understanding with partners, which set
out our framework for counter-terrorism cooperation and
the sharing of best practices. Australia also co-chairs, with
Belgium, a project team of the Financial Action Task
Force, which is developing new guidelines on best-
practice implementation of obligations regarding terrorist
asset-freezing.

In closing, a significant challenge remains: to
continue efforts to equip all States to deal effectively
with the international terrorist threat. Australia hopes
that the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy will continue to provide impetus for the
international community to adopt practical measures
that facilitate counter-terrorism cooperation by way of
extradition, prosecution, information flows and
capacity-building. We will continue to work to promote
cooperation between Member States to implement the
Strategy in full.

