I would like to thank you, Sir, and, through you, Estonia, for convening this important discussion. I also thank Rhonda, Karin and Ed for their briefings and remarks. The Security Council has demonstrated its resilience and flexibility in adapting its working methods during the coronavirus disease pandemic. It has been impressive to see us continue to conduct the Council's important and life-saving work during such a difficult time, and it is a testament to the commitment and professionalism of every delegation around this virtual table. The Security Council has admirably established a procedure for the adoption of resolutions through a written process, ensuring the extension of peacekeeping missions and sanctions resolutions and enabling the continuity of our important work to maintain international peace and security. The Council has also held numerous virtual videoconferences, including many, like this one, which have been streamed live, allowing all Member States and the world to see the Council at work, debating the pressing issues of the day. This transparency is important in the Council's work. We thank the delegation of Kuwait for its effective chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions during the previous two years, and we congratulate them on the successful conclusion of several notes. We enthusiastically participated in the fruitful retreat in January, hosted by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and welcome their leadership on this matter. We agree that implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507) and the recently adopted notes should be the primary focus of the Working Group at the present time. We also agree that it is important to find the right balance between transparency and effectiveness and efficiency. We consider it important that the Council maintain sufficient flexibility to respond to changing circumstances throughout our work, and we look forward to engaging on working methods within the Working Group under the leadership of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines over the coming year.
