Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to
Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his valuable briefing
and his efforts to establish dialogue and cooperation
with the countries of the Great Lakes region in order
to overcome the various challenges they face. I also
thank Ambassador Bale' of the Republic of the Congo,
in his capacity as Chair of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, for his briefing.

The Great Lakes region faces serious challenges
in terms of security, stability, declines in development
indicators, and the spread of armed groups that
pose the main obstacle to the establishment of State
authority. The latter threaten the lives of millions of
civilians and play a role in pillaging natural resources,
thereby depriving the people of the region of important
development resources. The humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate and raise serious concern,
given the large number of refugees, internally
displaced persons and those in need of humanitarian
assistance. Those challenges can be addressed only
through cooperation among the countries ofthe region,
collective responsibility and finding sustainable
solutions to strengthening regional and international
partnerships, in particular with the African Union,
the United Nations, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, the European Union and the
Southern African Development Community. Stability
in the Great Lakes region and neighbouring countries
will undoubtedly affect in a positive way the potential
for development, security and improving the living
standards of the people of Central Africa in specific
and across the continent of Africa in general. In that
regard, I would like to reflect on four main aspects.

First, concerning the political aspect, establishing
security in any one of the States in the region closely
depends upon its political stability, in particular
with regard to the peaceful transfer of power and the
sustained engagement of all segments of society in
political processes. There will be no progress without
empowering the national institutions of those States,
while building advanced political frameworks and
cooperation among the countries of the region, as
well as the engagement of their Governments as
part of international efforts made by regional and
international organizations. We remain concerned
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation in those
areas marred by political tensions. In order to improve
the situation and establish comprehensive peace, the
following priorities should be implemented: ending
conflicts in the countries experiencing political tensions;
neutralizing illegal armed groups; expeditiously
addressing the humanitarian crises resulting from
forced displacement; and protecting human rights and
preventing impunity in the Great Lakes region.

Secondly, the United Nations missions in countries

neighbouring the Great Lakes region are the largest in
terms of their human component and annual budgets.
Such contributions attest to the firm belief in, and the
vital and critical role of, peacekeeping operations in
restoring State authority, achieving peace and stability
and alleviating humanitarian suffering, particularly in
the Central African region which has suffered for many
years. Radical solution must be found to address the
problems leading to humanitarian suffering, namely, in
South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and Burundi.

Thirdly, the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region was described as the framework of
hope when the agreement was signed, in 2013, and as a
MODEL to bring about stability. Peoples hoped that it
would be a cornerstone for stability and advancement
in the whole Great Lakes region. Regrettably, the
agreement is entering its fifth year with unprecedented
humanitarian suffering and an increase in the number
of refugees, with 11 million forcibly displaced persons.
In that regard, we reiterate the need for countries of the
region to commit to the agreement, and we commend
the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy. We look
forward to the implementation of the provisions of the
agreement and overcoming all obstacles.

Fourthly, the regrettable security situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has taken a turn for the worse, as evidenced by the
escalation of violence by armed groups fighting among
themselves and controlling natural resources. They
even attack peacekeepers in United Nations missions,
illustrated by the worst attack of its kind in the history
of the United Nations, which was launched by the Allied
Democratic Forces against Tanzanian peacekeepers on
7 December 2017, killing 15 peacekeepers and injuring
53 others. That attests to the need to unify the efforts of
Governments of the Central African region to combat
armed groups in the region, limit their influence and
eliminate them gradually.

In conclusion, we hope that the conference to be
held in Geneva in three days' time will contribute to
alleviating the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. It
will be the first-ever humanitarian donors' conference
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Its goal is to
alleviate the humanitarian suffering of the Congolese
people, and, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are keen on
promoting the role of the Committee in anchoring
security and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through continuous communication with
Member States, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and all the relevant stakeholders.

