At the outset, allow me to thank the Russian Federation for convening this debate on the issue of women and peace and security. We congratulate the Russian Federation on its successful presidency for the month of October, and wish an equally productive one for its successor. This year paves the way for the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of historic resolution 1325 (2000). Almost 20 years after its adoption, a considerable gap remains in place, particularly in the context of addressing the specific needs of women in peace processes, conflict prevention and resolution. The realization of those goals requires a comprehensive approach, as well as realistic and pragmatic solutions. Terrorism and violent extremism also have serious adverse effects on women's lives. Genuine efforts are therefore needed to protect women and girls from violence and extremism. Similarly, women are the main victims of sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism; a horrific weapon of war that is a threat to international peace and security. In order to end that brutal crime, we must promote accountability and access to justice. In March, when sufficient pieces of evidence were provided, Iraq held accountable a terrorist of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), who had committed sexual violence crimes against a Yazidi female survivor who was, at the time, only 14 years old. The perpetrator was found guilty of participating in the rape and abduction of a Yazidi girl by the court. Iraq believes that such a move would encourage other women and girls raped and abducted by ISIL to come forward and seek justice as the judicial system had been hampered in hearing this kind of case owing to the reluctance of victims to testify in public. It will also empower women and girl survivors of sexual violence and protect their rights. Iraq is developing its second national plan, with the assistance of the United Nations and civil society organizations, which focuses on new, as well as previous, challenges. Owing to Iraq's fight against terrorism and the multiple hurdles that have developed as a result of that war, the first action plan was not fully implemented. Iraqi women are playing an active role in mediation efforts and in the country's response to the coronavirus disease, as they have shown great resilience in their fields of work. In 2019, Iraq, in coordination with the United Nations Population Fund and in collaboration with civil society organizations, developed its national strategy to combat violence against women and girls, which will serve as a guiding tool to prevent and respond to the needs of women and girls and raise awareness against negative gender stereotypes. Civil society organizations have played an active role in this regard, as they have helped supply significant inputs to the domestic violence draft law and the survivors draft law. In conclusion, Iraq is working to ensure the empowerment of women at the economic, social and political levels, thereby enhancing their engagement in political and economic decision-making, as women play a robust and effective role in transformation and building processes towards the achievement of peace, security and sustainable development.
