Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I begin by joining
others in welcoming the briefing by the Secretary-
General and the presence and contributions of so many
ministers.

Since our previous open debate (see S/PV.7540),
the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories has sadly deteriorated. The violence that
we saw in October is fast becoming the new normal.
We absolutely and unreservedly condemn every act of
violence, whoever the perpetrator, whoever the victim,
as well as all incitement to violence. We see three clear
steps that the parties must take. First, they need to do
all they can to de-escalate tensions, not inflame them.
Secondly, they need to re-establish a mechanism to
deal with incitement, as they previously committed
to do. Those responsible for the violence need to be
held to account. Thirdly, to achieve genuine peace and
stability, the underlying causes of the conflict have to
be addressed so that those who currently feel despair
and fear can instead have a brighter future to hope for.
Over the short term that means taking practical steps
to improve conditions on the ground. The Palestinian
Authority must move forward with reconciliation and
retake control of Gaza. Israel must lift restrictions on
Gaza and transfer more of the West Bank to Palestinian
Authority control.

It is extremely disappointing that progress has
not materialized in recent months, despite the tireless
efforts of the Quartet. If specific and concrete steps are
not taken, the security situation will deteriorate further
and more lives will be lost needlessly. Furthermore,
the parties will be even further away from the genuine
peace process that Israelis and Palestinians deserve,
and the prospects for a two-State solution will be
further diminshed.

Continued settlement building, the demolitions
of Palestinian property and evictions also continue to
cause unnecessary suffering to ordinary Palestinians.
Such acts harm the peace process. Recent months
have seen further settlement activity, including the
expansion of the Gush Etzion settlement agreed earlier
this month, and reports last week that 385 acres of land
south of Jericho had been declared Israeli State land.
We are concerned by these developments and call on
Israel to reverse its decisions.

The international community, including the
Security Council, needs to demonstrate that we have
not forgotten the people most affected by this conflict.
The United Kingdom remains committed to working
with the United States, the European Union, the Quartet
and the United Nations and key regional partners to
encourage steps that improve the lives of Palestinians
and ensure Israelis are safe and secure.

Let me now turn to Syria. The work of the
International Syria Support Group provides some
optimism for the prospects of a political settlement,
despite the slight delay to the start of talks, from
Monday to Friday this week. To maintain momentum,
confidence-building measures need to take place
alongside negotiations. As we all agreed in resolution
2254 (2015), we look forward to detailed proposals on
confidence-building measures from the office of the
Special Envoy as soon as possible. The international
community and the Council must then help the Syrian
parties deliver them. Syrians need to see improvements
to the situation on the ground, and they need to see
benefits in the negotiations starting in Geneva.

Yet the situation on the ground tells a different
story. Indiscriminate airstrikes continue, including
against targets that are not Daesh. There have been
repeated and well-evidenced reports that Russian and
Syrian regime bombing raids have resulted in extensive
civilian losses. Attacks against the opposition and
civilians will only undermine the political process.
How can opposition groups explain their participation
in negotiations to their supporters when they continue
to suffer daily bombing raids, when they continue to
see medical facilities destroyed and when their access
to food and humanitarian aid only decreases? These
barbaric actions must stop.

Given the level of barbarism, it is unsurprising that
Syria remains the world's worst humanitarian crisis.
The horrific situation in Madaya reminds us all of the
urgent need for unimpeded and sutained humanitarian
access and for greater support for the United Nations
relief effort. The Syria conference in London on
4 February is the moment to show that support. As the
Secretary-General told us this morning, we hope it will
raise significant new funding from a wider range of
partners to meet the needs of all those affected within
Syria and the neighbouring countries. We welcome the
support from the Council and the broader international
community in this endeavour.

Let me conclude with a final observation. There
has not been this level of diplomatic activity over Syria
since the last round of talks in Geneva in 2014. It is in
all our interests to maintain the momentum and to build
on the optimism. It is the only way that we can ensure

that 2016 is finally the year that we bring this terrible
crisis to its overdue conclusion.

