The Middle East is truly at a "watershed moment", as Secretary-General Antonio Guterres told the Council recently (see S/2020/596, annex 1). For the Palestinians and the Arabs, this is a moment that will define whether we are condemned to a future of continuous conflict or a hopeful future of possible peace. The threat of annexation of parts of the West Bank is hanging like a sword over the heads of the Palestinians, and it constitutes an "existential threat to their future", as Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayeh rightly said. Israel is threatening to take unilateral action that will upend decades of peacemaking and of hope for a negotiated settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Such an act will end the two-State solution and bury any prospects for peace. How much longer can the Security Council accept Israel's unilateral and illegal actions, which have defied and undermined the maintenance of peace and security in the region for so many decades? How much longer do the Palestinians have to see their basic rights violated and their legitimate aspirations to live in peace and security in an independent State denied? Two years ago, during this same quarterly debate (see S/PV.8316), an overwhelming number of countries strongly condemned the adoption of a basic law by Israel enshrining de jure discrimination against the Arabs. Today, on the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Israel has decided to again manifest its utter disregard for international legality and multilateralism by stating its intention to annex parts of the West Bank. There is no need to remind the Council of the multitude of condemnations that this decision has drawn from Governments, but also Parliaments, academia and civil society. In a letter, 1,080 Members of Parliament from 25 European countries rejected the annexation plans by Israel, underscoring the fact that it would be "fatal" to the prospects for peace, and called on their respective countries and the European Union to adopt international sanctions as a response. The annexation plan has also prompted more than 400 scholars of Jewish studies in North and South America, Europe and Israel to write a letter rejecting such plan and explaining that it would "formally (de jure) creat[e] apartheid conditions in Israel and Palestine". Unfortunately, this threat of annexation is just the culmination of decades of occupation, confiscation of land, settlement expansion, demolition of Palestinian homes, killings, imprisonment and deportations of Palestinians from their own land and country. No genuine peace process within the internationally agreed parameters can take place while Israel keeps imposing a fait accompli that goes unanswered by the Security Council, and for how much longer? We call on the Security Council to assume its responsibility, move beyond condemnations and put an end to Israeli's illegal and illegitimate measures, which contravene all the relevant United Nations resolutions adopted by this very Council. Lebanon is facing multiple challenges because of the absence of a peaceful horizon in the region, the financial and economic crisis and a pandemic that will put its population at grave risk should it overwhelm its medical facilities and supplies. Amid all these serious threats, the Government is trying to find a solution to the current economic impasse. It is working with international financial institutions to put the country back on a recovery trajectory. The Lebanese authorities have reaffirmed that they remain committed to implementing essential and necessary reforms, and they continue to seek the support of the international community, especially friendly countries of the region and the world. In that dire context, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has proved to be an important bastion of stability in southern Lebanon and the region. The recent visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon, Mr. Nassif Hitti, to the UNIFIL headquarters is a testament to Lebanon's appreciation of UNIFIL's role and our country's long-standing commitment to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety. In that regard, Lebanon once again calls for the renewal of UNIFIL's mission without any changes to its mandate in order to further preserve the relative calm that has been prevailing in its area of operations and to safeguard the stability in the south. The stability of the south and in all of Lebanon is undermined daily by the continued Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, air and sea in grave violation of resolution 1701 (2006). Just to give an example, from 19 February to 16 June of this year, and during a cruel pandemic, UNIFIL recorded a daily average of 3.7 airspace violations, with 11 daily overflight hours. These repeated violations by Israel further destabilize the situation. Once again, we call on the Council to take measures to compel Israel to cease its violations of the country's sovereignty and stop increasing the tension in the region. As many members have said in the Council, UNIFIL is a regional public good. Let us empower it by stopping any violations of the resolution that granted UNIFIL its mandate, in accordance with resolution 1701 (2006), to allow this United Nations mission to effectively implement this mandate.
