Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals; Judge Vagn Joensen, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR);
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the ICTY; and
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I thank them all for their important
and comprehensive briefings this morning.

The creation of the Tribunals 20 years ago by the
Council came in response to crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide and was aimed at ensuring
criminal justice and at preventing those responsible for
those crimes from escaping punishment. The work of
the Tribunals is a vital part of international law and
international criminal justice in upholding the rule of
law.

The Tribunals have recently made positive progress
towards achieving the objectives for which they were
created, as shown by the number of cases dealt with
and the reduced number of cases remaining before
them. Despite the difficulties and obstacles and despite
the financial costs of investigations and trials, the
achievement registered by the Tribunals in imposing
the rule of law makes clear the appropriateness of the
orientation underlying their creation and of their work,
which has been so successful. The Tribunals have
played a key role in the evolution of the principles of
international criminal law, which form the basis of
their work and that of many national tribunals in the
context of their judgements and decrees. The Tribunals
also improved international criminal proceedings and
contributed to putting an end to impunity in the case of
the most heinous crimes.

The achievement of the noble objectives for which
the two Tribunals were created is based on our strong
support and constructive cooperation. That is why
Jordan strongly supports the Tribunals and calls for
them to be provided with all the means necessary for
them to conclude their work in due time, as set out by
their Presidents. We reaffirm the need for a smooth
transition to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. In this fashion, we will be able to
ensure that the remaining accused will be appropriately
tried.

We reaffirm also that the closure of the Tribunals
depends on the completion of the work currently under
way. Today we must focus in particular on the technical
and administrative aspects of the work of the Tribunals.
That is why we will not comment on the content of cases
or of investigations. However, we wish to reaffirm that
the work of the Tribunals has in no way been an obstacle
to the political processes, reconciliation or peace in
the former Yugoslavia or in Rwanda; on the contrary,
the Tribunals have demonstrated that international
justice and the achievement of peace, security and
reconciliation go hand in hand.

We express our conviction that absolute justice
cannot be achieved. The majority of the perpetrators
of international crimes in the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda will remain free, as has happened following
all wars. History has shown this. However, we must not
be discouraged, nor should the Council be discouraged
from supporting international humanitarian law and
international criminal law. We should notbe discouraged
from responding to the challenge of impunity.

To conclude, I would like to thank the four briefers
for their achievements, and I thank them for continuing
with the exceptional activities carried out by both
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. I also congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Chile in his capacity as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

