Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
wishes to thank the Russian Federation for its timely
initiative of convening this public meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We also wish
to express our appreciation to Mr. Oshima for the work
he has accomplished in recent years in consolidating
the humanitarian assistance activities for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

The first consequence of the increase in conflicts
and violence is the suffering of the civilian population.
Entire populations have to leave their places of origin,
fleeing the aggression to which they are subjected.

Undoubtedly, the Security Council has the
responsibility of taking action to prevent aggression
and violence against civilians. To achieve that
objective, it is essential to adopt an integral approach,
which, in our opinion, should consist of three elements.
The first element is the prevention of conflict itself.
The second - in agreement with Mr. Oshima - is the
promotion of a culture of respect for human rights and
humanitarian standards. The third, related element is
the eradication of impunity.

Furthermore, when we talk about civilian victims
in armed conflicts, whether refugees or internally
displaced persons, in most cases we are in fact talking
about women, children and the elderly. We are talking
about rape, violent abuse, sexual enslavement and the
forced recruitment of children.

For that reason, the Security Council must
include in the peacekeeping operations it authorizes
concrete measures and effective provisions to promote
a gender perspective, as part of the integral approach
that I have just mentioned.

The adoption of measures such as resolution 1460
(2003) on children and armed conflict is a step in the
right direction. Its practical implementation in the
specific case of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
demonstrates the positive impact that the Security
Council can have on the ground.

Because of the importance of this issue and its
implications, we urge the Secretary-General to move to
an earlier date the presentation of his next report on
this subject, originally scheduled for June of next year,
so that the Council can evaluate his proposals and
promote their implementation as soon as possible.
Likewise, we consider it necessary that the Security
Council be informed on progress made in strengthening
cooperation among the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
so that the guidelines and/or agreements reached
among them can be considered by this body in the
establishment or strengthening of peacekeeping
operations related to different conflicts on the
Council's agenda.
We note that in spite of the Council's continued
appeals to the parties to armed conflicts to comply
strictly with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and with the norms and principles of
international law, in particular international
humanitarian law, in practice these norms and
principles are ignored. We wonder how this process can
be reversed. In Mexico's opinion, there are several
strategies we could follow.

First, at the macro level, the United Nations and
States must fully publicize the obligations of parties
and the rights of individuals in situations of conflict. It
is not enough for States to sign and ratify treaties and
conventions if the people for whom they are intended
are not familiar with them. We are pleased to see the
continuation of the regional workshops on fundamental
concepts relating to the protection of civilians, to
which Mr. Oshima referred. We reiterate our interest in
participating actively in the workshop to be organized
for the Latin American and Caribbean region.

Secondly, at the field level it is essential that in
any peace agreement, in any resolution coming from
this body, we seek to ensure due protection for
humanitarian organizations, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross and other non-
governmental organizations, and their unrestricted
access to the zones of conflict. Likewise, we must
promote full access by humanitarian personnel to
vulnerable populations, separate civilians from armed
elements and seek measures that restore the rule of law
and promote justice and reconciliation in States
affected by armed conflict.

That is why my delegation presented a draft
resolution on the protection of humanitarian personnel.
We would like to thank Mr. Oshima and all his staff for
the information on restrictions and threats and dangers
confronting humanitarian personnel and for the
suggestions they provided in the preparation of this
draft. The draft seeks to be an initial response by the
Security Council to this problem, providing elements
for an effective protection mechanism. My delegation
is confident that this draft resolution can be adopted
unanimously in the near future.

Once conflicts are over, a series of measures must
be implemented to avoid their recurrence. My country
considers it essential to promote the intensive use of
confidence-building measures, including the
establishment of disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for
combatants, and measures for the consolidation of the
rule of law. The successful implementation of such
measures will mean not only progress in the protection
of civilians, but also the establishment of a needed link
for their development.

One element of cohesion which could help in the
integration and reconciliation of societies that have
emerged from conflict is to ensure that violations of
international humanitarian law do not go unpunished.
Of course, every society must evaluate the best way of
achieving this objective in order not to revive conflicts
that have been overcome. While the practical
implementation of those measures is the direct
responsibility of the actors and States on whose
territories conflicts take place, there is also a need for
the support and cooperation of the other members of
the international community, including neighbouring
States.

That is why we believe that the creation of the
International Criminal Court represents an
unprecedented step forward to complement the efforts
of national jurisdictions to bring to justice those
persons who commit crimes against humanity. We are
convinced that the Court, once it has achieved
universality, will be a fundamental tool in the
eradication of the culture of impunity that
characterized the twentieth century. We wish to recall
here the old adage that no one is above the law. Mexico
appeals to all States to fulfil their obligation to bring to
justice those responsible for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other grave violations of international
humanitarian law, in accordance with national
legislation and with international law itself.

To attain that objective, it is a matter of priority
to ensure the implementation of an integrated approach
that includes the different stages of the problem and the
elements to which we have referred. Mexico will
continue to support efforts to protect civilians in armed
conflicts.

