Mr. De Rojas (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency of the Security Council this month.

Venezuela is pleased to be a sponsor of the draft
resolution submitted to the Council, which we hope will be
adopted in a few moments. As the Council knows, we are
linked to Haiti by two centuries of historical and
geographical ties, which has led us to take an active part in
the process of stabilization and democratic consolidation in
that country.

Venezuela praises the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH) for the considerable progress it achieved in
fulfilment of its mandate to assist the Government of Haiti
in maintaining a secure and stable environment. The
Mission dealt with one of its most difficult challenges last
year, when the peaceful transfer of power from one
democratically elected President to another took place.
Since then a year and a half has passed, and, as we have
seen, the process has not come to halt. Gradual progress
has been evident, and successful steps continue to be taken,
although, naturally, not without certain problems and
missteps.

The reduction in the number of military personnel
shows that the Mission has had positive results, and it is to
be hoped that Haiti will set itself firmly and definitively on
the road to reconstruction and development, in accordance
with the hopes and desires of the Haitian people. In this
regard, we welcome this last extension of the Support
Mission, since an abrupt withdrawal of forces would not
have been the most advisable move, and we must give it
the opportunity to conclude the operation in the best
possible way.

I cannot let this opportunity pass without mentioning
the work also being done by the International Civilian
Mission in Haiti, which the General Assembly will again
consider tomorrow. Its consolidation will allow for the
long-term success of the educational institution-building
process in Haiti. We have great faith in the joint work of
the United Nations and the Organization of American States
in that connection.

We are all aware that the Government and people of
Haiti bear the principal responsibility for the political,
economic, social and institutional reconstruction of the
country, but we also know that, if long-term peace and
stability are to be attained, it is indispensable that the
international community make a sustained commitment to
cooperation. That is why we are present here today.

Once again, I reiterate Venezuela's political will to
continue to lend all its support to this cause, in keeping
with the wishes of the people of Haiti themselves.

