Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Let me begin by thanking the representative of
Argentina for his congratulations on the return of Hong
Kong to China.
We are pleased to see the positive momentum in the
Angolan peace process since the beginning of this year.
I note that the representative of Angola, speaking on
behalf of his Deputy Minister, expressed confidence in
the future of Angola. This is encouraging. Yet we are also
concerned about the outbreak of military conflicts in some
parts of Angola and the failure to complete the
demobilization of UNITA military personnel.

Practice has proved that only when there is a
peaceful and stable environment can efforts be
concentrated on economic and social development. Years
of war have devastated Angola, a richly endowed country
with a vast territory. Today the dawn of peace has already
appeared on the horizon of Angola. We sincerely hope
that the Angolan Government, and UNITA in particular,
will, in the fundamental interests of the people of their
country and in a continued spirit of unity and cooperation,
seize the historic opportunity to complete as soon as
possible the pending tasks in the political and military
fields and achieve national reconciliation at an early date,

 

thus paving the way for national reconstruction and
development in the country.

The settlement of the Angolan question will ultimately
rest with the Angolan people themselves. However, the
international community also has the responsibility to
promote the peace process in Angola and facilitate Angola' s
efforts to achieve national reconciliation at an early date. At
present, the Angolan peace process is at a critical juncture
and is in dire need of vigorous support from the
international community, including the United Nations.
Therefore, we support in principle the Secretary-General's
recommendation to establish a United Nations observer
mission in Angola (MONUA) and hope that its
establishment will help promote the peace process and
ultimately national reconciliation in Angola. At the same
time, I wish also to point out that, as a principle, the
Security Council should not get involved in matters that fall
within the terms of reference of other United Nations
bodies. China has different views regarding certain of the
functions that the Council would be authorizing for
MONUA. We therefore have reservations on certain
provisions of the draft resolution before us. However, in
order to help bring about peace and development in Angola
at an early date, and considering the desires of Angola and
the other parties concerned, we will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

We hope that the Angolan Government and UNITA
will cooperate with MONUA to complete the peace process
smoothly. We also hope that other parties concerned,
including African countries, will continue to play an active
role in the Angolan peace process. The Chinese
Government will work together with the international
community to that end.

Finally, the Chinese delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to all the personnel of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) and
thank them for their contribution to helping Angola to
achieve peace and national reconciliation.

