Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, in my personal capacity, I would like to
express my pleasure in seeing you preside over the
Security Council and also in seeing someone wearing a
bowtie as President of the Council.

I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
group of five small nations (S-5), comprising Costa
Rica, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Singapore and
Switzerland, and I would like to thank Portugal, not
only for the timely organization of the fourth debate on
this important matter, but also for Portugal's overall
commitment to this relevant topic, namely, the working
methods of the Security Council. The S 5 appreciates
this opportunity to engage in a dialogue with the
Council, as we believe that decisions on behalf of the
membership of the United Nations are more effective
when they are taken in a transparent, inclusive and
accountable manner.

Let us imagine for a moment that we were sitting
here some decades ago, for example in 1950,
discussing action during the war on the Korean
peninsula, or in 1960, sending the first peacekeepers to
the Congo, or in 1966, taking decisions on the first set
of binding sanctions against Rhodesia. Let us try to
imagine not only how differently the world was shaped
at that time and how differently Council members may
have been interacting, but in particular how radically
different the way of working must have been back in
the 19505 and 1960s. At that time, as was noted by the
representative of the United Kingdom, there were no
computers, no mobile telephones, no rapid reporting by
our embassies during a given crisis. Nor did we receive
media alerts or images from a remote part of the world
after a massacre had been committed. Our predecessors
had to make strenuous efforts to find reliable
information and await instructions from capitals by
cable before they could use their room for negotiations.

I assume no one in this room would deny that
technological progress has had a huge impact on our
working methods. The new proximity,
interconnectivity and extremely fast flow of
information in and out of this Chamber have, on the
one hand, increased pressure on the Council, pushing it
to take rapid, legitimate and effective actions, and, on
the other, increased the stakes in handling information
responsibly.

In addition, the Council has become increasingly
more active over the decades. There have never been
so many sanction regimes, United Nations operations
in the field or other Council mechanisms as there are
today. Our predecessors had fewer items on their
agenda to monitor or Council decisions to implement.

It was therefore easier to track the Council's
work, whether as a member or as a non-member of the
Council. Therefore, while the main tasks of the
Security Council as set forth in the United Nations
Charter under Articles 1 and 24 have remained the
same, the ways of performing those tasks and the
consequences of a given decision have dramatically
changed.

The Council is still working either under the
provisional rules of procedure prepared in 1946 for the
first meeting after its creation - which were last
updated in 1982 - or is following informal traditions.
The Council will agree when I say that these rules of
procedure are neither adequate nor adapted to the needs
of today.

In 2005, the World Summit - in line with Article
10 of the United Nations Charter, which clearly
mandates the General Assembly to make
recommendations, including to the Security Council -
reflected in its Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) the need for far-reaching measures to achieve the
goals of legitimacy, transparency and accountability.
The 8-5 group was formed for the sole purpose of
contributing to the improvement of the working
methods of the Security Council.

In 2006, we presented to the General Assembly a
draft resolution with a set of recommendations
(A/60/L.49). The Council reacted with presidential
note S/2006/507, which was an important step in
Council working methods. The S-5 also welcomed the
update of note 507 in 2010 (S/2010/507). We commend
Japan, Bosnia and Herzegovina and all the other
members of the Council involved for their invaluable
contribution to improving the working methods in
recent years.

However, the implementation of the
recommendations in note 507 has been inconsistent.
While commending the Council for the progress
achieved so far, the 8-5 group continues to argue for
improvement in their implementation. We therefore
call for the adoption of an action plan to implement the
recommendations in note 507. The Council's Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions could be mandated with this task
and could regularly report to the Council and the wider
membership of the United Nations on progress in its
work, including in the analytical part of the Council's
annual report.

The 8-5 also considers that complementary
measures are needed to enable the Council to enhance
its authority and effectiveness and to be more
responsive to the United Nations membership as a
whole. There is considerable agreement among
Member States that the Security Council must improve
its working methods. That agreement transcends the
various interest groups with regard to the enlargement
of the Council and forms a large common denominator.

This is why a few months ago the 8-5 group
presented a new draft resolution with concrete,
pragmatic and easily implementable proposals. In this
resolution, we suggest measures to enhance the
implementation of note 507, and we propose further
measures. The draft resolution is attached to my
written intervention. This text, on which we have
consulted with the membership as a whole, has met
with considerable support. Let me highlight some of
the proposals.

First, as chair of a country-specific configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, I appreciate that the
chairs are invited to the relevant Council debates. I
support statements by France and the United Kingdom,
among others, favouring stronger interaction between
the Council and the Commission. I encourage the
Council to take a step further and invite chairs to
informal consultations as well, as my colleague the
representative of Brazil proposed earlier. And more
generally, peacebuilding considerations should be
integrated at all levels of the Council's work.

Secondly, with its composition in 2012, the
Council will have unique expertise in peacekeeping.
We therefore encourage it to continue to improve the
drafting of mandates and to articulate clear goals for
new operations, taking into account the needs on the
ground as expressed by the relevant stakeholders,
including non-State actors. The Council should
strengthen its cooperation with troop- and police-
contributing countries. And the Council should review
progress on the basis of clear criteria and, at the end of
each mandate, draw the lessons learned from the
experience.

Desiring to make its contribution, Switzerland
commissioned from the Center on International
Cooperation a study of working methods of the
Council in the case of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad. Advance
copies are available outside the Chamber. A discussion
of the findings will be organized soon.

Thirdly and lastly, the designation of the chairs of
subsidiary bodies by the five permanent members only,
and of the elected members only, is an anachronism.
Likewise, the practice of the P-5 taking the lead on
nearly all country-specific resolutions is outdated. We
encourage the P-5 to revisit these practices. Given the
complexity of today's world, the Council should make
the best use of the expertise of each ofits members.
The 8-5 group takes note of the position of the
P-5 that improving the working methods is a matter for
the Security Council only. If the Council wants to be
solely responsible for its working methods, it should
act accordingly by improving them soon.

The 8-5 group has always taken a constructive
approach and will continue to do so. We are ready to

work hand in hand with the Council to improve
openness and transparency. That is why we call upon
the Council to take up our proposals and to relaunch
the process for improvement. If there is no action, calls
for reform by the wider membership will become more
pressing. That would put at risk the relevance of the
most important organ for ensuring peace and security
in the world.

In closing, I wish to recall the commitment of the
S-5 group to the cause of improving the working
methods and to stress its constructive approach. The
group is ready to embark on an institutionalized
dialogue with the Security Council on implementing
note 507 and on any other improvement in its working
methods along the lines that the 8-5 set out in its draft
resolution. We expect the Council to react promptly,
openly and constructively to our ideas. The 8-5 will
remain seized of this matter.

