Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I am pleased and
honoured to address the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir. Permit me to begin by congratulating
you and your delegation on assuming that responsibility
for the month of March and for the manner in which you
have managed the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I would like to assure you of the full support
and cooperation of my delegation in your endeavours
for the few remaining hours of your presidency.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Lej, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS); Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Ms. Kate Gilmore, Deputy High Commissioner
for Human Rights; and Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(JMEC), for their briefings, which have provided
more depth with regard to the issues raised during
this meeting.

First and foremost, I would like to reiterate to the
Security Council the commitment of my Government to
the implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Thus
far, we have implemented what has been required of the
parties by the Agreement. The Government of South
Sudan is grateful for and appreciative of the efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
international community, including members of the
Troika, and the European Union (EU), for enabling the
parties to sign the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in August 2015.
The implementation of the peace process is
progressing well despite the delays in the formation
of the Transitional Government of National Unity.
Nevertheless, the arrival in Juba of 22 Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition) senior police officers, 39 and 40
commissioned and non-commissioned officers,
respectively, as well as the 15 bodyguards of Mr. Riek
Machar - we have received a total number of 130
troops in Juba - is a step in the right direction.

My Government has committed to transporting the
SPLA in Opposition forces from Kaldak to Malakal,
While some of the forces are in Bentiu and Pagak. The
forces in Pagak will be airlifted from Gambella in
Ethiopia. We acknowledge and appreciate the assistance
of UNMISS, the Troika and the EU in airlifting them
to Juba. As agreed by the parties and JMEC, by the
end of this week, if everything remains as planned and
UNMISS, the Troika and the EU continue to airlift
the SPLM/A in Opposition from the aforementioned
locations, the entire 1,370 agreed forces will be in Juba,
paving the way for Mr. Riek Machar's eventual arrival
there. Thereafter, the formation of the Transitional
Government of National Unity will be completed.

As far as the humanitarian situation in the country
is concerned, as I stated before the Council in my
statement last month (S/PV.7628), the humanitarian
situation in my country has not been exclusively caused
by conflict, as the humanitarians would want the
world to believe. As we focus on the conflict-related
humanitarian situation, we should not forget the dire
situation caused by climate change, in particular long
drought and heavy rains, which more often than not
have a devastating effect on the population.

The 1996 World Food Summit described a state
of food security as existing when all constituents
within a nation State, at all periods of time, have both
physical as well as economic access to nurturing food
in a sufficient quantity. Dietary needs must be met
and preferences should support a healthy and active
lifestyle. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization, the four critical pillars of food security
have been identified as the availability of food,
access to the population, utilization and, finally,
stability. The principal consideration for South Sudan
as a new country is the fact that the right to food is
inherent within the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and is vitally important in order to enjoy other
rights. Similarly, while the 1996 World Food Summit
established that food insecurity should not be employed
as a tool for political or economic pressure, the reality
is less clear.

It is the hope of the Government of South Sudan that
with the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
the Non-Governmental Organization Act, governance
and the humanitarian situation will improve and allow
the displaced persons both in camps for internally
displaced persons and points of contact to return home.
The Government of South Sudan regrets the incident
reports by the humanitarian agencies and the loss of
the lives of some humanitarian workers. It is not the
wish of the Government of South Sudan to continue
to fall into the abyss. It is certainly in our interest to
promote stability and national healing. Considering the
reports on the ground, the Government of South Sudan
commits to providing as much assistance as it can to the
community of humanitarian workers in order to help
facilitate their work, as they aid our people with vital
services. It is our hope that there will be a decrease
in these regrettable incidents and that normalcy, an
unknown phenomenon in South Sudan, will begin to
become a reality.

I would like to conclude by saying that my
Government has officially responded to the recent
Human Rights Council report on my country. My
delegation also acknowledges the decision of the
Human Rights Council, at its last cycle, to establish a
three-person Commission to report annually to it. My
country is also preparing its first universal periodic
review report, to be delivered in October. Nevertheless,
my Government does not accept the allegation of
organized and systemic killing, torture and rape
attributed to the Government's soldiers and its allied
militia. I would like to quote here from the response of
my Government:

"It is acknowledged that the SPLA, the
SPLA-IO and other criminals use the same uniform.
Unless the culprits are physically apprehended,
it is impossible to determine whether it is the
Government's soldiers and its allied militia, the
SPLA-IO or other armed criminals who committed
the crime."

That quote is consistent with a previous report of the
Secretary-General, which stated that the SPLA uniform
is widely available.

