Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with
the European Union - the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia -
and the associated country Cyprus, as well as the
European Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area - Norway - align themselves
with this statement.

The European Union is dismayed at the lack of
recent progress in the Angolan peace process. UNITA
continues to put its own interests before the very real
needs of the people of Angola. Consistently it has fallen
short of its promises to transform from a military
organization to a political one and to permit the extension
of State administration to all Angolan territory.

The draft resolution before the Security Council sets
out some of the tasks which are expected of UNITA in
order to safeguard the peace process. In the immediate
future, UNIT A must remove the obstacles to the
extension of State administration in Bailundo and Andulo,
as well as to other key localities. It must also abandon,
once and for all, its military activity and demobilize any
of its forces.

The European Union condemns the armed attacks
against the personnel of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), against humanitarian and
other international personnel, against the Angolan
authorities and, not least, against civilians. We applaud
the Angolan Government's patience and continued
flexibility in the face of these incidents. We urge the
Government to resist the temptation to act militarily in
response to provocation by UNITA, to govern the
activities of the Angolan National Police and to continue
to work for a peaceful solution.

Finally, we support further Security Council action
against UNITA. The existing sanctions have had a
positive impact. These further sanctions are not intended
to punish, but to encourage UNITA to finalize the
implementation of the peace process. Their message is
clear: UNITA, particularly the leadership, must keep to its
promises. We call upon UNITA to implement fully its
obligations by 23 June.

 

