Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
thank you, Sir, and the Spanish presidency for having
convened this very important meeting, which is taking
place at a time when the Middle East is facing serious
challenges and threats of all kinds, for which the
Security Council is responsible at the political, legal
and moral levels, given current developments and their
serious impact on the peoples of the region.

However, the Council is not adopting any resolutions
to tackle these very serious crises in the region, either
in Palestine or in Syria. It must also face the threat of
terrorist groups, which have turned the region into a
breeding ground from which to spread their influence,
while threatening both the region and the independence
and sovereignty of States. This requires a review of
the Council's mechanisms and of the resolutions it has
adopted, as well as their follow-up and the commitment
of States to abide by them.

Given the explosive situation in the region, the
Palestinian question remains the central issue on
which peace and security in the Middle East hinge. For
decades now, the Council has continuously considered
the deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, given the ongoing escalation and the serious
violations committed by the Israeli occupying forces
against the Palestinian people and their rights and
against the holy sites of both Islam and Christianity, in
particular Al-Quds and the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Unarmed
Palestinians are the victims ofmassacres, lynchings and
collective punishment. All of this represents a violation
of international law, the will of the international
community and the inalienable legal rights of the
Palestinian people. The Israeli Government is solely
responsible for the impact of these actions, which have
jeopardized international peace and security in the
Middle East throughout the occupation.

I am speaking today on behalf of the League of
Arab States, which adopted a decision on 13 October
asking for the protection of the Palestinian people
and the holy Christian and Muslim sites. This is not
the first time that the League has asked the Security
Council to take urgent steps to implement resolutions
on the occupied Palestinian territories and guarantee
international protection for the Palestinian people and
the holy sites.

I ask, how long will the Israeli occupation last? Until
when will the international community, represented by
the Security Council, stand idly by, unable to put an end
to the occupation or achieve a lasting and permanent
settlement on the basis of the Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on this issue?

The lack of effectiveness and efficiency of the
Council given current developments only aggravates
the deterioration of the situation, taking it ever further
away from international legality. The Council of the
League of Arab States has repeatedly warned against
the situation and the non-respect by Israel of United
Nations resolutions on the issue. A great many of these
have been adopted over the past 50 years, such as, for
example, resolution 181 (II), 242 (1967), 267 (1969), 338
(1973) and many others asking Israel to withdraw from
the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories in order to
resolve the conflict.

The Security Council has never witnessed such a
precedent, in which manipulation and blackmail by a
State that disregards international law and commits war
crimes is allowed. Ensuring international protection has
now become the most urgent question, as this is a legal
requirement given the situation and the need to achieve
the peace to which we aspire. The need for international
protection for Palestinian civilians is stipulated in the
provisions of international legality and resolutions on
Palestine.

Since the emergence of the Palestinian question, in
the days of the League of Nations when the territory
was under a mandate, the situation has been the
responsibility of the international community.

The International Court of Justice, in a well-
known Advisory Opinion issued in 1950, stipulated the
following:

(spoke in English)

"Two principles were considered to be of paramount
importance: the principle of non-annexation and
the principle that the well-being and development
of such peoples, those under the mandate, formed a
sacred trust of civilization."

(spoke in Arabic)

The legal study of the Secretary-General adopted
yesterday refers to this, for which I thank him.

(spoke in English)

The International Court of Justice confirmed that
the mandate remained valid after the determination of
the Covenant of the League of Nations.

(spoke in Arabic)

This international protection through the United
Nations can be easily carried out. In that connection,
I recall the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO), established pursuant to
resolution 73 (1949), which stipulates that the
Secretary-General could take all necessary steps to use
as many United Nations staff members as necessary
to ensure that the truce is respected. UNTSO remains
in Jerusalem to this day. That body can play a role in
protecting the holy sites.

In that regard, I recall resolution 904 (1994), which
was adopted following the massacre in the Mosque
of Ibrahim to guarantee the safety and security of all
Palestinian civilians throughout the occupied territories
and which stipulates that there should be a temporary
international presence. That is why I thank the
Secretary-General for having distributed and published
this important legal study, which stresses the need for
international protection through a direct presence in
the occupied Palestinian territories, given the recent
developments.

I would also like to state that the first article of the
Geneva Accord stipulates the shared legal commitment
of all States, which have the collective responsibility
to guarantee the compliance and implementation of the
provisions of that Accord. In addition, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, among other bodies, can
guarantee international protection by elaborating on
this concept.

Finally, measures aimed at protecting Palestinian
civilians faced with the violations perpetrated by the
Israeli occupying forces and the settlers are essential
to addressing the current situation. However, the crux
of the problem is the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories. As long as this occupation continues, the
Israeli violations will continue, be it is in Jerusalem or
any other part of the occupied territories. It is high time
that this method of managing the conflict be brought
to an end. The Security Council must act quickly to
end the conflict by halting the Israeli occupation of the
occupied Palestinian territories. We ask the Council
to consider the Quartet to be a Council mechanism
and to consider the mandate it gave the Quartet, in
accordance to resolution 1515 (2003), to achieve a two-
State solution based on the borders of4 June 1967, to be
a mandatory step on the path to security and stability in
the Middle East.

