Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude
for the briefing by Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and take
this opportunity to reiterate our unwavering support
for the work that he continues to do. Likewise, we are
grateful for the briefing by Ambassador Orrenius Skau,
Charge' d'affaires ad interim of Sweden, on behalf ofthe
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
on the Committee's work.

It has been almost eight years since the conflict
began in Libya and, given the inconceivable suffering
that the Libyan people have been subjected to, the
comprehensive implementation of the Libyan Political
Agreement is crucially needed to definitively conclude
the transition period. Accordingly, my delegation
underscores the willingness to engage in dialogue and the
commitment shown by the parties during the meetings
of the joint drafting committee to find common ground
to facilitate its effective implementation as well as to
comply with the proposals set out in the United Nations
action plan advanced by the Special Representative.
That same notable willingness must be maintained
and lead to a participatory process led by and for the
Libyan people.

It is therefore necessary to promote and move
forward the holding of a referendum on a new
constitution that clearly defines the elements needed
for electoral processes that will consolidate and bring
to term the transition period and, above all, will
establish the guidelines to develop the entire normative
structure enabling the establishment of reliable and
competent institutions upon which the State will be
anchored. To that end, we believe that the progress
made by the Libyan High Commission for National
Elections in voter registration has been a fundamental
step, with 2.5 million people registered, of whom
almost half are women, at the time of the writing of
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/l40).
In that understanding, we believe it essential to ensure
the active participation of women, young people and
all sectors of society in this process. We appreciate and
highlight the ongoing efforts of various subregional and
regional organizations, such as the African Union, and
countries such as Egypt, Algeria and Tunisia, among
others, to strengthen, support and advance the Libyan
political process and the action plan.

Despite these positive actions, we deplore the
worrying increase in violence and confrontations
between the parties during the reporting period, which,
according to the report of the Secretary-General,
have resulted in more than 160 deaths. Likewise, the
continuous reports of abductions, torture, arbitrary
detentions and summary executions are disturbing,
particularly in the cities of Derna and Benghazi, where
clashes have also occurred and where public spaces and
civil services have been identified as military targets,
in clear violation of international humanitarian law. In
this regard, we reiterate our call on the parties and local
actors to lay down their arms and avoid any rhetoric that
calls for violence as a means of achieving any objective,
since these attitudes not only threaten the lives of
hundreds of innocent people, but also setback and
undermine the progress made so far in implementing
the Libyan Political Agreement.

It is also alarming that, according to the report
of the Secretary-General, irregular combatants and
foreign armed groups from the Sudan and Chad are
present in Libyan territory and that their activities and
involvement in armed clashes in the south of the country
only exacerbate the internal conflict to the detriment of
the efforts being made by the Libyan people to stabilize
their country. Furthermore, the threat posed by the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters from Da'esh to
Libya, following their defeat and expulsion from Iraq
and Syria, is an imminent threat that endangers the
security not only of Libya, but of the entire region,
since, despite their defeat, they would still be able to
coordinate attacks through covert cells and engage in
arms trafficking despite the current embargo.

The situation of migrants and refugees has not
improved. According to the report of the International
Organization for Migration of 28 February, during
that month alone 34 people were killed in attempts to
cross the Mediterranean Sea, mainly from the ports
of Zuwara, Tripoli and Azawiya. Unfortunately, these
victims are among the more than 316 fatalities recorded
so far this year. We note with concern repeated reports
of violations of the rights of migrants, who are detained
indefinitely in detention centres under reprehensible
conditions, subjected to degrading treatment, torture,
forced labour, denial of medical assistance and sexual
violence. We call on the parties to prevent abuses
and violations of the human rights of migrants in the
centres under their control, and we recall that they must
comply with their obligations under international law
and guarantee respect for the rights of these persons.
We reiterate once again to the Libyan authorities that
they must initiate appropriate investigations to identify
those responsible for these violations so that these acts
do not remain unpunished.

In conclusion, we call on all parties to join in the
ongoing efforts to maintain a continuous dialogue that
will allow for a peaceful, orderly and inclusive political
transition that responds to the interests of the Libyan
people and allows them to freely and consensually define
their future within the framework of their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, since there is no
military solution to this conflict. We recall that the only
option for resolving this conflict is through compliance
with the Libyan Political Agreement, recognized
by resolution 2259 (2015), and reaffirm that it must
be implemented, as stated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/26, of 14 December 2017.

