Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me first express my
delegation's deepest appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely meeting. My appreciatiaon
also goes to all the briefers for their respective remarks,
which reaffirmed the international community's
commitment to resolving the conflicts in the Great
Lakes region. Today's open debate provides an
opportunity to examine the current political situation
in the subregion and serves as encouragement to the
parties concerned and their international partners to
recommit their efforts to address outstanding issues
and implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region.

As rightly pointed out in your concept note
(S/2016/223, annex), Sir, the underlying causes of
conflict in the Great Lakes region are complex and
multifaceted. In our view, efforts directed at ending
instability and violence alone will be insufficient. We
must also look beyond the traditional peace and security
dimension and search for solutions to the root causes of
conflict. As our contribution to this debate, we wish to
highlight the following points.

First, the Kingdom of Thailand believes that peace
cannot be sustained in the absence of economic recovery
and sustainable and inclusive development. The Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework, in our view,
provides a suitable platform for concerted efforts at
all levels to address peace, security and development
in a comprehensive manner. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has committed to
furthering economic development. The region has
committed to deepening economic integration. And the
international community has committed to supporting
the implementation of economic development and
the regional integration agenda. Therefore, we stress
the need for the full and timely implementation of
the Framework. We also welcome today's launch of
the Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-
2017, which outlines the United Nations development
approach in support of the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.

Secondly, the Great Lakes Region is rich in natural
resources, be it gold, charcoal, timber, wildlife or
water. However, such endowment has also been one of
the sources of instability in the region. The Security
Council has recognized the linkages between the
armed conflicts in the region and the illicit exploitation
of natural resources by armed groups and criminal
networks. That has resulted in a number of sanctions
being imposed on targeted individuals. While
recognizing the purposes of such sanctions, we are
of the View that the Council should take into account
potential unintended consequences, such as adverse
humanitarian impacts and national economic costs,
when imposing natural resources-related sanctions. In
addition to stemming illicit exploitation, we are also
of the view that effective governance can potentially
turn natural resources from being a driver of conflict
to a catalyst for development and shared prosperity.
Such governance cannot be ensured without the full
commitment and participation of the Governments of
the countries of the Great Lakes region, the extractive
industry and the relevant international actors.

Thirdly, regional and subregional organizations
can play a crucial role as partners of the United Nations
and the conflict-affected countries in their efforts to
prevent and resolve conflicts. We commend the African

Union and the International Conference on Great Lakes
Region for their constructive and continued commitment
and for their contribution to foster sustainable peace
and development in the region.
Fourthly, the effective prevention and resolution
of conflicts require the participation of all the relevant
stakeholders in the political and peace processes
in an inclusive manner. As evidenced in the report
(S/2015/716) on the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), only in that way can we
ensure the meaningful empowerment and participation
of women. As a strong supporter of the women and
peace and security agenda, the Kingdom of Thailand
advocates a greater role for women at all stages of the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We also look forward to further discussing
this important issue at next week's open debate on
the role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflict in Africa.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, allow me reiterate the Kingdom of
Thailand's readiness to share with the countries of the
Great Lakes region its humble experience and practices
on development and on the management of natural
resources, as well as on peacebuilding, which could
be applied in the context of the region. I also wish to
reiterate the Royal Thai Government's commitment to
supporting the countries of the region, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, in their efforts to achieve durable
peace and sustainable development.

The meeting rose at 4.10 pm.
