Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the French presidency for having
convened this Council meeting on the relevant topic of
combating illegal drug trafficking in West Africa and
the Sahel. We are grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
Mr. Fedotov, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Said Djinnit, for participating
in this meeting and for their thorough briefings.

We were interested to read the report of the
Secretary-General on transnational organized crime
and illegal drug trafficking in West Africa and the
Sahel (S/2013/359). We welcome its inclusion ofa wide
range ofproposals ofthe Russian delegation made at the
Council's open debate in February 2012 on the impact
of transnational organized crime on peace, security
and stability in West Africa and the Sahel region (see S/PV.6717). We support the recommendations of the
report on the importance of universalizing the three
main anti-narcotics agreements on strengthening the
current international narcotics control system and on
providing assistance in that area to the International
Narcotics Control Board. We would also like to note
the key role of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in
combating narcotics.

We see that the report notes an improving trend in
the narcotics situation in the region given the decrease
in the volume of drug trafficking from Latin America to
Europe through the countries of Africa. However, in our
opinion, the overall situation of illegal drug trafficking
on the African continent is far from satisfactory. That is
an area for the transit of heroin and cocaine, which has
become a new route for drug trafficking. The region
is increasingly becoming a centre for the producton of
synthetic narcotics. Drug trafficking in the region is
becoming actively linked to terrorism and transnational
organized crime being fuelled by the spread of weapons
in the region from Libya. The threat of drugs in the
region of West Africa and the Sahel can be effectively
countered only through the coordinated actions of
the entire international community, led by the United
Nations.

In that regard, we support the regime of targeted
sanctions established on the basis of resolutions 1735
(2006), 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009), against Al-Qaida
individuals and entities financed by extremist groups
in the region through funds received from the illegal
narcotics trade. We understand, however, that limited
measures alone will not solve the problem. We are
therefore placing our hopes in the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, which is expected to
be a significant factor in stabilizing the situation in the
region through comprehensive technical assistance to
its States.

In providing such assistance, we must duly consider
the national priorities of State recipients. Our pursuit of
alternative ways to combat such criminal activities is a
priority in fighting drug trafficking. We need realistic
and effective programmes to create jobs in the region
that will narrow the social basis for trafficking. In that
regard, effective assistance could be provided by the
business community. A significant role in developing
a comprehensive socioeconomic strategy for the
States of the Sahel could also be played by making
use of the capabilities of agencies such as the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Increased attention should of course be paid to
the marginalization and radicalization of the young.
The focus of working with the youth in West Africa
and the Sahel must be not only on resolving the
employment issue but also on education, including the
implementation of relevant projects under the aegis of
the United Nations and UNESCO.

The capacities of the security and law-enforcement
forces ofthe States ofWest Africa and the Sahel must be
significantly strengthened. In that regard, it is important
to improve border security, step up information
exchange and train law-enforcement personnel. We
support the United Nations and UNODC in their work
with the African Union and the Economic Community
ofWest African States, as well as other African regional
agencies, in the joint effort to fight crime. For our part,
we are also undertaking efforts to provide assistance to
African States to prepare professional staff for careers
in health care and law enforcement. We are interested
in further developing such cooperation.

We support the presidential statement adopted
today on the issue of combating illegal drug trafficking
in West Africa and the Sahel (S/PRST/2013/22). We are
ready to continue constructive dialogue and effective
cooperation on countering narcotics with all United
Nations Member States. In particular, we are planning
important events on the issues of anti-drug cooperation
as part of the upcoming Russian presidency of the
Group of Eight.

