The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item Without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Shola Omoregie,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Omoregie to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
Director-General of the United Nations Office in
Vienna.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Costa to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Brazil.

It is so decided.

I invite Mrs. Viotti to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/395, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Shola Omoregie, Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau;
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
Director-General of the United Nations Office in
Vienna; and Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.

I give the floor to Mr. Shola Omoregie,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.


