Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is appalled by the decision of Russia
and China to veto an otherwise consensus resolution,
submitted by Morocco, the United Kingdom, the
United States, France, Germany, Portugal, Colombia,
Togo, Libya, Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Tunisia,
Oman and Turkey.

It has been 10 months since the Syrian people
bravely demanded their universal rights, and 10 months
since the Syrian regime responded by violently
repressing and killing its own people.

Six months ago the Council adopted a
presidential statement (S/PRST/20ll/l6) condemning
the widespread violations of human rights and the use
of force against civilians by the Syrian authorities. It
called for an immediate end to violence and
compliance with obligations under international law,
and for the Syrian Government to implement its stated
commitments to reform. On that day, the death toll in
12-22356
Syria stood at approximately one thousand. But the
Syrian regime only continued its brutal repression.

Four months ago, two Council members vetoed
an attempt to send a clear message to the Syrian regime
to end the bloodshed. That day, the death toll stood at
three thousand, and the Syrian regime only continued
its brutal repression.

The death toll today stands at around six
thousand. The Syrian regime has ferociously escalated
its already brutal repression in the last 24 hours,
subjecting the citizens of Horns to artillery and heavy
weaponry. The death toll will be high. Those who
blocked Council action today must ask themselves how
many more deaths they are prepared to tolerate before
they support even modest and measured action.

Last Tuesday, this Council and the world heard
from His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin
Jabr Al-Thani of Qatar and from the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States (see S/PV.67lO). They
came with a simple request for Security Council
support for the Arab League's plan to facilitate a
political transition and bring about a peaceful
resolution to the crisis. The original Moroccan draft
resolution did just that. From the outset it had support
from the vast majority of Council members and had the
backing of the Arab League.

Yet some Council members argued that the draft
resolution imposed regime change. It said no such
thing. But in an attempt to reach consensus, we
provided further assurances in the text. The same
minority argued that the text could somehow be used to
authorize military intervention. It did no such thing. It
was a Chapter VI resolution. But in an attempt to reach
consensus, we provided further assurances in the text.
The same minority argued that very modest language
expressing concern about weapons was somehow
tantamount to an arms embargo. It was not. But we
took it out. They said that mere mention of Arab
League sanctions was tantamount to United Nations
sanctions. It was not. But we took it out in an effort to
reach consensus.

The facts speak for themselves. There is nothing
in this text that should have triggered a veto. We
removed every possible excuse. The reality is that
Russia and China have today made a choice to turn
their backs on the Arab world and the support tyranny
rather than the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people. They have failed in their responsibility as
12-22356
permanent members of the Security Council, and they
have done so on the most shameful of days of the
Syrian killing machine's three hundred days of
oppression.

The United Kingdom will continue to support the
Arab League's efforts to bring about a peaceful
transition in Syria. We shall continue to support the
brave Syrian people in their demands for change. The
regime must cease the violence. There must now be a
transition to a new political dispensation. Should the
regime continue on its current bloody trajectory, we
will once again bring the issue back to this Council, in
consultation with our colleagues in the Arab League.

