Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Spain, Mr. Alfonso Dastis Quecedo, for
presiding over today's open debate. I also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, Mr. Kim Won-soo,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs. and the
two other for their respective briefings.

Efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and impede the acquisition
and use by non-State actors and especially terrorists
of WMDs and related materials and technologies are
conducive to the maintenance of international and
regional peace and security and are therefore consistent
with the common interests of the international
community. China wishes to put forward the
following proposals.

First, we should address both the symptoms and
the root causes to eradicate the proliferation problem.
Countries need to foster a new vision of common,
comprehensive, cooperative and sustained world
security, abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, build a fair and just
security architecture by all and for all, and thereby root
out the threat of proliferation.

Secondly, we should value multilateral mechanisms
and consolidate and develop the international
non-proliferation regime. Countries need to uphold
multilateralism and the principle of consensus. We
need to keep alive the pivotal role played by the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction. We should maintain
the authority and effectiveness of the international
non-proliferation regime and avoid double-standards.

Thirdly, we need to balance security and
development in pushing for solution to non-proliferation
problems. There is a need for the relationship between
non-proliferation and peaceful use to be properly
handled, while ensuring the right of all countries,
especially developing countries, to use and share
relevant science and technology in a peaceful manner.
Efforts also need to be made to prevent any country
from attempting to undertake proliferation activities on
the pretext of peaceful use.

Fourthly, we should strengthen international
cooperation to form synergy in addressing new
challenges. We need to find solutions to regional hot-
spot problems peacefully, by political and diplomatic
means. There is a need to establish sound international
norms on non-proliferation to prevent the WMDs and
related materials and technologies from falling into the
hands of non-State actors, especially terrorists.

Resolution 1540 (2004), which has epitomized the
consensus of countries on non-proliferation, facilitated
international non-proliferation cooperation and helped
to prevent non-State actors from acquiring WMDs
and related materials and technologies, is a significant
milestone. China attaches great importance to its
implementation and actively participates in the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its Group of Experts.

Since the beginning of this year, the 1540
Committee has conducted a comprehensive review
of the implementation of the resolution by States and
the work of the Committee over the past five years
and has analysed the progress and shortcomings
in the implementation of the resolution and made
recommendations on the way forward. China has
responsibly and constructively participated in
consultations on the draft resolution voted on earlier
and the comprehensive review, joined the consensus on
the comprehensive review, and co-sponsored and voted
in favour of the draft resolution.

Resolution 2325 (2016), which was adopted
unanimously today, and the comprehensive review will
help move forward the international non-proliferation
process. China wishes to make the following proposals
on strengthening the follow-up implementation of
the resolution and on improving the work of the
1540 Committee.
First, we must strictly abide by the mandate
of the resolution and based on the main thrust
to prevent non-state actors from engaging in
proliferation activities, ensure national ownership in
non-proliferation efforts and maintain the Committee's
facilitating and coordinating role in the implementation
of the resolution.

Secondly, we must enhance the relevance and
effectiveness of assistance projects to focus on meeting
the assistance needs of developing countries. A
combination of multiple measures is needed to assist
developing countries with their consent in strengthening
their capacity-building for the implementation of
the resolution.

Thirdly, countries need to take effective and viable
measures tailored to their different national conditions
and political systems to effectively strengthen the
implementation of the resolution and carry out
exchanges and cooperation in this regard.

Fourthly, we need to identify the future development
direction of the 1540 Committee mechanism, further
improve the efficiency of its work, maintain its function
to promote the non-proliferation efforts of States
through cooperation, and avoid being reduced to a mere
a non-proliferation-related investigative mechanism or
an export-control mechanism.

We in China firmly reject the proliferation of
WMDs and their means of delivery and reject the
acquisition and use of WMDs and related materials
and technologies by non-State actors, especially
terrorists. We must strictly abide by our international
non-proliferation obligations, take an active part in
international and regional non-proliferation cooperation
and work hard to facilitate political solutions to hot-
spot proliferation problems.

China supports the United Nations in playing its
due role in the area of non-proliferation. China will
continue to work with the international community
to make positive contributions to the promotion of
international non-proliferation efforts and to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

