Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General J ean-
Pierre Lacroix for his informative briefing. The African
vision for resolving the issues in the region, as outlined
by Mr. Maman Sidikou, the Permanent Secretary of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, and
Mr. Pierre Buyoya, High Representative of the African
Union for Mali and the Sahel, deserves the most serious
attention we can give it. We are also grateful to the rest
of today's briefers.

We agree with the alarming opinions on the
situation in the Sahel that have been expressed today.
The level of the threats to security and stability in that
part of Africa is unprecedentedly high. The terrorist
underground that has established itself in the region
is scaling up its operations and seeking to expand its
geographical territory. The number of new radical
groups is growing, as is organized crime, which is
actively exploiting the absence of any authority across
vast areas of the region. The roots of these problems are
well known. In the Sahel we are reaping the whirlwind
sown by the collapse of statehood in Libya, the legacy
of a crude foreign intervention. Practically speaking,
we believe it will be impossible to stabilize the situation
in the region without normalizing the situation in that
country.

We welcome the initiative of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to create a Joint Force to combat
terrorism and organized crime. In the 18 months of the
Joint Force's existence, undeniable progress has been
made. Several military operations have been carried
out, the staffing of military personnel is at 80 per cent,
the establishment of a headquarters and secretariat is
nearing completion and mechanisms have been created
for financing them. We expect that concrete plans for
the continuation of joint operations will be announced
in the near future. In our opinion the Joint Force has
already demonstrated that it represents a key factor in
ensuring the stability of the region. Of course, much
remains to be done. The 29 June terrorist attack on the
headquarters of the Joint Force in Se'vare was naturally
a heavy blow that has slowed the training process. At
the same time, it served to reveal the Joint Force's weak
spots. As we understand it, the relevant conclusions
have been drawn and work has begun to address the
errors. It will also be important to speed up the process
of building military camps for the Joint Force, solve the
problems of providing them with enough weapons and
improve the training of combat personnel.

Those issues cannot be resolved without ensuring
stable and predictable funding for the Sahel States'
joint military structures. We have seen that the funds
are slowly reaching the region. Unfortunately, many
of those who made financial pledges in this regard
have not been in a hurry to fulfil them. And owing
to a lack of funding, neither can the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali fully implement its mandate to support the Joint
Force.

We are convinced of the importance of further
coordinated efforts, on the part of both the Africans
and the international community, aimed at combating
extremism in the Sahel-Sahara region. Military
methods alone clearly cannot root out that evil. It
is also essential to effectively counter the spread of
extremist ideology, work constructively to tackle the
acute socioeconomic problems plaguing the countries
of the region and strengthen their State institutions, and
we want to highlight the key role of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel in addressing those
challenges.

Russia is studying the possibility of adjusting its
effective cooperation with the G-5 Sahel States in
order to deal with the region's pressing problems. We
are already giving military and technical assistance to
a number of the countries in the region and providing
training for military and police personnel. We will
continue to facilitate capacity-building for the armed
forces of the G-5 Sahel with the aim of enabling
their Joint Force to become an effective tool for the
restoration and maintenance of peace in West Africa.

