Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Prosecutor for her briefing. I would also
like to reaffirm our full support to the International
Criminal Court.

There are times in the history of international
relations in which unity may be achieved to prevent or
put an end to those atrocities, addressed in the terms
of the Rome Statute, that offend the conscience of
humankind. The announcement in February 2011, by
the Libyan regime itself, that it was preparing to commit
a bloodbath sparked such unity and the adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), which was a moment of unity
in the Security Council. We have known other such
moments with the adoption of resolutions on the Central
African Republic, and the same issue arises today with
regard to Syria.

The United Nations and regional organizations
together condemned the brutal abuses committed by
Libyan leaders. The International Criminal Court
has been at the heart of the process of rounding up
criminals, whatever their rank or affiliation.

When we take stock of the implementation of
resolution 1970 (2011), there is a question that by its
very nature remains unanswered: How many lives
were saved? Without doubt, there were thousands, and
history must give credit to the unanimity ofthe Security
Council, the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court.

Have we solved everything so far? Certainly not.
Libya is going through a transition with its difficulties
and uncertainties following 40 years of a mad
dictatorship. Violent acts continue, including against
diplomatic missions. But despite the catastrophic
legacy of Al-Qadhafi-ism, Libyans demonstrate
determination. They must continue to unite around a
common political project to complete the transition
to democracy. We wouldl ike to see a Government of
national unity formed quickly by the elected Prime
Minister, Mr. Ahmed Meitig. The Council has mobilized
to assist Libya, and we must continue that mobilization.

The cooperation of Libya with the International
Criminal Court is crucial to end the era of impunity
in that country, which in 2011 emerged from 42 years
of dictatorship. Despite its difficulties, Libya itself has
requested to try SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi, in accordance with the complementarity
principle of the Rome Statute. The Libyan authorities
have thus expressed their willingness to assume
responsibility. Tripoli's two inadmissibility challenges
are at the appeal stage, and I will therefore not comment
on them.

Whatever the decision of the Court may be,
Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), must
comply with the judges' decisions. Libya's compliance
with its international obligations will be a further
demonstration of its commitment to the rule of law.
There is no competition between national justice and
the International Criminal Court, either in Libya or
elsewhere. Libya has clear obligations under resolution
1970 (2011). It has committed to respecting them, and
it must do so. For other procedures, as Ms. Bensouda
recalled, the signing ofthe burden-sharing memorandum
of understanding between the Court and the Libyan
authorities represents an innovative and positive
approach. The memorandum must be implemented.

Beyond those symbolic cases, other challenges
exist. The Prosecutor mentioned allegations of crimes
committed by supporters of Al-Qadhafi who may today
reside outside of Libyan territory and pose a threat to
the new Libyan authorities. She can be assured of our
support in that regard.

Light must also be shed on allegations of crimes
such as those reportedly committed in Misrata,
Tawergha and in Bani Walid. We regret that the return
of communities in Tawergha to their villages has been
delayed.

We also express our deep concern about the
practice of torture and deaths in the illegal detention
centres controlled by armed brigades. About 7,000
cases remain, including children. Those practices must
end. Like the Prosecutor, we encourage the Libyan
authorities to implement the law adopted in April
2013 criminalizing torture, forced disappearance and
discrimination. The armed groups must be reminded
that the fight against impunity applies to all.

The task today is to follow up that approach,
including beyond the case of Libya. The continuing
process also calls for Libya's full cooperation with the
Court, as well as the increased responsibility on the
part of the Secretariat and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya in terms of the activities of the Court's
bodies, so as to ensure that this Mission effectively
supports the fight against impunity.

We must also again restore unity in the Council
so as to save human lives today in Syria, far beyond
the political wrangling and in the name of humanity's
conscience, which animated the Council on 26 February
2011 (see S/PV.6491).

