Mr. Levitte (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central
and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia, as well as Cyprus, Malta and
Turkey, also associated countries, align themselves
with this statement.

I should like first of all to warmly welcome the
presence among of us of Mr. Svilanovic, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
who is representing his country today at the Security
Council table.
In the case of Kosovo, I should remind the
meeting that, for the European Union, the full
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) must be the
be all and end all of international community action. At
our meeting on 16 November, in the presence of the
Secretary-General's special representative, I had
occasion to mention the impressive achievements of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK)in this area over the last year and a
half. The holding of non-violent and remarkably well
organized municipal elections in Kosovo on 28
October, with the help of the Kosovo Force and the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, was a major feather in the cap for UNMIK.

Mr. Kouchner should be congratulated on his
exceptional efforts in this regard. We would like to
give him the most sincere congratulations of our 15
countries on the completion of his term of office. I
should like to assure his successor, Mr. Hans

S/PVAZA')

 

Haekkerup, here and now, of the European Union's full
support.

Action to combat violence should remain a
priority for the Secretary-General's new representative.
The fact is that men and women in Kosovo continue to
be killed because of their ethnic background or the
moderate opinions voiced by them in political debates.
Furthermore, in the Presevo Valley, extremist groups of
Albanian origin have killed police officers of Serbian
origin. They seek to maintain a state of instability by
harassing the forces of law and order. The reaction of
the Kosovo Force to this provocation has been to
increase the number of control points and step up its
patrols at the borders of the ground safety zone. These
measures have led to the seizure of weapons and the
arrest of dozens of suspects. The Kosovo Force is
continuing to reinforce its presence in this sector and is
also active in fighting crime country-wide, in
conditions which are, at all times, difficult and
sometimes at the cost of the lives of some of its
members.

President Kostunica has called on the people to
respect the laws and not to fall into the trap of
extremists who seek to increase tension. The
international community must throw all its weight into
ensuring that this message is heard by the people. It
must also make it absolutely clear to the agitators that
they will be unable to rely on its tolerance and
understanding.

The European Union therefore welcomes the
presidential statement on which the Security Council
has today agreed. This statement is a clear message of
the international commitment to the fight against
violence and the search for dialogue. Mr. Svilanovic,
when he returns to Europe -in fact to Paris, where
President Kostunica will visit, giving him an
opportunity to receive the signs of friendship from
France-will be able to confirm this fact to the
highest Yugoslav authorities.

On 1 November, Mr. Svilanovic set out before the
United Nations the principles which would be
governing the action of the new Yugoslav authorities.
He proclaimed his country's pledge to comply with the
Charter, emphasizing in particular that the
consolidation of democracy and reconciliation between
the peoples of the region would be among the top
priorities of President Kostunica and his Government.
He also expressed the hope of a rapprochement
between South-East Europe and the European Union.

Major steps have been accomplished to date. The
new Yugoslav authorities have worked actively on the
realization of this programme. Even though extremist
nationalism continues to rear its head here and there,
democracy has now become established in the region.
Continuing intolerance, violence and ethnic hatreds are
becoming increasingly a memento of the past.

The establishment at the regional level of
diplomatic relations between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Bosnia and Herzegovina on 15
December was one of the most long-awaited measures.
After years of conflict and suspicion, this decision,
which the European Union welcomes, will help to set
the seal on reconciliation in the Balkans. Coming as it
does less than a month after the Zagreb summit, which
proclaimed the European orientation of all the
countries in the region, it represents a very positive and
encouraging development.

Mr. Minister, today, on behalf of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, you have signed the Rome
Statute, which creates the International Criminal Court,
thereby demonstrating the standing commitment of the
new Yugoslav authorities to respect international
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity.

Mr. Minister, the European Union wishes to
assure the Yugoslav authorities, through you, of its
support for their action in favour of stabilization,
democratization and reconciliation in South-East
Europe.

