Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
would like to join previous speakers in expressing its
gratitude to Ambassador Arias for his briefing and for
his leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). We have welcomed the work that has been
accomplished in the Committee and the submission of
its tenth 90-day work programme (S/2004/32, annex).
Important progress was made during the past quarter
under Ambassador Arias's leadership. We are confident
that the Committee will maintain its momentum and
that it will implement its work programme.

Over the past 25 years, Pakistan has been a
principal victim of terrorism. Since 11 September
2001, we have been at the forefront of the global
campaign against terrorism. Confronted by terrorist
attacks against innocent people in our cities -
including attacks against the President of Pakistan -
my Government is steadfastly committed to achieving
success in the war against terrorism. We believe that,
with determination and cooperation - but also with
wisdom - that war can be fought and won.

Even as we speak, Pakistani forces are engaged in
operations to wipe out what remains of the Taliban and
Al Qaeda elements on the frontier between Pakistan
and Afghanistan. This is the first time in Pakistan's
history that our armed forces have been deployed in
such large numbers - 70,000 - in the tribal areas of
Pakistan bordering Afghanistan to interdict and hunt
down Al Qaeda and Taliban elements. Pakistan has
developed an effective intelligence network and a
quick-reaction force for that purpose. We have captured
more than 500 Al Qaeda and Taliban operatives in this
campaign. Needless to say, Pakistan has paid a high
human and economic cost in pursuing this anti-terrorist
campaign.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee was set up
after 11 September 2001, when the Security Council
determined that international terrorism, as a
phenomenon, constituted a threat to international peace
and security. The CTC was designed as a unique body
and was directed to address what was an amorphous,
sometimes undefined phenomenon - a threat whose
specific manifestations were not always clear or
anticipated.

Since its establishment, the CTC has
accomplished valuable goals: among other things,
ensuring general adherence by Member States to
international counter-terrorism conventions, energizing
States to adopt important legislation, ensuring timely
reporting of such national and international efforts to
combat terrorism and enhancing coordination among
States in the campaign against terrorism. The CTC's
accomplishments have been due, in no small measure,
to the energy and commitment of its two Chairpersons,
first Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock of the United
Kingdom, and currently Ambassador Inocencio Arias
of Spain. There is no doubt that the Committee's wide-
ranging responsibilities and, especially, the need to
ensure timely implementation and reporting of the
means adopted by Member States to combat terrorism
have imposed a heavy burden on the successive
Chairmen and their delegations, as well as on the small
Secretariat support staff assisting the CTC. Therefore,
Pakistan supports the efforts of the CTC Chairman to
revitalize the work of the Committee, as reflected in
the CTC's report on its revitalization (S/2004/124, annex).

In our view, the revitalization of the CTC should
focus on substance, rather than on form. It is important
to assess and encourage concrete actions by States
against terrorism, rather than to focus on the evaluation
of reports and documents. The CTC should also be
enabled to promote a comprehensive approach to
combat terrorism, addressing the current and mutating
nature of the terrorist threat, the greater and vigorous
emphasis on intelligence and information sharing,
intelligence analysis, early warning and appropriate
law enforcement, administrative and political actions
against terrorist threats, including strengthened
policing of borders, prevention of terrorist financing
and building capacity within States for combating
terrorism and extremism. The CTC also needs to
address the root causes of terrorism: economic and
political injustice, foreign occupation, poverty and
extremism.

The Chairman's report has been the subject of
extensive discussions in the CTC at the level of
experts. We believe there is need to carefully consider
the approach outlined in the report and in the draft
resolution circulated by the Chairman. We should
create institutional or Secretariat structures which
conform to the provisions of the Charter and respect
the prerogatives and responsibilities of the Secretary-
General and the General Assembly.

It can be argued that the CTC needs the assistance
of an operational body for discharging certain specific
tasks within a limited period of time, such as
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), by Member States. Therefore, we would be
prepared to consider the creation of a supplementary
and special group to assist the Committee with that
task. Such a special body should be created for a
limited period of time and should not set a precedent
for other future structures. We are therefore heartened
by the remarks made by the Chairman of the
Committee that the proposed structure will be of a
special nature and will not set a precedent for the
future. Those assurances should be appropriately
reflected in the draft resolution which is to be adopted.

In that context, we also welcome the views
conveyed by the Secretariat in a letter to the Chairman
of the CTC yesterday. We trust that further
consultations on the proposed draft resolution will
involve close interaction with the Secretariat, and that
its views will be taken into account, and will bring the
provisions of the draft resolution in line with the
requirements of the Charter. Similarly we hope that the
views expressed by non-members of the Security
Council in this debate today, will also be taken into
account in finalizing the draft resolution. Through such
a transparent and interactive process, we look forward
to the adoption by consensus of the draft resolution on
the CTC's revitalization.

