Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Egyptian delegation
for organizing today's meeting and for the briefing
by Mr. Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.

Sanctions are one of the most important instruments
in the Security Council's toolbox. However, political
practice has shown that restrictive measures cannot
be an end in themselves. Their job is to assist in the
achievement of political and diplomatic solutions to
conflict situations, and the Council alone has the right
to impose and use them in support of the clear and
legitimate goals that are enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

We recognize the importance of improving
sanctions. We believe they should be limited in
duration, subject to regular review and have clear
criteria for being phased out. It is important to ensure
that they focus on those who are genuinely responsible
for instigating crises. They should not harm civilians or
socioeconomic development, which is why it is essential
to study the situation carefully before introducing
them. Using restrictive measures to overthrow
objectionable regimes, including through economic
strangulation or by influencing their circumstances, is
unacceptable. We believe that the wilful interpretation
of sanctions decisions is illegitimate. Experience has
shown that it is liable to increase chaos and worsen
civilian populations' suffering. It is also important to
ensure that sanctions texts do not depart from generally
recognized international legal standards. Sanctions
should never be wielded as a club against diplomatic
and consular representatives, whose activities have
been seriously complicated by expanded interpretations
of existing restrictions, constituting a violation of the
Vienna Conventions.

With regard to the work of the Security Council
Sanctions Committees, I would like to emphasize that
any infringement on their prerogatives should not
tolerated. In particular, we see no need for duplicating
their powers by adding bureaucratic superstructures,
including working groups. Every sanctions regime
is individual and unique by definition, and what is
useful for some issues can be counterproductive
for others. It is important to emphasize that as an
intergovernmental organization, the United Nations
should reserve the prerogative of decision-making
for Member States. In that context, we are wary of
the idea of introducing supporters of stakeholders
into the decision-making chain. It is no secret that
they may be fronting for influence groups interested
in a particular outcome, not to mention the fact that
most of the Sanctions Committees have their own
monitoring groups providing independent evaluations
and recommendations. It is regrettable that the use of
unilateral restrictions, often on top of Security Council
decisions, is becoming the norm today. That frequently
implies unfair economic competition. Such policies
undermine political and diplomatic efforts to resolve
crises, run counter to efforts to strengthen international
cooperation, violate States' sovereignty and legitimate
interests and have nothing to do with the concerns of a
global Organization.

We are ready to continue constructive discussion
of the issue of improving sanctions mechanisms. In
that context, we believe it would be useful to return to
the results of the Council's Informal Working Group
on General Issues of Sanctions. Its achievements,
including a final report (S/2006/997), made a significant
contribution to improving the effectiveness of the work
of the relevant Committees. Many of them could be
adapted to current realities.

