Let me apologize on behalf of Minister Blok, who had looked forward to participating in this important meeting. Unfortunately, he had to cancel at the last moment because of unforeseen developments that required his attention. My Minister asked me to convey his deep appreciation for the efforts of Germany regarding the issue at hand in general and the personal efforts of Minister Maas in particular. It is now nearly six months since the Berlin Conference. We commend the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Williams specifically, in keeping up the momentum created in January despite the unprecedented times we are now facing with the coronavirus disease crisis. It is indeed a Herculean task. Continuous disregard of the weapons embargo and increased foreign intervention have driven Libya to a point of regional escalation, putting all the Libyan people at risk. These developments endanger the country's territorial integrity and sovereignty, which runs counter to what the United Nations and the Security Council stands for. We call on all members to recommit to the Berlin conclusions and move towards de-escalation, especially in the short term around Sirte and Al-Jufra. We are therefore supportive of the idea, proposed by you, Mr. Minister, in your national statement just now, to demilitarize this area and to create a buffer zone there. We very much welcome the resumption of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks and call on them to settle on a lasting ceasefire and discard the zero-sum attitude. We are also encouraged by the various political initiatives and prospects of inter-Libyan talks in Geneva under the auspices of UNSMIL. The Kingdom of the Netherlands, together with Switzerland, is pleased to have joined the international follow-up committee on Libya by co-chairing the international humanitarian law and human rights working group. We need to actively deal with the horrors of the conflict, such as the horrific mass graves around Tarhouna. We must hold the perpetrators accountable, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands fully supports the statement of our Belgian colleague to that effect just now. Accountability is crucial to breaking the vicious cycle of violence based on revenge and impunity. In that context, we also welcome the establishment of the fact-finding mission and the work of the International Criminal Court. We call on all parties, national and international, to provide the necessary support for their activities. Let me end by reiterating our support for UNSMIL in bringing about a lasting solution to the Libyan crisis within the framework of the Berlin conclusions. The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that all parties in Libya should engage in a serious political dialogue. Any solution to the Libyan crisis should be Libyan-led and Libyan-owned. The Libyan people have suffered from insecurity for far too long. They deserve to live in a peaceful, secure and prosperous country.
