Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): I
would like to join other members in thanking
Ambassador Arias for his report to us this morning and
to also congratulate him for the work that he has done
as the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) over the months.

Perhaps the most significant contribution by the
Security Council to the global campaign against
terrorism has been the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001), which established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Through its capacity-building and global
coordination initiatives, the Committee has become a
significant element of the worldwide campaign against
terrorism. It has helped energize States and
organizations around the world to pay more attention to
combating terrorism, whether through the adoption of
new - or the improvement of existing - counter-
terrorism legislation or the development and
implementation of counter-terrorism action plans.
While the Committee has performed admirably, much
work remains to be done.

In the two and a half years since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001), despite the global counter-
terrorism effort, the terrorists and their supporters have
continued to strike, whether in Bali, Moscow,
Casablanca, Riyadh, Baghdad, Istanbul, Haifa,
Jerusalem, Karbala, Quetta or elsewhere. Terrorism has
continued to spread, raising the spectre of further
deadly attacks on innocent victims and continuing
threats to international peace and security.

The Security Council must remain at the forefront
of the international community's campaign to rid the
world of the scourge of terrorism. To do so, it must act
with a renewed sense of urgency and a commitment to
a sustained and determined effort to defeat this global
scourge. It must act as though 11 September took place
yesterday, not more than two years ago. It must not
wait for the next major terrorist act to occur to become
energized. The Council and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee must never forget that, as long as a few
States are not acting quickly enough to raise their
capacity to fight terrorism, we all remain vulnerable.

The Committee has initially responded to the
challenge. It has identified not only the difficulties
States are having in implementing resolution 1373
(2001), but it has also highlighted its own internal
structural problems that are preventing it from
performing more effectively. It must continue to
innovate and evolve.

After months of deliberations, the Committee has
agreed that restructuring its support staff is needed to
enable the Committee to carry out all of the current and
new tasks in its approved work programme,
particularly in the facilitation of technical assistance
and coordination among international, regional and
subregional organizations. The proposal presented by
Chairman Arias not only reflects the views of all 15
Committee members, but also takes into account
detailed discussions with the Secretariat.

Once the proposed restructuring becomes a
reality, the CTC can become more effective in fulfilling
its mandate of monitoring States' efforts to implement
all of the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). It will
be able to work more closely with States in identifying
gaps in their counter-terrorism capabilities and in
finding the necessary technical assistance to fill those
gaps. In addition, it will expand its efforts to galvanize
organizations worldwide to adopt and implement best
practices, codes and standards and to ensure that their
members are implementing the requirements of the
resolution. Of course, it will do this while respecting
what have become its hallmarks: transparency,
cooperation and even-handedness.

Finding innovative ways to address the ongoing
threat to international peace and security posed by
terrorism presents the Council with a unique challenge.
The Council must not become complacent in this
search. It must continue to explore ways to enhance its
contribution in this area. The adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) and the creation of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee were central elements of the Council's
extraordinary response to this unique situation. We
View the CTC's restructuring proposal as a
continuation of that response and as a managerial
reform after the experience of 30 months of work. The
CTC has fulfilled its responsibility by studying the
problem and proposing the solution. The Council must
now do its part and take the necessary action to make
the proposal a reality.

