Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
meeting.

(spoke in English)

Allow me to start by congratulating the delegations
of Uruguay, Egypt, Japan, Senegal and Ukraine for the
beginning of their tenure as elected members of the
Security Council. I would also like to commend your
leadership, Sir, during your presidency of the Council,
as well as the five outgoing delegations - Chad, Chile,
Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria - for the excellent job
done. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.

At the end of 2015, while the world celebrated
milestones that resulted in the culmination of certain
efforts of international political will, from Sendai to
New York and from Addis Ababa to Paris, the Middle
East continued to struggle with yet another sombre
and traumatizing year haunted by Israeli occupation,
terrorism, conflicts, violence and violations of human
rights. Indeed, the absence of collective political will
is turning the land of faith and hope into the land of
hatred and sorrow.

The year 2015 came to an end in my country
with 1,168 Israeli violations of Lebanon's sovereignty
by land, air and sea. These are facts. No unfounded
accusations or attempts to blame Lebanese parties will
change them. Hard facts remain hard facts. A simple
calculation proves that Israel commits an average of
3.2 violations against my country per day. All those
violations have been communicated to the Council and
circulated as official documents of the United Nations.
They illustrate the systematic disregard by Israel of
our collective will to advance the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

On 28 January 2015, the escalation along the Blue
Line resulted in the killing of a Spanish soldier by
Israel, and on 4 January 2016 Israel bombarded six
Lebanese Villages for one hour. These are just a few
examples of unilateral actions taken by Israel, which
undermine the work of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the Lebanese Armed
Forces, threaten their security and jeopardize efforts
to maintain stability in the region. It is alarming that
Israel not only refuses to abide by its obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006), but that it continues to take
unilateral and provocative actions in a show of blatant
disrespect for the tripartite mechanism established by
UNIFIL.

Despite the complex political situation in my
country, my Government has reaffirmed time and
again its unwavering support for the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety. It also renewed
its determination to continue combating terrorism and
to address the social, economic and security impacts of
the continuing flux of refugees from Syria. We clearly
stated that the exodus of despair of the Syrian refugees
should summon in all of us our shared values of
humanity and the will to put on track a serious political
process to end this protracted conflict. In that regard,
Lebanon acknowledges the adoption of resolution 2254
(2015) and looks forward to the upcoming Syria donors
conference in London next month. That meeting should
be an opportunity to reinvigorate international efforts
to share responsibilities with regard to the refugees and
to alleviate their suffering and the burden on their host
communities.

What can be said about the situation in the occupied
territories of the State of Palestine in 2015? The Israeli
reign of terror continues unabated. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded the
highest number of casualties in October, with 51 killed
and 7,027 injured Palestinians. Israeli authorities have
been detaining more than 8,000 children since 2000,
and prosecuting more than 700 children per year. That
means that at least two generations of Palestinian
youth do not know anything other than administrative
detention and Israeli might. They deserve better choices.
How many Palestinian generations must suffer from
illegal Israeli practices - which in many cases result
in extrajudicial execution - for the Security Council
to act? For how long will this organ remain silent while
the so-called self-proclaimed "only democracy" in the
Middle East continues the demolition of houses, the
seizure of Palestinian land - the latest being 370 acres
in the West Bank - the intensification of settlement
activities and the isolation measures that segregate
people in East Jerusalem, denying them the exercise of
their fundamental and inalienable rights? All of that is
part of a clear and undeniable endeavour to render the
two-State solution an unattainable objective.

The unravelling of this tragedy in the occupied
State of Palestine requires immediate action by the
international community to provide international
protection to the Palestinian people. This tragedy should
arouse within the Council the political will to establish
a new, credible and comprehensive framework for
negotiations, which should be conducted within a defined
time frame and based on the well-known parameters set
by the relevant United Nations resolutions, in particular
all Security Council resolutions, General Assembly
resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (III), the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Let us make 2016 the year of achievements and
of the fulfilment of hopes and aspirations. Let us
demonstrate to the peoples of the Middle East that they
are neither forgotten nor left alone.

