Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank Under- Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga- Anyanga for their comprehensive updates. I would like to start by welcoming the improvements in bilateral relations between the Government of the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan. The United Kingdom also wishes to commend the role that the Government of South Sudan played in facilitating the negotiations that led to the signing of the Juba peace agreement on 3 October. The United Kingdom calls for the swift implementation of that agreement, including in the two areas. We also welcome the resumption of negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and the Al-Hilu faction of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement- North. We continue to urge all parties to engage constructively, without preconditions, in order to deliver a peaceful and swift resolution. We are also encouraged that last month saw a high- level meeting between representative of the Sudan and South Sudan to discuss the final status of Abyei and other border areas. The indicated willingness of both Governments to seize this opportunity is long overdue. However, it is disappointing that this rapprochement has yet to translate into progress on the ground in Abyei. We call on both countries to build on this renewed engagement at the senior and local levels towards resolving the final status of Abyei. Turning to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), the United Kingdom commends the role that the mission has continued to play in supporting peace and security in Abyei. We welcome UNISFA's ongoing engagement with the Government of the Sudan and the Government of South Sudan, the implementation of the quick-impact projects, the removal of explosive hazards and the continuation of humanitarian support. UNISFA's continued efforts to support women's empowerment in Abyei are also critical. We regret, however, that the mission continues to face obstacles to delivering its mandated activities. It is clear that those blockages are severely affecting the stability and security of the region. This comes at a time when there have been increasing incidents of violence, including attacks on peacekeepers and criminal acts, alongside the continued appalling rates of sexual and gender-based violence in the region. We urge both parties to work with the mission to make progress on the establishment of the Abyei police force as a mechanism to ensure that stability and security issues are addressed. There is a clear need to boost the civilian and police components to empower UNISFA to best support the local community. We therefore repeat our call on the Government of the Sudan to facilitate the issuance of all outstanding visa requests, especially those for police personnel. The Security Council has also repeatedly called for the Governments of both the Sudan and South Sudan to facilitate the operationalization of Athony airstrip. The coronavirus disease has served to underline the importance of ensuring the provision of swift medical evacuations for United Nations personnel. This is particularly the case for UNISFA, given its remoteness. The continued denial of this request unfortunately shows the disregard for safety of United Nations personnel. We repeat our call for all parties to fully respect international humanitarian law and allow humanitarian actors to deliver aid to those in need without hindrance. In conclusion, the United Kingdom commends the vital role UNISFA plays in the maintaining the stability of Abyei and the assistance it provides to the achievement of a final settlement on its status. We urge the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to see the United Nations as a key partner in supporting their efforts on this matter.
