Mr. Owada (Japan): The United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) has so far achieved
impressive success in preventing the spillover of conflicts
elsewhere in the region into the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia. However, the current situation in Kosovo
raises serious concern in terms of peace and security in the
region, including Macedonia. My delegation therefore
welcomes the recommendation of the Secretary-General to
extend the mandate of UNPREDEP after 31 August of this
year for an additional six months, primarily because of the
situation in neighbouring Kosovo.

My delegation also considers that UNPREDEP, with
its increased strength, will have sufficient capability to play
a significant role in a comprehensive regime to monitor the
implementation of the arms embargo set out by Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998). The Government of Japan
is of the View that the effective prevention of the influx of
weapons and armed personnel to Kosovo Albanians is as
important as pressure on the authorities in Belgrade in order
to stop the violence in Kosovo. My delegation therefore
fully supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to increase the strength of UNPREDEP.

For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution now before us, which purports to
enable UNPREDEP to further contribute to the maintenance
of peace and stability in the region.

I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
basic position of my Government concerning the Kosovo
crisis, which is so clearly reflected in the statement on
Kosovo issued in London by the Foreign Ministers of the
Contact Group countries, Canada and Japan on 12 June of
this year.

The authorities in Belgrade must cease all actions by
the security forces which affect the civilian population.
They must enable unimpeded international monitoring in
Kosovo and facilitate the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their homes. They must also make substantial
progress in the dialogue with the Kosovo Albanian
leadership. At the same time, the Kosovo Albanians -
who also share the responsibility for the immediate
cessation of hostilities - must make very clear their
rejection of Violence and acts of terrorism. As is
mentioned in the London statement, a political dialogue
is unlikely to take root if Violence continues to be
espoused by members of the Kosovo Albanian
community.

I should like to close by expressing the deep
appreciation of my Government to all the men and
women working for UNPREDEP for their efforts and
dedication in carrying out their important mission.

