Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Angola voted in
favour of the resolution and we are proud to be part of
the consensus reached within the Security Council in
adopting that seminal text. This was a wish that we
expressed from the very beginning of our
consultations. With this, we have done justice to the
validity and vitality of multilateralism. When things
looked so dark in Iraq, the United Nations played the
role that only it could play - a vital and unifying role.
We are poised to emerge from the crisis with a stronger
United Nations ready to act in providing the answers
when needed.

Today's resolution clearly provides for the
partnership of Iraqis and the international community.
Angola proudly commends the Secretary-General for
the wisdom and leadership he has once again
demonstrated. Angola is proud to praise the
statesmanship and self-reliance of Lakhdar Brahimi, as
well as his ability to listen to Iraqis and so faithfully to
translate their messages to the international community.

Resolution 1546 (2004), which we have just
adopted, represents a clear departure from earlier
Security Council resolutions 1483 (2003) and 1511
(2003). We are indeed grateful to the sponsors for their
willingness to respond to the concerns raised during the
consultations. Indeed, the spirit of give and take which
characterized our negotiations resulted in a better and
clearer resolution, and also a stronger Security Council.

Resolution 1546 (2004) provides for the
restoration of full sovereignty to Iraq, based on its
independence and unity; the right of the Iraqi people
freely to determine their own political future and to
control over their natural resources; the need for the
continued presence of a multinational force, in
partnership with the Iraqi authorities and in full respect
for their sovereignty; and a clear role for and the
importance of the United Nations in the political
process, including beyond the elections.

The continued support of the international
community, and especially of the neighbouring
countries, is critical to helping the Iraqi people to meet
the challenges ahead. Today's resolution stresses that
important point, and Lakhdar Brahimi, in his wisdom,
reinforces and reminds us of the importance of this
support. We are confident that the Iraqi people will
emerge from the democratic process with renewed
strength to tackle the key national challenges: the
consolidation of peace and stability, long-term national
reconciliation and economic recovery.

