Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
My delegation heartily welcomes the adoption of resolution
998 (1995), on the strengthening of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). It was essential for the
Council to act swiftly in order to make possible the prompt
deployment of elements of the rapid reaction force
proposed by the United Kingdom, France and the
Netherlands.

As the Council knows, the Governments of those three
countries, faced with the grave deterioration of the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina - the systematic impeding of
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, the blockading of
the Sarajevo airport, attacks against UNPROFOR personnel,
the taking of UNPROFOR personnel as hostages and
attacks against the civilian population - decided that the
only possible response was to provide UNPROFOR with
new means, for twin objectives. The first is to better assure
the security of its personnel. It was inadmissible that
UNPROFOR personnel should continue to be subjected to
threats, restrictions on their freedom of action, detention or
direct attacks as they carried out their functions. The United
Nations soldiers could not continue to live in that state of
constant insecurity and humiliation. The second objective is
to enable UNPROFOR to fulfil its mission. In this regard,
it was necessary to give the military commanders in the
field a broader range of means to react. At present they can
choose only between endless - and usually fruitless -
negotiations with the parties and resort to air power.

I would like to emphasize in this respect that the
nature of the United Nations operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not be changed. There will be no
change in UNPROFOR's mandate or in its rules of
engagement. The elements of the rapid reaction force will
act in support of UNPROFOR within the framework of its
mandate. They will be placed within the existing United
Nations chain of command. Their tasks will be set by the
commanders of the United Nations peace force and
UNPROFOR on the ground. The missions of the rapid
reaction force will consist essentially of emergency
actions to help isolated or threatened units or to help in
the redeployment of UNPROFOR elements in order to
make them less vulnerable or facilitate their freedom of
movement, which is so essential.

The resolution the Council has just adopted contains
a provision that the modalities of financing will be
determined later. To our mind, this is not a matter of
bypassing the usual rules for financing peace-keeping
operations, nor is it an attempt to undermine the
prerogatives of the General Assembly. We understand that
this provision simply means that it is not up to the
Council itself to establish the modalities for financing for
an operation it decides upon. It goes without saying that
the deployment of additional troops must not be delayed
because of this.

Faced with UNPROFOR'S serious difficulties on the
ground, the impossibility of its carrying out its missions
and the attacks to which it has been subjected, the
Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands, rather than electing to withdraw from Bosnia
and Herzegovina, proposed that additional means be made
available to the United Nations. The resolution the
Council has just adopted will have to be implemented
quickly if we want to make UNPROFOR less vulnerable
and enable it to carry out its mandate: to assure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, see that the safe areas
are respected and monitor current or future agreements on
a cease-fire and a cessation of hostilities.

My Government expects the new means made
available to the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be used judiciously, but not weakly. The
humiliation of UNPROFOR personnel must cease, and the
United Nations mandate must henceforth be carried out.
France will not remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina unless
its soldiers can maintain their pride and honour and serve
effectively in the cause of peace.

 

I would like to emphasize in this connection that
strengthening UNPROFOR and improving its conditions for
carrying out its mandate, thus making it possible for United
Nations contingents to remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
have only one purpose: to promote the pursuit of the peace
process by stabilizing the situation and by facilitating a
cessation of hostilities. From this standpoint, it is essential
that the parties understand that there is no military solution
to the conflict and that they should refrain from taking any
action that might lead to an escalation, which would
endanger the chances for a peaceful solution. It is just as
important that the party that has not yet done so accept the
Contact Group plan as a starting point for any overall
political solution.

My Government is determined that the sacrifices it has
made thus far and the new efforts to which it is prepared to
commit itself must not be in vain. It will spare no effort to
restart the negotiation process and will fully support all
initiatives to that end.

