Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for being at this meeting,
for his briefing and for all the work that his team is
doing on the ground to help the people of Syria.

The United Kingdom joins other colleagues in
welcoming the adoption of resolution 2449 (2018). This
ensures that aid can continue to move across borders
to reach those people who depend on its arrival. We
thank the co-penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, for their
sustained efforts to make agreement today possible.

As others have noted, this resolution keeps open
routes for humanitarian aid that offer a lifeline to
millions of Syrians, including those in hard-to-reach
areas and those who could not otherwise receive the
support they need. The United Nations has stated that
2.6 million people are accessible only through these
cross-border routes.

The decision to renew resolution 2165 (2014) by
way of today's adoption is therefore positive, but it is
no cause for celebration, as the need for its renewal
is the result solely of the dire situation on the ground.
Approximately 13 million people in Syria need
humanitarian assistance, and 5.2 million of them are
considered to be in acute need.

As the Dutch Minister reminded us, every month we
come to the Council, we hear a briefing from the Under-
Secretary-General and we say the same things. Every
month there is a list from Under-Secretary-General of
requests that the United Nations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) have
made for access for humanitarian assistance, and every
month, very sadly and almost criminally negligently,
the Syrian Government does not grant the request of
the United Nations humanitarian wing. I think we all
need to demand a really comprehensive answer as to
why the requests from OCHA are not being met when
so many people depend on humanitarian assistance
for their survival. I really would appeal through
you, Mr. President, to both the Russian and Syrian
representatives in the Chamber today to let us have a
proper explanation or, better, to grant the requests of
OCHA so that those people can get the help they need.

We want to look forward to a time when
humanitarian aid is no longer necessary, when we can
offer help in rebuilding and reconstruction and when
conditions allow the Syrians who have had to flee to
return to their homes voluntarily, in safety and dignity
and in line with international humanitarian law. But we
need to be crystal clear that we are not there yet; Syria
is not there yet. This resolution, as both my French
and American colleagues noted, is emphatically not a
call for refugee return. It is for the Syrian parties to
create conditions that are conducive to their safe and
voluntary return. That is a critical distinction. The
Al-Assad regime, supported by its backers, has not
only created an environment that makes humanitarian
aid essential for millions of Syrians, but it continues
to use aid as a weapon of war. We therefore call on the
Syrian authorities to cease doing that respond to the
requests of the United Nations and engage with the
political process to pursue a credible, balanced political
settlement, which provides the only foreseeable way out
of the conflict. We look to Russia to use its influence
with the Syrian authorities to press them to do that,
maintain the ceasefire in Idlib, in accordance with the
Sochi agreement, and ensure that humanitarian access
continues for as long as it is necessary.

I also want to echo that reconstruction money will not
be available from my Government or from our partners
until there is a viable and lasting political process.

Adopting today's resolution sends a clear message
from the international community that we remain
committed to supporting the people of Syria. At the
same time, it also sends a very clear message that aid
should never be use as a weapon and must reach those
who need it without impediment. It is also an important
reminder that, notwithstanding our differences, as
the Dutch Minister further reminded us, the Council
can - and should - act on Syria.

