Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I
have addressed the Council under your presidency, Sir,
allow me to share with you our pleasure at seeing you,
the Ambassador of a friendly and brotherly country,
chairing the meetings of the Council this month.

Allow me also to express through you our
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Peter

 

Burleigh, for the highly efficient manner in which he
guided the affairs of the Council last month.

Since the last full meeting of the Security Council on
the Afghanistan issue, on 28 August 1998, there has been
a significant improvement in the internal situation of
Afghanistan as well as a visible reduction in the tension
between Afghanistan and Iran. These positive developments
are attributable to the concerted efforts of the international
community, particularly the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and to the
determination of the people and leadership of Afghanistan
to restore peace in their country.

Despite these positive developments, much needs to be
done to steer the country out of the devastation of a
protracted conflict and to put it on the track of
reconciliation, progress and prosperity. The people of
Afghanistan deserve peace after seeing the plundering of
their country as a result of a prolonged and brutal Soviet
occupation and the subsequent internal power struggle
among the Afghan factions.

We want to place on record our appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and his Special Envoy,
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, for their concerted efforts
towards the restoration of peace in Afghanistan. It was due
to a timely initiative of the Secretary General that the
ministerial meeting of the "six plus two" countries was
convened in New York on 21 September 1998. The
meeting took a number of important decisions, including
the decision to request Ambassador Brahimi to visit the
region to defuse the potentially volatile situation created by
the tension between Afghanistan and Iran.

Ambassador Brahimi's visit to Afghanistan, in
coordination with the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, enabled him to take up directly with Mullah
Mohammad Omar the demands put forward by the Foreign
Ministers of the six plus two countries. We note with
appreciation that the Kabul authorities have addressed most
of those demands, which has greatly contributed to the
easing of the tension between Afghanistan and Iran. They
have, first, returned the dead bodies of the Iranian
diplomats killed in Mazar-e-Sharif; secondly, expressed
regret to the families of the Iranians killed in Afghanistan;
thirdly, undertaken to apprehend and punish those
responsible for the killings of Iranian consulate personnel
in Mazar-e-Sharif; fourthly, agreed to the establishment of
an mission of inquiry to investigate both past and recent
mass killings; and, fifthly, repatriated all Iranian prisoners.

The Kabul authorities also expressed their readiness
to broaden the ethnic dispensation of their Government.
They were, however, of the view that the defeated and
discredited warlords should not be allowed any role in the
political process of the country, as it is those warlords
who were responsible for Afghanistan's continuing
tragedy.

Pakistan believes that there is now a distinct
possibility of the restoration of peace in Afghanistan.
However, this will not be possible without the cessation
of all outside interference in Afghanistan. The recent
impounding by the Kyrgyz authorities of a full trainload
of weapons destined for Ahmed Shah Massoud - 700
tons according to some reports - shows that massive
arms supplies continue to be smuggled into Afghanistan
by outsiders.

The international community must now adjust to the
new realities on the ground in Afghanistan by recognizing
the Kabul authorities as the de jure and de facto
Government of Afghanistan. There is also a need to shed
our biases and to take advantage of the window of
opportunity by seeking a realistic and practicable solution
to the conflict in Afghanistan.

The countries sharing borders with Afghanistan have
a particular responsibility to work for the restoration of
peace and harmony, instead of raising alarms over
imaginary threats. We are encouraged by the
pronouncements made by the Kabul authorities that their
agenda is purely domestic and that it poses no threat to
any neighbouring country. Our efforts should be to
establish a relationship of trust and confidence with them,
and to avoid seeking pretexts for interfering in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan. In this context, we
welcome the proposed meeting of the six plus two group
in Tashkent. We are confident that the meeting will
contribute to our collective goal of restoring peace in
Afghanistan.

Let me now turn to the draft resolution on
Afghanistan before the Security Council today. While the
draft resolution has been significantly modified compared
to the first draft submitted by the same source some
months back, it continues to have a number of serious
shortcomings. The draft resolution paints a pessimistic
picture of the situation in Afghanistan. It ignores the fact
that there is peace today in nearly 90 per cent of that
country. It ignores some recent positive developments,
such as the exchange of prisoners between the Kabul
authorities and the forces of Ahmed Shah Massoud. It

 

ignores the signing of a supplementary protocol to the
memorandum of understanding between the United Nations
and the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan on 23 October
1998, under which the Kabul authorities have agreed to
take a number of steps to facilitate the provision of United
Nations assistance to Afghanistan. It ignores the fact that
the Taliban have in principle allowed the stationing of
United Nations personnel in several of their cities to
monitor human rights violations. It ignores, most
conspicuously, the ongoing shelling of Kabul by the forces
of Ahmed Shah Massoud, frequently using Luna rockets.
While the draft resolution expresses unsubstantiated
concerns about ethnic and religious-based persecution,
particularly against the Shias, it makes no mention of the
fact that the most notable Shia religious leader, Ustad
Akbari, and several important Shia commanders, have
voluntarily joined the Taliban and that discussions are
currently under way for their participation in government in
important positions.

There is also no mention of the mass killings of
Taliban by the forces of the northern alliance in Mazar-e-
Sharif in May last year. The Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan was shown several
hundred dead bodies of Taliban killed in Mazar-e-Sharif.
He was also shown recently dug graves of about 3,000
victims of last year's massacre.

Furthermore, while the Taliban authorities have
formally imposed a ban on the production, transport and
sale of landmines, there are reports that the northern
alliance has continued to lay mines periodically. The draft
resolution neither refers to this important issue nor censures
the northern alliance for its indiscriminate use of landmines
with severe consequences for innocent women and children.

The overall tone and tenor of the draft resolution is
thus biased against one party to the conflict. That and its
noticeable and numerous omissions do not augur well for
the image of the United Nations, or of the Security Council
for that matter, as an impartial player.

The Security Council has expressed its readiness to
consider the imposition of measures against the Taliban in
particular. This is likely to send a wrong signal to the
Kabul authorities. We strongly believe that dialogue and
engagement, rather than coercion and intimidation, would
produce the desired results.

Pakistan's consistent policy has been the promotion of
a peaceful and negotiated settlement in Afghanistan. In
order to achieve this objective, Pakistan has made serious
efforts in engaging with all sides in the conflict. Prime
Minister Nawaz Sharif has on numerous occasions
brought the leaders of all Afghan factions together with
a view to encouraging a political solution to the impasse.

Pakistan has suffered more from the conflict in
Afghanistan than any other country, excluding
Afghanistan itself. As a consequence of the continued
instability in Afghanistan, Pakistan continues to host more
than 1.5 million Afghan refugees more than six years
after voluntary repatriations started. We stand almost
single-handed in looking after these refugees in the face
of donor fatigue and the indifference of the international
community to their plight. Pakistan has also been a victim
of terrorism, drug trafficking and arms smuggling as a
result of conditions inside Afghanistan.

We note with appreciation that the United Nations
and other agencies are likely to resume their work in
Afghanistan. The people of Afghanistan are in need of
substantial humanitarian supplies to sustain their
livelihood. The Afghan economy has been completely
destroyed due to 10 years of struggle against the Soviet
military intervention and the subsequent civil war. There
is no hope of its revival without massive international
assistance. For the moment, the Afghan people depend
heavily on food and other essential items from Pakistan,
which enable them to survive at the subsistence level.
Regardless of political considerations, the Member States
must face up to this grave humanitarian challenge and
provide all possible financial, technical and material
assistance on a priority basis.

For our own part, I would, in conclusion, like to
reiterate our full support for all efforts aimed at seeking
durable peace and prosperity in Afghanistan through
engagement and dialogue and humanitarian assistance
commensurate with the magnitude of the tragedy that this
country has had to face now for almost 20 years, since it
was subjected to a massive foreign invasion.

