Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as
the European Free Trade Association countries members
of the European Economic Area, Liechtenstein and
Norway, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). The
decision to expand the force to more than 5,500
personnel, including 500 military observers, is highly
appropriate and is a clear sign of the international
community's commitment to peace in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.

The European Union believes that the decision made
here today can achieve its aims only if there is
unequivocal political will on the part of all involved and
strict adherence by all parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. Clear progress must be made in establishing
an effective framework for the implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement, which remains the most viable basis
for the peaceful resolution of the conflict. Indeed, the
successful continuation of the peace process depends on
the willingness of the parties to place the interests of the
Congolese people above any other interests.

In this context, the European Union considers it to
be of the utmost importance that all parties cooperate with
and facilitate the deployment of MONUC to all
designated areas and assure the security and freedom of
movement necessary for the full accomplishment of its
mandated tasks. This is essential for the success of
MONUC and will be instrumental in ensuring the
observance of the ceasefire.

The European Union welcomes the establishment of
an effective joint structure of MONUC and the Joint
Military Commission (J MC) and reaffirms its intention to
support its work.

The European Union considers that a peaceful and
voluntary process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the militia and other groups currently
operating in the region constitutes a key factor in the
process and a crucial element for the restoration of peace.
In this regard, the European Union considers it essential
that United Nations Member States take all the necessary
measures to curb all sale or supply of arms and other
military equipment to armed groups operating in the
conflict. In this context, the European Union recalls its
declaration of June 1999 on the arms trade to and within
the Great Lakes region.

 

The European Union further reiterates its call for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is another key
element of the Lusaka Agreement, which the European
Union strongly hopes to see fully implemented.

The European Union considers that an urgent national
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Agreement is
essential to ensure the success of national reconciliation. As
we have stated on many other occasions, the European
Union stands ready to give its support in that framework,
and reaffirms that funding is available to assist any credible
political dialogue if parties show their readiness and
seriousness concerning the process.

The European Union considers the work of Sir
Ketumile Masire as an element that is fundamental to the
peace process and, in that context, reaffirms its support for
all his efforts and initiatives as facilitator and stands ready
to assist him in fulfilling his mandate.

The European Union remains deeply concerned by the
continuing reports of human rights violations caused by the
delays in the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement,
widespread ceasefire violations and the continuation of the
conflict. Recent reports regarding the outbreak of fighting
between the Lendu and Hema tribes in the Ituri region of
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo - fighting
which has resulted in the killing of many people and major
Violations of human rights - deepens our concern and
stresses the dramatic nature of the situation and how the
hostilities have caused immense human suffering to
civilians, in particular women and children. The continuing
practice of recruiting child soldiers, reported to be taking
place especially in the east of the country, is particularly
serious and unacceptable. This situation demands immediate
action.

The European Union reaffirms the importance it
attaches to the respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and stresses the need to ensure
unhindered access by humanitarian organizations to all
areas where the population is in need. The security of its
personnel also needs to be assured.

The European Union reaffirms its support - in the
context of a lasting solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - for the idea of an
international conference to address the underlying causes of
conflict and the related issues concerning the stability of
the Great Lakes region. The organization of such an
initiative, as soon as the key elements of the Lusaka
Agreement have been implemented, could contribute to
the achievement of security, structural stability and
sustainable development.

Last month, all the regional leaders who came to
New York to address this Council on the Democratic
Republic of Congo reaffirmed their commitment to
finding a peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict
and asked that the international community, through the
United Nations, provide assistance. The United Nations
reacted rapidly by showing its readiness to assist and to
reinforce its commitment to this process. This Council is
today following up on that commitment.

The European Union is convinced that the extension
and expansion of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
provides a unique opportunity for all the parties involved
to restore peace and stability to that battered country and
help give back to the Congolese people and all affected
in the region the means to achieve a democratic
environment and national reconciliation.

The European Union reiterates that the success of
MONUC hinges on the political will of the parties to
fulfil the obligations they accepted under the Lusaka
Agreement. We therefore strongly hope that today's signal
of international support for the peace process will be an
additional incentive for the parties concerned to create the
conditions for peace, leading to the holding of free and
fair elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This is, we believe, the only path towards long and
lasting national reconciliation. Furthermore, the European
Union calls upon the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to enhance the political and civil rights and fundamental
freedoms of its people.

