Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): First, I thank
Special Representative De Mistura for his briefing and
for his work under truly challenging circumstances. We

wish to pay tribute to the women and men working
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United Nations
personnel who are in Afghanistan to support a better
future for that country. Everything must be done to
enable them to carry out their work effectively and to
ensure their security. I also wish thank Ambassador
Tanin for his important contribution to the debate
today.

Let me join previous speakers in expressing our
condolences to the United States delegation in view of
the passing away of United States Special Envoy for
Afghanistan and Pakistan, Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke. I had the privilege and experience of
working with him on matters of reconciliation and
issues of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and I was deeply impressed by
his commitment and his stamina.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the European Union delegation on behalf
of the European Union. Austria wishes to make several
additional points.

The past year has brought important
developments for Afghanistan. The holding of the first
international conference in several decades in Kabul
was a particularly significant milestone. We welcome
the progress made by the Afghan Government in the
implementation of the London and Kabul conference
commitments, including the elaboration of a
framework to track progress for each of the priority
programmes. The strengthening of the mechanisms of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board is
another important step to provide for the necessary
policy dialogue and effective implementation of the
Kabul process.

In order to succeed, the Kabul process needs to
include all segments of Afghan society. Maximum
ownership and empowerment on the part of the Afghan
people will be critical for the country's long-term
stability. We furthermore agree with the Secretary-
General's view that the process of transition must be
guided by realities on the ground and should yield a
peace dividend for the Afghan people. Improvement of
livelihoods and the creation of sustainable income
opportunities - including for women and girls - will
be an important part of that effort.

We welcome the inauguration of the High Peace
Council last October, as well as the establishment of
the Saalam Support Group within UNAMA to support
the Peace Council's work. We urge the Afghan
Government to consider the recommendations made by
civil society groups regarding the peace process and to
further enhance the inclusiveness of the peace and
reconciliation programme through broad representation
of religious and ethnic communities and women.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and
succeeding resolutions on women, peace and security
remain of direct relevance.

We also wish to acknowledge here the important
work done by UNAMA in the field of human rights.
UNAMA's recent report on the implementation of the
2009 Law on the Elimination of Violence against
Women documents harmful traditional practices
violating the rights of women and girls and contains
recommendations that should be built upon to improve
the situation of the female population in Afghanistan.

In view of the recent completion of the electoral
process, we wish to commend the Afghan electoral
institutions for their dedicated work under very
challenging circumstances. We hope that the newly
elected Lower House of Afghanistan's National
Assembly will be convened speedily in order to take up
its important legislative functions. We welcome the
announcement by President Karzai that the new
parliament will be inaugurated in late January.
Comprehensive and long-term electoral reform needs
to be pursued as a matter of priority.

The difficult security situation in Afghanistan
continues to be of great concern, in particular in view
of the significant increase in civilian casualties. The
vast majority of civilian deaths and injuries,
particularly the deplorable rise in casualties among
women and children, were clearly linked to the anti-
Government elements. We strongly condemn their
direct targeting of the civilian population, including
public officials and international staff. It needs to be
stressed once again that that kind of warfare violates
the most basic principles of international humanitarian
law.

Let me further touch upon the drug situation in
Afghanistan, which has been documented in the annual
Opium Survey issued by the United Nations Office on
Drug Control (UNODC). The Survey raises concerns
about the continued cultivation and production of
narcotic drugs in Afghanistan, mainly concentrated in
areas where the Taliban and Al Qaida are active, as

well as about ongoing drug trafficking. In that light, we
encourage the Government of Afghanistan to increase
its efforts against opium cultivation and drug
trafficking in close cooperation with the international
community and with the assistance of UNODC. A
comprehensive approach tackling the areas of security,
governance, rule of law and human rights is key for
effectively addressing the drug problem in Afghanistan
and in the region.

I wish to thank the Afghan authorities and
UNAMA for the excellent cooperation I have enjoyed
with them as Chairman of the 1267 Committee and
would like to underscore the importance of continued
cooperation, particularly in regard to de-listing
requests. The consolidated list needs to remain a living
document. Therefore we to continue to ensure that the
list reflects the actual threat, which means that entries
that are no longer relevant are removed and new threats
are reflected by appropriate new entries. I am satisfied
that, only last Friday, the Committee was able to take
another positive decision on a de-listing request. At the
same time, I would draw the attention of the Afghan
authorities to the possibility for listed individuals to
address the new 1267 ombudsperson.

As this is most likely the last public meeting of
the Council in which I will have the honour to
participate as representative of Austria in the course of
my country's term on the Council, I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for the kind words
expressed by the United States delegation at the
beginning of the meeting. I also wish to thank you and
all other members of the Council, as well as the
Council secretariat, for the excellent cooperation we
have enjoyed during the last two years.

My country has always believed that serving on
the Council is primarily a service that an elected
member offers to the world Organization and to its
membership. As we now return to the ranks - to our
natural habitat as a permanent member of the General
Assembly - we will continue to serve the United
Nations family as best we can, based on the very same
principles that have guided us during these two years.
Our best wishes accompany the five new incoming
members.

