Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to express its pleasure at seeing
you, Sir, preside over this very important meeting of
the Security Council. We also express our gratitude to
your country for focusing the Council's attention, in an
open format, on the current peace process between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. We particularly appreciate
Norway's leadership in guiding the Council's work in
that region. Since I myself had the honour of
participating in the recent mission to those two
countries, I can bear witness to the generous support
received from your country and to the excellent work
done by Ambassador Kolby and his team to make the
mission the success that it was.

The Ambassador of Norway gave a very
comprehensive briefing on the mission's visit to the
capitals of Ethiopia and Eritrea and other regions in the
two countries, with all of which my delegation fully
agrees. That is why I do not wish to repeat any of his
statement. I will confine myself to commenting on
three aspects closely related to the observations and
recommendations made by the mission.

My first comment relates to the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE). It is clear to our delegation that UNMEE is
doing very positive work in the Temporary Security
Zone between the two countries and in its delicate
diplomatic task. Its presence should be maintained,
first, so long as it enjoys the consent of the two parties
and, secondly, until the conclusion of the border
delimitation and demarcation process, in accordance
with the provisions of the Algiers Agreements of June
and December 2000. We believe that this presence will
be all the more necessary during the sensitive border
demarcation phase to follow the decision of the
Boundary Commission late this month. We therefore
urge the two countries to facilitate freedom of
movement and to cooperate closely so that UNMEE
may duly finish its work.

My second comment concerns the promotion of
constructive dialogue between the two countries. The
re-establishment of friendly relations and good-
neighbourliness between Ethiopia and Eritrea is an
objective that is in the interests of the two peoples and
of the international community as a whole.
Nonetheless, during our visit we noted that additional
efforts are necessary if that goal is to be met. We
therefore wish to join in the appeal to the friends of
Ethiopia and Eritrea, the guarantors, the facilitators and
the witnesses of the peace process to help promote a
constructive dialogue between those two peoples. It is
also for that reason that it is essential to insist on the
appeal to the parties to refrain from taking any
unilateral action counter to the spirit and scope of the
Agreements.

We believe that the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) has a particularly important role to play in this
respect. It was thanks to the work of its Chairman for
the year 2000, President Abdelaziz Bouteflika of
Algeria, that a cessation of hostilities and a peace
agreement were achieved. The members of the OAU
must therefore continue to support the peace process
and to contribute to reconciliation in the Horn of
Africa.

My third comment concerns the social situation in
the Temporary Security Zone. Wars leave wounds,
marks of destruction and manifestations of poverty. We
saw all of these in the area monitored by the United
Nations Mission, where refugees and displaced persons
require care, homes must be built, communications
infrastructure repaired and, ultimately, confidence
restored. We urge the international donors to contribute
generously to the Consolidated Appeals process to
meet humanitarian needs for 2002. This is a first step
in the process of economic reconstruction following the
devastation of war.

I cannot conclude without placing on record my
delegation's gratitude to the countries that contribute
troops to UNMEE, whose professionalism and
readiness to serve were obvious to us on our visit to the
region. We also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the region, Ambassador Legwaila
Joseph Legwaila, and the United Nations team in Addis
Ababa and Asmara. The success of our work for peace
will depend to a great extent on their dedication and
efforts.

