Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic ofKorea): Mr. President,
allow me to begin by expressing my sincere appreciation
to you for having convened this timely open debate on
the issue ofpost-conflict peacebuilding. Halfa year has
passed and a lot has happened since last July's general
debate (see S/PV.6805), based on the fifth annual report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his initial briefing
and his in-depth report (S/2012/746), which clearly
illustrates the problems at hand and the priorities ahead.
My appreciation also goes to the Chairman ofthe PBC,
Ambassador Abdul Momen, for his insightful remarks.
I am confident that the sixth annual report of the PBC
will serve to help us better understand and define the
nature and scope of the PBC's role.

As the Secretary-General's report rightfully points
out, the Peacebuilding Commission has over the past
six years been steadily developing with a view to
effectively carrying out its mandates by catalysing
international efforts to assist countries emerging from
conflict situations to achieve sustainable peace.

Noticeable progress has been made due to factors
that include more effective leadership of United Nations
teams in the field; enhanced United Nations support for
national capacity-building; ownership of peacebuilding
processes; and an improved funding mechanism to
support peacebuilding.

Nevertheless, reality dictates that the situation in
most, if not all, post-conflict countries and regions
is still fragile, and the many challenges before us
have hardly subsided. Two days ago, in the Central
African Republic, which is one of the PBC's country
configurations, rebel forces relied on the use of force
to make their point. That is only one of the many cases
which demonstrate that the focus of peacebuilding
efforts should be placed on preventing the recurrence
of conflict. The Security Council must also be ready to
swiftly respond to the recurrence of violence in post-
conflict situations.

Having said that, let me stress the following points
from our national perspective.

First, peacebuilding efforts should be exerted in
such a way as to further strengthen and respect the
national ownership of recipient countries. The ultimate
goal of peacebuilding does not stop at stabilizing
a post-conflict situation, but lies in establishing a
basis for long-term sustainable development, which
is impossible without the recipient countries' own
capability. In that regard, my delegation would like
to stress that strengthening civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict is the most critical ingredient for
achieving and maintaining sustained peace.

Secondly, inclusivity has proved important in
addressing the root causes of conflict and increasing
the legitimacy of a political settlement. The role
of non-State actors and civil society needs to be
recognized and integrated in peacebuilding efforts.
The case of Yemen provides a good example. By
including the extra-parliamentary opposition and other
key constituencies such as civil society representatives,
women's groups and youths in the political process,
Yemen's national dialogue conference is on a stronger
track for a transparent transitional process that is in
keeping with international norms and standards. As
such, my delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
efforts to highlight the significance of inclusivity as
one of the priority directions of his report.

Thirdly, partnerships among all stakeholders,
within and outside the United Nations system, should
be strengthened, with the PBC playing the role of
facilitator. The strategic partnerships of the United
Nations with international and regional financial
institutions, such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, are crucial in securing financial
resources and effective budget allocation. In that vein,
we were pleased to witness intensified cooperation
with the World Bank throughout the year, including the
launch of a joint process to strengthen the alignment
of the Peacebuilding Fund, the World Bank and other
multilateral peacebuilding financing instruments in
that respect.

Finally, my delegation would like to emphasize
the importance of a closer linkage and coordination
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission in carrying out peacebuilding mandates
and helping countries meet the multifaceted post-
conflict demands. The Security Council should make
clear what advice it needs from the PBC, and the PBC
should develop a systematic method for assisting the
Security Council to better utilize the lessons learned
through its activities related to the six country-specific
configurations. The accumulated lessons and experience
of each of the country-specific configurations will add
valuable perspective to the discourse of the Security
Council.

The Republic of Korea has been constructively
contributing to peacebuilding activities, including as
vice-chairperson of the PBC in 2009 and member of
the Organizational Committee since 2008. Korea has
recently made an additional donation of $500,000,
bringing its total contribution to $4.5 million, since
the establishment of Peacebuilding Fund in 2006.
My delegation stands ready to further scale up our
multifaceted contribution to the noble cause of
peacebuilding and looks forward to further constructive
discussions in the Security Council and the General
Assembly on ways to implement and improve the
PBC's role, with a view to promoting a more secure and
sustainable peace around the globe.

