Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, at a time
when your presidency of the Security Council is
coming to an end, allow me to say how proud and
deeply satisfied my delegation has been to have the
Council guided during January by Mauritius, a
fraternal country and, like mine, a member of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).

I would like to take this opportunity to heartily
congratulate you for the excellent initiative you have
taken in organizing the present meeting on the situation
in Africa. Your presidency has been marked by a very
special concern - about the problems of Africa, your
continent. Thus, conflicts and human tragedies -
including the war of aggression of which my country,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is a victim -
have received the particular attention of the Council. I
am therefore most grateful to the United Nations for
keeping the question of the situation in Africa on its
agenda, through the Security Council, and for its
efforts to find solutions to conflict situations in the
world.

Before continuing, on behalf of the President of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
General Joseph Kabila, and in the name of our
Government and people, I would like to express to you,
and through you to the whole international community,
our gratitude and humble thanks for the generosity and
solidarity that you have shown, particularly in reacting
with the required speed to the humanitarian emergency
created by the eruption of the Nyarigongo Volcano in
the Congolese province of North Kivu. Our thanks go
especially to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
for responding as soon as he was informed of the scope
of the tragedy in the city of Goma and its environs,
especially the loss of life and physical damage. His
action, and that of all States, organs and organizations
and of all people of goodwill are an expression of their
concern to safeguard human life and to respect the
dignity of the victims at Goma and its environs.

We have been pleasantly surprised by the
significant mobilization of means and funds to address
the most urgent necessities. We urge the Council to
pursue those praiseworthy efforts not only to keep the
emergency under control, but also to ensure in the
immediate future the reorganization and reconstruction
of the city of Goma. This mobilization of the
international community in support of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be pursued and
broadened in order to help the Congolese people to
rebuild their country, restore their unity and create the
conditions necessary - especially institutional
conditions - to deal with such tragedies. We call on
the Secretary-General of our universal Organization
and on the Secretary General of our regional
organization to spare no effort to coordinate the entire
mobilization so as to facilitate the humanitarian work
and to promote the unhindered delivery of assistance to
the population of Goma and its environs.

The responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security falls to the Security Council. It is
regrettable, however, that insofar as Africa is
concerned, results do not always attain the desired
level. The need to give the Security Council an
effective role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, especially in Africa, has become crucial.

The Organization of African Unity/African Union
is also playing a very important role in the search for
viable solutions, particularly within the framework of
the Central Organ of its Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution.

It is of capital importance that the partnership
between the two institutions be strengthened with a
view to enhanced efficiency and convincing results. In
this regard, I wish to thank Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary
General of the Organization of African Unity/African
Union, for his particularly informative presentation.
His presence among us today bears witness to the
interest that Africa attaches to this question and is
particularly useful in conveying both the concerns and
the points of View of Africa. I hope that his
participation in this meeting on the situation in Africa
will point the way towards a future dialogue between
the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity, which we encourage and hope will prove to be
useful, constructive and productive.

Africa is, in effect, the theatre of many conflicts
and crises violating the United Nations Charter and
threatening international peace and security. The spread
of these conflicts requires United Nations action in the
quest for peace to be reconsidered in order to make it
more effective.

Governments are, of course, primarily responsible
for maintaining the peace. In order to achieve that goal
and to inspire the confidence of the United Nations,
they must assume their full responsibility in the
settlement of disputes and the in the establishment of
the conditions necessary to the flourishing of
democracy, the pursuit of development and the
eradication of poverty. It is therefore important that the
United Nations assist in the strengthening of capacities,
support subregional initiatives to resolve conflicts on
the continent and cooperate more closely with the
Organization of African Unity.

Such partnership, however, is unfortunately not
operational. One clear result of this inadequate
cooperation is the perception that the Security Council
is often guilty of delaying the full implementation of its
own resolutions. Indeed, international action based on
the Security Council's resolutions seems to yield
optimum results only outside Africa, while support for
preventing and settling conflicts in Africa in no way
corresponds to the magnitude of the problems.

"What holds true on one side of the Pyrenees may
be false on the other," one French political analyst has
said. In other parts of the world experiencing ongoing
problems, assistance is granted on a massive economic
scale and through trade advantages, while everything is
done to encourage countries to improve regional
cooperation and to pursue their efforts towards
political, economic and social reform so as to enable
them to consolidate democracy and human rights, good
governance and the promotion of the rule of law and
political stability, thus laying the foundations of
sustainable development. Nothing of the sort occurs in
Africa. With regard to the settlement of conflicts, one
clearly sees the application of double standards. The
most egregious manifestation of that phenomenon is
the experience of my country in recent years.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains an issue of great concern. Years of
conflict have created tragic humanitarian situations and
dangerous political instability. The Council continues
to have trouble ensuring respect for its resolutions. The
implementation in particular of resolution 1304
(2000) - which calls for the demilitarization of the
city of Kisangani and its environs, the orderly
withdrawal of foreign forces from Congolese territory
and cooperation in the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - has not even begun.
Kisangani remains occupied and the sound of marching
boots is again being heard. The occupying forces,
rather than being withdrawn, are being reinforced on
Congolese territory.

My Government attaches special importance to
the improvement and effectiveness of humanitarian
operations in armed conflicts and natural disasters, and
particularly to assistance to refugees and internally
displaced persons. Similarly, we duly appreciate the
efforts of the United Nations to promote and develop
international humanitarian law. The natural disaster in
Goma, a Congolese city under Rwandese occupation,
and the response of the international community are a
clear demonstration of the United Nations capacity to
respond to humanitarian challenges.

As to the illegal exploitation of a country's
natural resources and other forms of wealth, in which
private and state actors engage in order to enrich
themselves shamelessly on the sweat and blood of
innocent victims and to sustain numerous conflicts, that
criminal activity should be the subject of concerted
global action to eradicate it.

Ever since the creation of the United Nations
some 50 years ago, no programme that has been
undertaken has succeeded in eradicating poverty. Yet,
poverty, ignorance, intolerance and exclusion are at the
root of many conflicts tearing Africa apart. The
elimination of poverty would therefore clearly have an
impact on preventing conflicts and help to make this
century one of harmony defined by peace, tolerance
and prosperity for all humanity.

At the dawn of the twenty-first century, with the
end of the cold war and the rapid development of new
technologies, especially information technologies, we
must review our strategies not only in the field of
peacekeeping, but also in that of development. In that
respect, my Government encourages greater coordination
between the main agencies involved in conflict prevention
and post-conflict reconstruction, in particular the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, so as to
deepen consideration of questions relating to improved
interaction between the two organs and to promote an
integrated approach to peace-building and post-conflict
reconstruction.

My Government welcomes the fact that the
Economic and Social Council has held a debate on the
role of the United Nations system in support of the efforts
of the African countries to achieve sustainable
development. We also welcome the decisions of our heads
of State last year to launch the New African Initiative and,
in October, to consolidate the Initiative by establishing the
New Partnership for Africa's Development. These
commendable initiatives prove, if there is any need to do
so, that Africa is ready to assume full responsibility for
its own development and future.

In addition to the many obstacles it faces -
notably poverty, the burden and management of debt,
underdevelopment and war - Africa is encountering
the new challenges presented in particular by the
emergence of the HIV/AIDS pandemic. These new
challenges could halt its development and threaten its
very existence. Together, we must reaffirm the
importance of concerted international action to address
the HIV/AIDS scourge, given its negative impact on
the social fabric and thus on the future of the current
generation and of those to come. To that end, we must,
inter alia, encourage the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS to continue strengthening its
cooperation with African States with a view to
developing better national practices and policies in
HIV/AIDS education, prevention, detection,
counselling and treatment.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my delegation's
firm belief in the existence of a close link between
development in Africa and the establishment of peace
and the stabilization of its socio-economic situation.

The maintenance of peace is an important
element of the activity of the United Nations. I would
like to express the hope that the Security Council, the
principal organ of the United Nations charged with
maintaining international peace and security, will be up
to the task of fulfilling its responsibilities more
effectively, in keeping with the spirit and the letter of
the commitments renewed at the Millennium Summit.

The United Nations must be innovative with regard
to international strategy. Conflicts notwithstanding,
relations of deterrence or force must not be used to build
peace. Rather, it should be allowed to emerge through
the sound common management of needs and various
problems that arise, in particular by taking maximum
advantage of inherent socio-economic potential.

This is our understanding of the scope of the
international conference on peace, stability, democracy
and development in the Great Lakes region, to be
convened by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in close cooperation with the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity. My
Government sincerely hopes that that conference will
succeed and serve as a model for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, not only for Africa but also for
all parts of the world where peace processes are under
way or are being initiated, in the best interests of all
the populations concerned.

