The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Brazil, Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt,
Finland, Guatemala, Guinea, India, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, the Republic of
Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould-
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive Secretary of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document 8/2006/610, which
contains a letter dated 3 August 2006 from Ghana
addressed to the Secretary-General.

It is with considerable pleasure that I welcome all
participants to this meeting, in particular the foreign
ministers, the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS and the
other dignitaries who are with us today. Their
participation in the meeting is highly appreciated.

I also wish to commend Ambassador Jean-Marc
de la Sabliere, Permanent Representative of France, for
ably steering the affairs of the Council in July, a month
that witnessed complex developments on the world
scene, demonstrating how elusive peace can be even
when it seems assured.

Despite the clamour of events in other regions of
the world, it is appropriate that, with Ghana in the
chair, the Council should devote at least one meeting to
an examination of the situation in West Africa, using
the lessons of our experience and all the peacemaking
tools at our disposal to meet existing as well as
emerging challenges. The aim should be not only to
preserve the modest achievements of the region in the
area of peace after nearly two decades of conflict, but
also to address the underlying causes with a View to
finding a lasting solution to the chronic instability.

In practical terms, peace consolidation is an
all-encompassing enterprise, involving initiatives
ranging from conflict prevention, management and
resolution to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It has to
include a wide range of programmes and activities
targeted at virtually every sector of national life. The
actions must necessarily cover every stratum of society
and, inevitably, span across national and regional
boundaries to embrace the global community as a
whole. When the world's leaders adopted the outcome
document of the 2005 world summit last September,
they reaffirmed that peace and stability thrive best on a
foundation of sustainable development, itself
inextricably linked with good governance. We need
thus to root our peace strategies in realism by focusing
less on quick fixes and more on underlying causes and
durable solutions to the problem of instability.
06-46071

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, a body entrusted with the responsibility
of healing the wounds of conflict and getting
traumatized societies back on their feet, is very timely,
being one of the most important outcomes of the
current process of United Nations reform. Its role
should enhance considerably the prospects for realizing
comprehensive approaches to post-conflict recovery
and, equally significantly, for ensuring the long-term
engagement of the world community that is so critical
to its success. Furthermore, in its interventions, the
Commission should accord due recognition to the
realization of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), which are vital signposts on the long and
winding road to sustainable peace in regions such as
ours that have suffered years of instability and conflict.

West Africa is at a crossroads, and we must get
our bearings right. Though the guns are falling silent
over much of the region, there remain simmering
tensions in states such as Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea-
Bissau. Somehow, these must be resolved before they
become intractable. At the same time, we must not lose
sight of the need to strengthen the foundations of peace
even in those countries that have not experienced any
major upheavals or conflicts, for we have to have
consistently in view the fact that all the countries in the
region are located in the bottom 25 per cent of the
Human Development Index.

In May 1975, when the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) was founded, there
was good reason to be optimistic about transforming
the region into an economic powerhouse. It was
envisaged that once the artificial barriers of language,
lopsided infrastructural development, backward
technologies, together with duplicative and inefficient
productive structures, had been transcended, the region
could exploit the advantages of free movement of
people, goods and services across boundaries to build
strong economies for the well-being of its peoples. It
seems that, thirty-one years later, the region is a mere
shadow of the vision that inspired the integration
project.

Undoubtedly, we have paid dearly for the
political instability that has plagued the region for
much of the post-colonial era and the precipitous
decline in the living standards of our peoples, contrary
to the promise of the independence movements. The
reasons for this state of affairs are complex.
Nonetheless, it is now generally accepted that many of
06-4607]

the region's problems could rightly be blamed on
authoritarian rule, lack of good governance and
unaccountable leadership, all of which have
contributed immeasurably towards impoverishing and
polarizing our societies. In fact, it was only a matter of
time before the region would become engulfed in
violent conflicts, starting with Liberia, in December
1989 and spreading rapidly to Sierra Leone, Guinea-
Bissau and, indeed, threatening to destabilize the entire
region.

It is to the credit of the United Nations, especially
the Security Council, that it stood steadfastly behind
ECOWAS throughout the darkest moments of conflict
in the region. Ironically, these conflicts have also
demonstrated the effectiveness and resilience of
ECOWAS, which has managed against great odds to
contain them in a volatile region, often working in
close partnership with the United Nations, pursuant to
the objectives of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

We recognize that ECOWAS is faced with severe
constraints in terms of capacity and resources, despite
having been at the forefront of peace operations
throughout West Africa. In fact, it already has in place
the legal framework and several institutional
mechanisms for pursuing peace in our region. We
welcome the exceptionally active role that the United
Nations is playing in building the capacity of
ECOWAS to undertake peace missions. We further
acknowledge with gratitude the support of several
countries in that regard.

From our perspective, therefore, the strategy for
peace consolidation should focus on the following
broad priorities: first, resolving ongoing conflicts as
quickly as possible or at least preventing them from
escalating; secondly, preventing a relapse into conflict
in countries that have just emerged from war; thirdly,
preventing a fresh outbreak of conflict; fourthly,
developing the institutional framework and relevant
capacities for peace initiatives; fifthly, mobilizing the
required resources at the national, regional and
international levels for peace initiatives; and sixthly,
addressing the underlying causes of conflict in a
comprehensive manner.

These broad objectives should translate into
programmes and plans of action, the details of which
can obviously not be fashioned at this meeting.
Nonetheless, it is of the utmost importance that we
3
redouble efforts to resolve in the shortest time possible
some of the issues that pose a clear and present danger
to security in West Africa.

In particular, we should aim at achieving the
complete demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration of ex-combatants, particularly child
soldiers and mercenaries. There are also critical cross-
border issues that should be urgently addressed, such
as the illicit trade and proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, illegal dealings in mineral and natural
resources, smuggling of narcotics, human trafficking,
repatriation of refugees and resettlement of internally
displaced persons.

Accelerated economic growth and sustainable
development within the institutions of democratic
governance must be the central goal of West Africa.
After all the years of hard work and costly sacrifices,
the global community must not settle for anything
short of sustainable peace, stability and development.
If the partnership envisaged under the Peacebuilding
Commission should materialize, a stabilized West
Africa, with its rich human and material resources, will
succeed in building a modern and globally competitive
economy capable of improving the living standards of
its estimated 250 million inhabitants. By empowering
ECOWAS, we make it a reliable partner for peace and
wealth creation for the benefit not only of the region,
but also of the entire world.

There is fortunately a silver lining to the dark
clouds that have hovered over the region, and that is
the evident determination of the West African peoples
to construct new societies founded on the principles of
democratic accountability, respect for human rights and
the rule of law. That determination now dominates the
political landscape of the region and represents the
surest path to peace, progress and prosperity for West
Africa. The example of Ghana's development under the
iconic leadership of one of the region's new generation
of democratic leaders, John Agyekum Kufuor,
President of the Republic, is a good illustration of this
evolution. Long may it endure.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency, Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting and
give him the floor.


