Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation
welcomes the Secretary-General's important statement.

I would like to thank the Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms.
Carol Bellamy, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for their continuing efforts to
strengthen the role of the United Nations in bringing
this issue to the attention of the international
community.

The story told this morning by a former child
soldier, Alhaji Sawaneh, clearly shows how painful the
realities of numerous armed conflicts are in various
parts of the world, including Afghanistan. They
represent a grave threat to the future of new
generations, and my delegation appreciates your
leadership, Madam President, in convening the
Security Council meeting on this particularly important
topic.

By adopting its landmark resolutions 1261 (1999)
and 1314 (2000), affirming the protection of children
affected by armed conflict as a peace and security
concern, the Security Council has become actively
engaged in the issue. Those documents became an
important basis for advocacy on behalf of children
affected by conflict.

Today is the time to analyze the progress
achieved in the implementation of our resolutions and
to determine ways to move forward in defending
children who have suffered in wars. In my delegation's
view, the Secretary-General's report to the Security
Council is, in fact, a very useful source of reference for
this debate. It contains a comprehensive overview of
the fate of children caught in conflicts, draws on
specific activities from the field, traces the progress
made thus far and provides a list of additional key
actions that may be taken in the near future. As the
report shows, real progress has been made.

The Ukraine welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Otunnu, aimed at generating a series of
child-protection pledges from the parties to conflict.
And we can now see that important commitments made
to the Special Representative and other relevant bodies
have been met in several zones of conflict.

We especially appreciate the fact that the reports
to the Security Council on some specific conflict
situations now contain distinct sections on the
protection and well-being of children. About 30 reports
submitted recently to the Council integrated
information and recommendations covering the
protection of children affected by armed conflict. On
this basis, seven Council resolutions and several
presidential statements included concern for the plight
of children affected by armed conflict.

We are pleased with the training on the rights of
the child, and child protection is now an integral part of
the curriculum of all peacekeeping training activities
conducted by the Training and Evaluation Service of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

We also support the increasing and widespread
engagement of non-governmental organizations in
advocacy work, as well as the provision of information
and programme activities on the ground. My delegation
welcomes all those steps taken so far to implement
resolutions and encourages all actors to continue these
efforts. In spite of the progress achieved so far, a great
deal remains to be done to ensure the effective
protection and rehabilitation of children in times of
war.

We are prepared to move ahead with the new
recommendations of the Secretary-General. Many of
those recommendations are built on and refine
elements of resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1314 (2000).
We share in particular the Secretary-General's view
that the mandates of peacekeeping operations should
continue to include provisions for the protection of the
rights of children.

Peacekeeping missions have a critical role to play
in providing protection to children. In order to
implement this particular dimension of their mandate, a
child protection adviser should be responsible for
coordinating activities to ensure the protection and
welfare of children. Greater attention should be given
to appropriate training of peacekeeping personnel, both
civilian and military, in the area of the protection of the
rights of children. We are sure that the greater
involvement of women in peacekeeping missions will
help enhance the capacity of missions in terms of
protecting children and dealing with gender-sensitivity
aspects.

We totally agree with the Secretary-General that
the effective monitoring of adherence to the framework
of international law and to consequent obligations is
essential action contributing to the protection of
children and their rights. In this regard, it is very
important to continue to include observations
concerning the protection of children in the reports to
the Security Council on conflict situations.

Over the past few years, a number of parties to
conflict have made concrete commitments to the
protection of children. The challenge now is how to
ensure adherence to those commitments. Such
reporting can assist in exerting political pressure on
parties, whose conduct falls short of their child-
protection obligations and commitments. The Security
Council can make a big difference in this regard by
using its collective influence to lean on parties to
conflict.

The demobilization and reintegration of soldiers
should be an integral part of humanitarian relief and
peace-building strategies. In this context, we fully
support the Secretary-General's statement that there is
an urgent need for the international community,
especially for international and regional institutions, to
provide sustained and adequate resources to all
relevant actors, particularly peace operations, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) engaged in implementing demobilization and
reintegration programmes for children.

In conclusion, Ukraine would like to thank the
delegation of France for its leadership in preparing a
new draft resolution on children in armed conflict that
will assign new initiatives to a number of actors,
including Member States, international financial
institutions, regional organizations, the United Nations
and the Council itself. We support this draft and look
forward to further progress in this direction, and we
express our readiness to contribute to the subsequent
consideration of the question of children in armed
conflict, in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly.

We also recall another initiative of France, to
convene a Security Council summit meeting on
children in armed conflict during the General
Assembly's special session on children, which will
most likely take place in May 2002.

