Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in that country. It was very encouraging to
hear from him that the martial art of karate serves as a
means of uniting the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

More than 20 years have passed since the brutal
war in Bosnia and Herzegovina came to an end. The
prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina is critical, not
only for its future but also for the peace and stability
of the Western Balkans region. Japan, as a member of
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board, has
continuously supported the country's reconstruction
and State-building efforts for two decades.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is now at an important
juncture. The country has made the transition from war
to peace, but the question is whether the country can
achieve lasting peace and a successful future. In that
regard, Japan is seriously concerned about the decision
of the National Assembly of Republika Srpska to hold
a referendum on secession. Such a referendum would
constitute a breach of the Dayton Agreement. It would
also undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although the President of
Republika Srpska stated publicly that the referendum
has been put aside, the National Assembly's decision
has not been repealed. Furthermore, the President
has continued to make public statements referring to
the Republika Srpska's independence. Japan urges all
political leaders to refrain from any divisive rhetoric.

Japan warmly congratulates Bosnia and Herzegovina
on its application to join the European Union, which it
submitted in February. We hope that that will present
an opportunity for the country to make further progress
on the reforms needed for greater integration.

Before concluding, I would like to reassure the
Security Council of Japan's strong support for High
Representative Inzko and his Office. In the light of
the importance of the role of the High Representative,
Japan has been underwriting 10 per cent of the entire
budget of his Office for 20 years. The visit of the High
Representative to Japan in January was appreciated
by the Japanese authorities. I wish Mr. Inzko every
success so that outstanding objectives and conditions
necessary for the closure of his Office can be achieved
at an early date.

