Ms. Rice (United States of America): My thanks
go in particular to Special Representative
Coomaraswamy for her thorough briefing and her
passionate commitment to this cause. I would also like
to thank UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Hilde
Johnson and Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Atul Khare for their very
passionate and informative briefings. But I should like
especially to thank Manju Gurung for her presence
here and her statement to the Council. Her courage and
her example are extraordinary, and all of us can only
begin to imagine how difficult and daunting it must be
to speak before a Council like this in a room like this.
We wish her to know how much we admire her and
10-40745
how much we are here cheering for her and for a
brighter, safer and more peaceful future. We wish her
all the best.

The nineteenth century American abolitionist
Frederick Douglass once said, "It is easier to build
strong children than to repair broken men." Two
centuries later, we see the truth of that insight in
country after country, in conflict after conflict. As the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181) makes
painfully clear, children are abused and children's
rights are violated in armed conflicts in many areas of
the world. Even after such conflicts end, the scars
remain. Children exposed to violence or trauma,
especially prolonged trauma, are more likely to have
their social, emotional and cognitive development
impaired. And such ordeals inflict psychological
damage that can endure for years to come.

The litany of abuses is grim: outright killing,
maiming, forced participation in armed conflict, rape,
sexual exploitation and other forms of sexual violence.
Those outrages not only rob children of their innocence
and limit their full and meaningful participation in
their societies, but they also risk further stoking the
very conflicts in which these children so gravely suffer.
Parties that commit violations against children plunder
the future of their countries and threaten international
peace and security.

The United States fully and firmly embraces our
responsibility to protect children, and we will not rest
until the last abuse is halted and the last child soldier is
released. We welcome the Secretary-General's report
as an important tool to help us uphold that common
responsibility. We are glad to note that for the first time
the report's annexes include parties that have engaged
in patterns of killing, maiming, raping and sexually
abusing children in contravention of applicable
international law.

We urge that all information on violations
identified by the monitoring and reporting mechanism
be thoroughly verified to ensure a high degree of
accuracy. We agree with the report's recommendation
to ensure that specific language on protecting children
is placed in the mandates of both the relevant United
Nations peacekeeping operations and those of political,
humanitarian and peacebuilding missions. We also
agree that, given the regional dimensions of some
conflicts highlighted in the report, these missions
should speed their development of strategies and
10-40745

coordination mechanisms for better information
exchange and cooperation on cross-border child
protection issues.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to include the unlawful recruitment or
use of children as a listing criterion in appropriate
Security Council sanctions regimes, and we strongly
encourage closer cooperation and coordination among
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
these sanctions committees and their expert groups. As
the Secretary-General suggests, such coordination
would let us weigh the application of "more vigorous
measures against persistent violators" (S/2010/181, para. 186) when that is appropriate.

We take heart from several instances in which
parties and former parties to armed conflict have taken
meaningful steps to protect children, from Afghanistan
to Burundi and Nepal, often after strong
encouragement from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.

Nevertheless, Violations and abuses against
children are endemic in far too many places. The
United States is particularly concerned about the
situation in Somalia. Active recruitment of child
soldiers has placed several thousand children in the
line of fire. We strongly condemn the use of child
soldiers by any group, and we call on parties to the
conflict in Somalia to immediately cease child
recruitment and release those who remain within their
ranks.

Equally, we continue to be gravely concerned
over developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Virtually every party engaged in the conflict
there actively and unlawfully recruits children.
Hundreds of children were shoved into the ranks of
combatants there last year. We particularly abhor the
actions of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), which
makes a practice of forced recruitment through
abduction.

The United States is also deeply disturbed by the
situation in the Central African Republic, where the
active and unlawful recruitment of children is so bad
that, as the Secretary-General notes, children now
comprise a full third of the total self-defence militias
and where the LRA continues its reprehensible acts.
15

We do see some hard-won progress, thanks in no
small part to the efforts of Special Representative
Coomaraswamy, as well as moves towards
mainstreaming this issue across the whole of the
United Nations system. But the grievous examples of
violations and abuses against children - whether in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Somalia or a number of other places -
remind us that the pace of progress is too slow for too
many children. Much more work must be done, and we
have no time to spare.

The United States will remain fully and deeply
dedicated to preventing the violations and abuses
committed against children in armed conflict. We will
continue to strongly support the efforts of the United
Nations and our many non-governmental organization
partners. We look forward to continuing to work
closely with our fellow Security Council members on
this vital issue. We are grateful to those who organized
today's important debate, but we hope that the day will
soon come when such meetings will no longer be
needed.

One child harmed as the result of armed conflict
is one child too many, and the only morally tolerable
number of child soldiers is zero.

