The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Cuba, Egypt,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab
Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet
Nam, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
22 January 2010 from the Charge d'affaires, a.i., of the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document S/2010/44
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Wednesday, 27 January 2010,
regarding the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 22 January 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the lnalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. Ifl hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 26 January 2010 from the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations, in which he requests that the Permanent
Observer of the League o£ Arab States to the United
Nations, His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with male 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.
10-22064
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I wish to acknowledge the presence of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
at today's meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, to whom I now give
the floor.


