Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to express my
appreciation to the briefers - Judge Vagn Joensen,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR); Judge Carmel Agius, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY); Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
ICTY; and Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of
the ICTR - for their statements.

We wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Judge Carmel Agius on his recent appointment as
President ofthe ICTY. We are confident that Judge Agius
will continue the excellent work of his predecessor,
Judge Theodor Meron, in providing leadership to the
Tribunal in fulfilling its mandate.

The reports and briefings have provided invaluable
insight into the progress made by the Tribunals and
the Mechanism, as mandated by the Council. We
value the work of the Tribunals and the Mechanism in
upholding the rule oflaw and dispensing justice for the
heinous crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. In that regard, we are highly encouraged
by the commitment, integrity and high standards of
professionalism shown by the judges and the staff of the
Tribunals in their work, consistent with the fundamental
principles of due process and fairness.

We are also very encouraged that the Tribunals are
on track towards meeting their respective completion
dates - the ICTR by the end of this year and the ICTY
by the end of 2017. We give due recognition to and
commend Judge Joensen for his effective and successful
stewardship of the ICTR, leading to its closure by
the end of this year and transition the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, pursuant
to resolution 1966 (2010).

However, we understand that the ICTY is faced
with several challenges, in particular as regards staff
attrition, which has reached a critical level, and also
the request for extension of the terms of service for
its Judges, necessitated by delays in proceedings.
We believe that the delays are due to factors beyond
the Tribunal's control, such as resignations and the
health condition of the accused. We therefore believe
that those challenges are not insurmountable. We will
continue to give the necessary support to the ICTY
in overcoming those challenges. We cannot in good
conscience ignore or refuse to assist the Tribunal in
overcoming those challenges as it approaches the last
stretch in completing its mandate.

As the closure of the ICTR approaches, we agree
that it is important to preserve its legacy in the form
of judgements, testimonies and other records related to
upholding the rule of law and the delivery of justice
regarding one of the darkest periods of modern history.
The preservation of those records would provide a
basis for future international tribunals and serve as a
reminder to humankind ofthe importance of combating
impunity.

We further wish to acknowledge the cooperation of
the States concerned and the regional States for their
cooperation with the Tribunals. It would have not been
possible for the ICTR and ICTY to fulfil their mandates
without the fullest cooperation of the respective
States. We encourage the concerned States to continue
their cooperation so as to enable the Tribunals and
Mechanism to fulfil their respective mandates. While
it would have been ideal for the Tribunals to fulfil their
respective mandates expeditiously and without delays,
we are of the View that our eagerness to pursue justice
should not come at the expense of due process or the
rule of law.

We need to continue sending a strong and unequivocal
message that impunity will not be tolerated or go
unpunished. Malaysia remains resolute in its position
that the perpetrators of such crimes must and will be
brought to justice to account for their crimes. That is
part of the healing, truth and reconciliation process that
communities and States have to undergo in seeking
and upholding justice. In that regard, Malaysia highly
values and underscores its full support for the work of
the ICTY, the ICTR and the Mechanism in upholding
the rule of law and justice. We deeply acknowledge
their contributions to the international justice system,
the rule of law and the maintenance of international
peace and security.

