Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me first express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate, which is co-sponsored
by China, Angola and Senegal, and to all the briefers
for their insightful remarks.

As set out in the concept note (S/2016/321, annex),
the Gulf of Guinea is one of the regions that has been
most plagued by piracy and armed robbery at sea. Yet
the problem has not received due international attention.
The last time that the Security Council considered this
issue (see S/PV.6723), it adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/13. Since then, the situation has persisted
and even escalated. We welcome today's debate as an
opportunity to remind the Council and the international
community that piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea requires sustained attention and
collective actions. I wish to highlight several of our
contributions in that regard.

First, with regard to counter-piracy measures,
resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) encourage
States in the region to take concerted actions to counter
piracy and armed robbery at sea. They also encourage
the international community to provide assistance
to that end. That is a key message. Only through the
collective efforts of the entire international community
can the problem be effectively addressed. We must help
countries in the region, as well as the relevant regional
and subregional organizations, to enhance cooperation
on joint monitoring and patrols, and the sharing of
intelligence with a view to implementing the integrated
maritime security strategy, and to operationalizing
the relevant regional mechanisms, in particular the
Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety
and Security in the Gulf of Guinea.

We can also learn from the experience in other parts
of the world, in particular the Gulf of Aden. In that case,
two important factors contributed to the significant
reduction in incidents of piracy and armed robbery at
sea. The first was effective international joint naval
patrols in the designated high-risk areas. The second
factor was compliance with the best management
practices and anti-piracy guidance developed by the
shipping industry and the International Maritime
Organization. We should consider applying those
good operational practices to the situation in the Gulf
of Guinea.

Secondly, with regard to compliance with
international law, it must be emphasized that any
measures taken to combat piracy and armed robbery
at sea must be consistent with international law. Due
regard should be given in particular to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which
sets out the legal framework applicable to activities in
maritime areas under national jurisdiction and beyond.
The objective should be to effectively counter piracy and
armed robbery at sea, without impairing the freedom of
navigation, the protection of the marine environment
and safe access to marine resources, in accordance with
international law.

Thirdly, with regard to addressing the root causes
of the issue and to capacity-building, while the
problem manifests itself offshore, a comprehensive
solution cannot be found without adequate onshore
measures and undertakings. As with other types of
organized crime, acts of piracy and armed robbery
at sea are largely economically motivated. Therefore,
we need to address the socioeconomic grievances
that prompt many to resort to such crimes. Creating
economic opportunities and alternative livelihoods
for local communities can contribute to the resolution
of that problem in a sustainable manner. In addition,
international assistance should be directed at helping
States in the region to strengthen their social-welfare
efforts and their law-enforcement and prosecution
capacities in relation to piracy and armed robbery
at sea.

Piracy is a challenge that concerns us all. The
Kingdom of Thailand has been working with the
international community to tackle that scourge
and ensure safety and security at sea. As part of the
Combined Maritime Forces partnership, the Royal
Thai Navy has successfully played an active role in
joint anti-Somali piracy operations. At the regional
level, we have made constructive contributions under
the frameworks of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Maritime Forum and the Regional Cooperation
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Asia.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the Kingdom
of Thailand's commitment to supporting the Gulf of
Guinea countries in their efforts to fight piracy and
armed robbery at sea. In particular, we are ready to
share our humble experience in maritime safety and
security, as well as in alternative development, so as to
improve the livelihood of the people. That experience
could be applied in the context of the Gulf of Guinea.

