Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania appreciates your
leadership, Madame, and decision to convene this open
meeting. We welcome the statement of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, and we associate ourselves with
the statement of the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

My delegation believes that the time has come for
the subject of the interdependence of security and
development to be on the regular agenda of the
Security Council, for the world has changed
significantly since 1945, when the Security Council
was established. The nature and causes of conflict and
instability have changed fundamentally. The threats to
international peace and security that the Security
Council was confronted with at that time were
significantly different from those it has to deal with
today, most of them in Africa.

Today, a disproportionate share of the Security
Council's time and the United Nations budget is
devoted to peace and security issues in Africa. The
foundations of enduring peace and security in Africa
have to rest on development, good governance,
participation and opportunity, both political and
economic. Today, there is no doubt in our minds that
deprivation, destitution and desperation, especially
among young people, are veritable and imminent
threats to peace and security within countries and
globally. Crimes such as drug trafficking, piracy and
terrorism, as well as illegal migration, have their roots
in poverty.

Security is essential to development, and
development is essential to security. The Security
Council of today cannot ignore this nexus. Giving hope
to the young people of Africa for a brighter future will
help to reduce pressure on them to engage in activities
that can lead to insecurity, instability, crime and
conflict. For post-conflict societies, development and
the peace dividend it provides are the best way to
prevent relapse into conflict. People need to have a
stake in peace, and shared development and prosperity
are the best way to give them a stake in peace that will
stabilize societies and create an environment conducive
to good governance, respect for human rights and
accountability.

Peacekeeping and protection measures, robust or
otherwise, mandated by the Security Council can help
to ensure peace between conflicting parties for limited
periods of time. But we need to deal with the causes of
conflicts, not only their manifestations; we need to
develop capacities to prevent fires from breaking out,
not only capacities to put out fires. This cannot happen
without addressing development issues as an integral
component of the architecture of peace and security in
today's world. The Security Council needs to develop a
strategy to embed development in this architecture. We
are not asking the Security Council to exceed its
mandate or to encroach on the territories of other
agencies and programmes; we are only asking it to
develop a strategy to be helpful to and supportive of
the development work done by others.

Peacekeeping must not only end conflicts; it has
to create space for sustainable development. It has to

provide guarantees for the kind of peace and stability
that are necessary for development to occur and
economic opportunity to emerge. Peacekeeping and
peacebuilding must be not an end, but part of a
continuum of interventions needed to guarantee peace
and security. Whereas the Peacebuilding Commission
serves to bridge the gaps between security and
development, the Security Council should ensure the
interdependence of security and development by
encouraging all actors and all countries to promote
sustainable human development.

But each conflict is different in its genesis and
evolution. We must not have a one-size-fits-all
solution. The capacity of the United Nations to
understand better the causes of each conflict in each
context and to design a strategy geared to each needs to
be improved. And certainly, in resource-rich conflict
and post-conflict countries, the United Nations has to
assist in ensuring that such resources provide a
foundation and catalyst for development, not one for
the self-enrichment of the few or for fuelling current or
future conflicts.

