Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the convening of this meeting, and expresses
its appreciation to Peru for furthering the debate on the
important matter of youth, peace and security.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The role of youth in relation to peace and security
is of particular importance to the African continent,
where some estimates indicate that 60 per cent of the
population on the continent are under the age of 25.

South Africa recalls the initiative of Jordan, which,
during its tenure in the Security Council in 2015, ushered
in the landmark resolution 2250 (2015) - the first
resolution on youth, peace and security. It underscored
the importance of youth as active positive agents in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
not reactive elements fuelling conflict.

South Africa welcomes the independent progress
study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86), and
the sterling work of its lead author, Mr. Graeme Simpson,
as well as the team constituting the Advisory Group of
Experts. Of particular interest to our delegation was the
emphasis placed on the positive role that youth can play
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace as envisaged
in resolution 2250 (2015) and subsequent resolutions,
including resolution 2282 (2016). Those resolutions
reaffirm the importance of youth in the deterrence and
resolution of conflicts and their role in sustainability,
inclusiveness and the success of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts.

The progress study on youth, peace and security
reveals the variety of ways in which young people
contribute to sustaining a broader concept of peace that
entails not just the end of violence, but the strengthening
of societies susceptible to the resurgence of violent
conflict, and their addressing their political grievances
through legitimate and peaceful political channels. In
that regard, South Africa supports the recommendation
that, in order to fully harness and support the innovation
of young people's contribution to peace, there is a
need to invest in young people's capabilities, redress
the structural barriers that limit youth participation in
peace and security, and emphasize partnerships and
collaborative action, where young people are viewed as
equal and essential partners for peace.
South Africa has acknowledged the role played by
the youth as agents of change. as they were instrumental
in advancing the goals of the broader struggle for
liberation and democracy in our country. Young
people who were often at the front lines of the battle
for freedom are also now at the forefront of combating
poverty, inequality and unemployment in South Africa.
The South African Government has therefore made
the empowerment of youth central to its development
agenda and has set up programmes dedicated to their
education, job creation and development. President
Ramaphosa has also identified our country's most
pressing challenge as youth unemployment. In that
regard, South Africa is harnessing the potential of our
young people and drawing them closer to the country's
economic activity by launching the Youth Employment
Service initiative. We have also established a youth
working group that will ensure that all representatives
of young people will have a say in the policies and
programmes that are meant to promote their interests at
the highest possible level.

My delegation has noted with concern that youth
programmes tend to give priority to the roles of young
men over those of young women in society, a problem
that is only emphasized by the fact that young women are
disproportionately targeted by sexual and gender-based
violence. We should therefore ensure that the outcomes
of today's meeting reinforce the work being done to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security.

Ultimately, we need to create an environment that
can enable young people to contribute positively in
society. We see young people as having the potential
to be engines for growth and stability on our continent
and in the rest of our world. An investment in them
is an investment in future peace and prosperity and a
guard against the interests of belligerent forces such
as terrorist groups. We must harness young people's
dynamism and positivity and build up their resilience
in the face of sentiments that promote resorting to
violence as a way to achieve misguided interests.

In conclusion, we have the potential to make
meaningful change through investing in our young
people and giving them a voice to determine their
futures. We see today's open debate as just such an
opportunity and look forward to an outcome that
strengthens the resolve of the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security by lifting
up and harnessing youth in the pursuit of international
peace and security.
