The President: Let me conclude the debate by
expressing my gratitude for all of the inspiring and
thoughtful statements made today. They lead me to
conclude that we all share the wish to strengthen
international law in our conduct.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, which are indispensable
foundations of a more peaceful, prosperous and
just world. The Council underscores its
conviction that international law plays a critical
role in fostering stability and order in
international relations and in providing a
framework for cooperation among States in
addressing common challenges, thus contributing
to the maintenance of international peace and
security.
20

"The Security Council is committed to and
actively supports the peaceful settlement of
disputes and reiterates its call upon the Member
States to settle their disputes by peaceful means,
as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, including by use of regional
preventive mechanisms and the International
Court of Justice. The Council emphasizes the
important role of the International Court of
Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, in adjudicating disputes among States.

"The Security Council attaches vital
importance to promoting justice and the rule of
law, including respect for human rights, as an
indispensable element for lasting peace. The
Council considers enhancement of the rule of law
activities as crucial in the peacebuilding
strategies in post-conflict societies and
emphasizes the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in this regard. The Council supports
the idea of establishing a rule of law assistance
unit within the Secretariat and looks forward to
receiving the Secretariat's proposals for
implementation of the recommendations set out
in paragraph 65 of the Secretary-General's report
on the rule of law and transitional justice in
conflict and post-conflict societies (S/2004/616).
The Council urges Member States which are
interested in doing so to contribute national
expertise and materials to these developments
within their means, and to improve their
capacities in these areas.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
responsibility of States to comply with their
obligations to end impunity and to prosecute
those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and serious violations of international
the

humanitarian law. The Council reaffirms that
ending impunity is essential if a society in
conflict or recovering from conflict is to come to
terms with past abuses committed against
civilians and to prevent future such abuses. The
Council intends to continue forcefully to fight
impunity with appropriate means and draws
attention to the full range of justice and
reconciliation mechanisms to be considered,
including national, international and 'mixed'
criminal courts and tribunals and truth and
reconciliation commissions.

"The Security Council considers sanctions
an important tool in the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security.
The Council resolves to ensure that sanctions are
carefully targeted in support of clear objectives
and are implemented in ways that balance
effectiveness against possible adverse
consequences. The Council is committed to
ensuring that fair and clear procedures exist for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists
and for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exemptions. The Council reiterates
its request to the 1267 Committee to continue its
work on the Committee's guidelines, including on
listing and delisting procedures, and on the
implementation of its exemption procedures
contained in resolution 1452 (2002) of
20 December 2002."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/28.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.

06-4010]
