Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Since my last briefing
and the open debate on 27 July on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PV.6171), there have been several
important developments on the ground and continued
international efforts to create the conditions for the
prompt resumption and early conclusion of Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations. United States Envoy Mitchell
completed a regional visit on 29 July to seek
commitments and actions from the parties, including
with regard to the implementation of phase I Road Map
obligations, as well as on broader regional steps, as
outlined by the Quartet in its Trieste statement of
26 June. The Quartet envoys met in the office of the
2
Special Coordinator in Jerusalem on 31 July in a
follow-up to the principals' meeting in Trieste, and are
expected to meet again soon.

During September, the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee and Quartet principals are expected to meet
on the margins of the general debate. The principals
will also consult with the members of the League of
Arab States Follow-Up Committee on the Arab Peace
Initiative. The Secretary-General looks forward to
those meetings as important benchmarks for progress
in the renewed effort by the international community
this year to achieve genuine forward movement on the
political, security and economic tracks.

In the West Bank, the Palestinian Authority
continues its efforts to impose law and order in
Palestinian cities and towns. Since mid-June there has
been a notable decrease in the number of Palestinians
injured by Israeli military activities, and we hope this
welcome trend will continue. Attacks by Israeli settlers
on Palestinians and their property continued, along
with a lack of enforcement of the rule of law.
Altogether, 24 Palestinians, of whom five were
children, and seven Israelis, all adults, were injured.
There were no fatalities to report.

In last month's briefing, we reported that Israel
had eased some movement restrictions, improving
access to certain West Bank towns and aiding efforts to
improve living conditions and promote economic
growth. According to the Nablus Chamber of
Commerce, that city has seen a slow, albeit significant,
revival of commercial activity since the beginning of
the year. In addition, the Government of Israel
announced that, as of 5 August, passenger crossing
hours at Allenby Bridge will be expanded on a pilot
basis, which we hope will ease the flow of the
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who Visit the
West Bank. This measure follows an earlier
announcement of the expansion of commercial crossing
hours, an important step for facilitating Palestinian
exports.

We welcome these actions and the statement of
the Government of Israel that it intends to take further
steps to ease movement and access. This is essential if
change is to become truly transformative, because
significant obstacles to movement and access persist in
the West Bank, including around East Jerusalem; the
total number of obstacles stands at 614. Other
measures that would greatly enhance economic
09-48663
development in the West Bank include further removal
of obstacles; removal of the permit requirement for
Palestinians to travel into the Jordan Valley;
significantly improved access to East Jerusalem; an
increased number of permits for Palestinian workers in
Israel; and increased capacity of commercial crossings
and redeployment of Palestinian customs authorities to
Allenby Bridge. The easing of the tight restrictions on
infrastructure development in Area C is also critical for
Palestinian economic development.

We continue to be concerned at the critical budget
deficit facing the Palestinian Authority. We welcome
recent transfers made by key donors, who have made
significant pledges, and we encourage all donors to
fulfil pledges made in Paris in December 2007 and at
Sharm el-Sheikh in March of this year.

The issue of continued Israeli settlement activity
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank is a matter of
grave concern. We urge the Government of Israel to
heed the call of the Quartet to honour its Road Map
obligations and freeze all settlement activity, including
natural growth, and to remove outposts erected since
March 2001. Also, the barrier, which deviates
significantly from the 1967 line into occupied
Palestinian territory despite the statement by the
International Court of Justice that this is contrary to
international law, continues to restrict Palestinian
access to East Jerusalem, as well as to key social
services and agricultural land.

Israeli actions in support of settlers in the heart of
East Jerusalem have been a matter of particular
concern in the reporting period. On 2 August,
following a decision by the Israeli High Court, Israeli
security forces forcibly evicted nine Palestinian
families, amounting to 53 people, including
20 children, from their homes in the Sheikh Jarrah
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem. Under the protection
of Israeli security forces, the property was handed over
to a settlement organization, and Israeli settlers took
over the buildings immediately after the evictions. The
families evicted are now living on the sidewalk near
the homes from which they were forcibly removed, and
tensions in the area remain high. Settlement plans in
other parts of Sheikh Jarrah have put approximately
450 other residents of the neighbourhood at risk of
displacement. In addition, on 5 August, eight
Palestinians were injured in clashes with Israeli forces
delivering demolition orders in the Al-Bustan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem.
09-48663

We reiterate our call to Israel to adhere to
international law and its Road Map obligations, and to
cease and reverse provocative actions such as the
demolitions and evictions in East Jerusalem. We
remind Israel of the Quartet's united position on this
issue, and of its recent affirmation that unilateral
actions cannot prejudge the outcome of negotiations
and will not be recognized by the international
community.

Turning to the situation in and around Gaza, there
have been serious developments inside the Strip. Late
last week, a radical group calling itself Jund Ansar
Allah, armed with firearms, rocket-propelled grenades
and explosives, took refuge inside a mosque in Rafah,
declared an Islamic emirate and criticized Hamas for
insufficient efforts to launch attacks against Israel and
apply strict sharia law. After that group refused to
respond to calls by Hamas for its surrender, on
14 August a violent confrontation ensued, in which at
least 28 people were killed and more than
100 wounded, among them a number of unarmed
civilians.

Both the de facto security forces in Gaza and the
militant wing of Hamas were involved in acting against
the group, and heightened security measures were put
in place in other parts of the Gaza Strip. These events
highlight concerns regarding the radicalization of
certain elements in Gaza, the dangers of continued
smuggling of weapons and explosives into the Strip,
the absence of an appropriate legal framework for
ensuring public security and order, and the need for full
respect of international humanitarian law by all parties
to ensure the protection of civilians.

These developments took place during a period in
which there have been no casualties due to Israeli-
Palestinian violence. A relative calm, enforced on the
Gaza side by Hamas, prevails. However, there were
two rocket and mortar attacks against Israel by militant
groups in the Gaza Strip, including an attack on
9 August on the Erez crossing point while Palestinian
patients were being evacuated for medical treatment in
Israel.

In response, Israeli forces conducted an air raid
shelling the areas of the tunnels under the Egypt-Gaza
border. Israeli forces have also conducted six ground
incursions during the reporting period. Since the last
report to the Council, four more lives have been lost in
accidents in the tunnels. Nevertheless, large-scale
3
smuggling continues. This, along with the closure
regime, is undermining the regular economy and
people's livelihoods in Gaza, as well as forces of
political moderation.

Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), which
calls for mechanisms to prevent illicit trafficking of
arms and ammunition into Gaza and for the sustained
reopening of the crossing points, is yet to be
operationalized. Overall, an average of 87 trucks per
day were allowed into Gaza, as compared to 78 per day
in July. This is significantly higher than the 18 trucks
per day in November 2008, before the start of
Operation Cast Lead. However, in May 2007, prior to
the imposition of the comprehensive closure regime,
475 trucks per day were entering Gaza as part of
normal commerce and trade. Today, the overwhelming
majority of imports are limited to food and sanitation
items, with little or no entry for all other goods,
including items intended for recovery.

Notwithstanding that, there were some positive
developments with respect to access. On 27 July, for
the first time in 10 months, Israel permitted the
shipment of 100,000 litres of diesel and 40,000 litres of
gasoline into Gaza for private use. On 6 August, three
truckloads of cement and steel bars were allowed into
Gaza for the Palestinian Water Authority's north Gaza
wastewater treatment plant. While welcome, these
measures are not sufficient to meet the needs of Gaza's
civilian population.

Consultations are ongoing with the Israeli
authorities regarding the United Nations proposal to
start early recovery construction activities for schools,
homes and health clinics in Gaza. We hope for and
expect a clear answer on the proposal from the Israeli
Government very soon. The passage of time leaves
little hope of rebuilding homes, education and health
facilities before winter, which is essential to begin
restoring a semblance of normality to life for the
civilian population. It remains unacceptable that no
early recovery or reconstruction activities for the Gaza
civilian population have been enabled some seven
months after Operation Cast Lead. We also reiterate
that the United Nations has effective measures in place
to ensure the integrity of programming in Gaza.

We continue to call for the release of Israeli
Corporal Gilad Shalit. We express the hope that
negotiations on a prisoner exchange will be pursued in
good faith by both parties to facilitate his release,
along with the release of a number of the more than
11,000 Palestinian prisoners being held in Israeli jails.

Following the public hearings in Gaza and
Geneva that were reported on last month, the fact-
finding mission led by Justice Goldstone has
completed its investigations and is in the process of
finalizing its report. The report is expected to be issued
in early September, with presentation and discussion of
the report at the Human Rights Council scheduled for
29 September.

Between 3 and 10 August, the Fatah party of
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas held its sixth
party congress in Bethlehem, the first in 20 years and
the first in the occupied Palestinian territory. Most
Fatah members from Gaza were unable to participate
following prevention of their travel by Hamas, but
voted by telephone. President Abbas was elected by
acclamation as Fatah leader and Chairman of the
party's Central Committee. Nineteen other Fatah
members, 14 of whom were not members of the
previous Central Committee, were elected to the new
Central Committee, and a new Revolutionary Council
was elected.

We continue to call for efforts to reunite Gaza
and the West Bank within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority. We support Egypt in
its efforts in this regard and hope that reconciliation
talks are resumed again in earnest soon.

In the occupied Syrian Golan, the situation
remained quiet, although Israeli settlement activity
continued. During a visit to the area on 10 August,
Special Coordinator Serry expressed the continued
commitment of the United Nations to a comprehensive
regional peace and our hope for the early resumption of
negotiations between Israel and Syria.

Turning now to Lebanon, efforts to form a new
Government continued since my last briefing on
27 July. Political leaders announced that they had
reached an agreement on the distribution of Cabinet
seats, but not yet on the names of ministers. We expect
the new Government to commit to the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006).

The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has remained generally quiet. The tensions in the area
of Khirbat Salim and Kfar Shouba have gradually
09-48663
subsided. The investigation into the 14 July incident in
Khirbat Salim is ongoing. Separately, in the early hours
of 17 August, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) removed
the watchtower that they had earlier set up south of the
Line of Withdrawal near the village of Kfar Shouba,
where there had been protests and the consequent
violation of the Blue Line by a group of civilians on
17 July.

The Special Coordinator, Mr. Michael Williams,
and UNIFIL Force Commander, Major General
Claudio Graziano, have been in constant contact with
the Lebanese Armed Forces, Israeli authorities and the
IDF command in order to defuse the tension caused by
the incidents of recent weeks in southern Lebanon. We
believe that the dismantling of the watchtower will aid
this effort. Meanwhile, Israeli air violations continued
on an almost daily basis during the reporting period.
We look forward to the outcomes of the current
consultations on the UNIFIL mandate.
09-4866}

In conclusion, we urge the parties to respond
positively to the efforts under way to create the
conditions for an early resumption and early
conclusion of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, as well
as to efforts to promote progress towards
comprehensive regional peace. The Secretary-General
remains committed to working with the parties and his
international partners for an end of the occupation that
began in 1967 and the establishment of a Palestinian
State living side by side in peace with Israel, within
secure and recognized borders, and a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

