Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I should like to express the deepest condolences
of the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran over
the terrorist act committed against the Ambassador of
the Russian Federation. While extending our sympathy
to the Government and the people of the Russian
Federation, I am sure that these barbaric acts only
strengthen the political will to fight terrorists and
terrorists organizations.

I would like to express my appreciation to Spain for
organizingthis debate;to theAmbassadorofAfghanistan
for his statement; to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA); and to the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their briefings.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/1049) once again refers to the further
deterioration of the security situation during the
reporting period, with the number of armed clashes
having increased by 22 per cent over last year, reaching
its highest level since the United Nations started
recording incidents in 2007 and surpassing the previous
record year of 2011. Our region continues to suffer
from an alarming surge in extremist violence, while
a dramatic increase in drug production is threatening
our societies. Afghanistan is most affected by these
problems; 2016 has been a very challenging year for
the National Unity Government of Afghanistan as
extremist groups such as Da'esh expand their terror
inside the country.

Today, the Afghan National Unity Government is
at the forefront of fighting terrorism. The sustained
support of the international community is needed even
more to support the Afghan Government in its fight
against terrorism and extremism, as well as to address
its security, economic and political challenges. We
continue to fully support the National Unity Government
and we stand ready to work with its leaders to help them
discharge their responsibilities. We welcome the recent
achievement of the Government in making peace with
Hizb-i Islami (Gulbuddin).

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to
consolidating peace and progress in the region. The
trilateral transit agreement between Iran, India and
Afghanistan on the development of the port of Chabahar
is one important step in that direction. It makes it
possible for Afghanistan to have access to world
markets, through open seas, making the development
of Afghanistan's vast and rich mineral resources
economically attractive. We invite interested actors
from the region and beyond to consider participating in
the development and expansion of Chabahar.

The Khawaf-Herat railway project is another key
connectivity project that connects Afghanistan to the
international railway network through Iran. We fully
share the conclusion by the Secretary-General in his
report that regional infrastructure initiatives, including
transport links between Afghanistan and Iran and
Turkmenistan, serve as an important pathway towards
prosperity and stability in Afghanistan.

The challenges facing Afghanistan and our region
are interconnected. Recent reports of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime indicate a 43 per
cent growth in drug production last year. Without drug
proceeds, terrorists cannot finance their operations and
drug producers need militias and warlords to traffic
their deadly commodity. As a front-line country in
the war against narcotics, we have offered alternative
cultivation, as well as alternative livelihood plans to
dissuade Afghan farmers from opium cultivation. The
strong support and commitment of international donors,
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime are essential to deterring the menace
of narcotics as a social health challenge and, more
importantly, a major source of income for extremists
and terrorist groups.

For the past 37 years, we have hosted no fewer
than 3 million Afghan nationals at any given time.
They have access to subsidized services available to
Iranian nationals, including basic commodities, public
transportation, public health and public education.
This year alone, we are providing education to nearly
400,000 undocumented Afghan students with minimum
burden-sharing assistance from the international
community. Iran continues to participate in the work
of the Tripartite Commission in order to plan for the
voluntary, safe, dignified and gradual repatriation
of Afghan refugees. We welcome any effort to help
overcome the main reintegration challenges faced
by returnees and to formulate the comprehensive
voluntary repatriation and reintegration strategy. First
and foremost, success in voluntary repatriation depends
on reasonably meeting the needs of repatriated refugees
in Afghanistan and underscoring the necessity for
mobilizing more international support for that purpose.

We support UNAMA and United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan. Through
genuine commitment by the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth in
the final report of the Tripartite Review Commission on
the United Nations in Afghanistan (S/2015/713, annex),
we need to utilize the UNAMA mandate and its good
offices for strengthening national institutes and capacity
in priority areas, as requested by the Government.

Let me conclude by reaffirming the resolve of the
people and Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
to continue their support for the fraternal people and
Government of Afghanistan, as they move through this
difficult period in their history to a stable, safe and
prosperous Afghanistan.

