Ms. Prost: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council at this
open debate on the topic of enhancing due process in
sanctions regimes. I hope that the reflections based on
my experience as Ombudsperson will help to inform
the discussion today. I will touch on three issues from
the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex), beginning
with the question of extending the mandate of the
Ombudsperson to other sanction regimes.

While international law in this area continues to
evolve, from experience one point is clear: the relevant
jurisprudence, as well as interaction with human rights
officials, courts and bodies, conveys a consistent
message. The imposition of targeted sanctions, which
directly affect the rights of individuals and entities,
without the availability of an independent review
mechanism that can deliver an effective remedy,
is a practice inconsistent with fundamental human
rights obligations. The Office of the Ombudsperson
has been criticized for not going far enough in that
respect in principle, in particular as to the absence of
a binding decision-making power. However, it has not
been disputed - in fact, it has been acknowledged
in some quarters - that if the recommendations
of the Ombudsperson are followed, in practice the
mechanism provides a fair process and can and does
deliver an effective remedy. However, it remains a
procedure applicable only in the context of one targeted
sanctions regime. The ramifications of this, given the
requirements of Article I of the Charter of the United
Nations, in terms of international law and human rights
obligations, is evidently a matter for the consideration
of the Security Council and of States.

A second and related point on the same issue is
that, on a principled basis, there is no evident rationale
as to why an independent review mechanism is made
available to one set of individuals subject to targeted
sanctions, but not to others. That is particularly the case
when the matter is considered from the perspective of
those subject to the sanctions. I have been exposed to
that perspective on several occasions when I have been
contacted by individuals listed on other regimes, and
I must advise them that the mandate of the Office of
the Ombudsperson is not applicable. The inequality of
that mechanism was particularly clear a few years back
where an individual was delisted from the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime and on the same day placed on
another sanctions list. In one context he had access to
a review mechanism, in the other context he did not.
Of course, the other regimes benefit from the focal
point mechanism, which was an important and helpful
mechanism in respect to fair and clear procedures. But
the law is clear that, even with improvements, the focal
point mechanism, by its very nature and structure, does
not have the fundamental characteristics necessary to
serve as an independent review mechanism or to deliver
an effective remedy.

The point is made that the justification for that
distinction arises from the differing nature and differing
criteria of the regimes, and the need for flexibility in
order to employ sanctions in other regimes effectively
against pressing threats. For the consideration and the
discussion on that point, I simply stress the limited
role that the Ombudsperson plays in this context.
Responsibility to decide upon and interpret the criteria
for listing rests exclusively with the Security Council
and its Committees. The role of the Ombudsperson is
a factual one: to analyze the information to determine
whether the person or entity meets the criteria that have
been set by the Security Council.

The final point on that issue is one which, in my
view, rarely gets sufficient attention, but it is continually
made clear to me in my practice as Ombudsperson.
Fair process is supportive of, and in fact essential to,
the effective implementation of sanctions measures.
Repeatedly, I have heard from Government officials,
legislators and judges about the challenges they face in
implementing these significant measures against their
citizens and residents without access to the underlying
information supporting the measures and, most
important, without the availability of an independent
recourse. Moreover, these are not just legal challenges
in the courts. There are difficulties politically and in
terms of policy in developing, adopting and applying
the necessary legislation and related measures for
implementation.

Those challenges are not new, of course, but what
is new is that in the context of the Al-Qaida regime
there is now a response to them. Reference can be made
to the existence of a mechanism at the international
level that can consistently address these fundamental
concerns. That this is helpful to implementation is not
speculation on my part. Recently I saw an example
where information communicated to a State about the
Ombudsperson process during one of my outreach
activities was instrumental in helping the officials
overcome some practical obstacles to implementation.

As to the legal challenges, the experience definitely
shows that there are no measures at the international
level, or otherwise, that can eliminate the potential for
judicial intervention, and appropriately so. However, if
experience with the Al-Qaida regime is any indication,
the introduction of a fair process mechanism
significantly reduces the number of domestic and
regional court challenges. Effectively, the issues come
back to the international level. It is clear that cases have
been filtered off to the Ombudsperson process and, as
well, the fundamental unfairness that provided such
fertile ground for legal challenges is no longer present.
In sum, the Al-Qaida experience demonstrates that
fair process is good for the effective implementation of
sanctions.

I turn to the second point I wish to address briefly,
which is the operation ofthe Office ofthe Ombudsperson
within the Al-Qaida regime. As I have stated repeatedly,
it is a robust mechanism and it provides a fair process
in the individual cases. However, there remain several
challenges, which - save for one - I will leave to
my written reports to the Council. The one issue is the
provision of reasons with respect to the decisions taken
on delisting requests. I emphasize that this problem
does not in any way relate to the question of confidential
information, which would never be disclosed in the
reasons.

While there have been many improvements to the
Ombudsperson process, the reality remains that it is
not a transparent one. While the petitioner receives
much-needed information in the dialogue phase, the
only View into the actual decision-making process is
through these reasons. The necessity for reasons in
both retention and delisting cases has been recognized
by the Council in successive resolutions, but despite
the requirements of the resolution there remains a
reluctance in the Committee to provide the factual
detail in the reasons, which is essential to making them
meaningful. The problem is less acute for retention
cases, but even in that context it can be a significant
struggle to obtain disclosure of the full reasoning that
is critical to defending the decisions.

For delisting cases, the View has been expressed that
the petitioners have already received their fair process
because the remedy has been granted. With respect,
however, fair and due process can never be assessed on
the bsais of results or outcome. In fact, to the contrary,
fair process means that regardless of the result, fair
and reasonable steps have been taken in reaching the
decision. In this particular case, a reasoned decision is
the distinction between a fair process and an arbitrary
one. It follows, therefore, that substantive reasons with
factual information, as a part of fair process, should be
provided regardless of the result, as has been mandated
by the Council.

It also merits noting that, given the confidential
nature ofthe sanctions process in general, these reasons
provide a rare opportunity to the Security Council and
its Committee to demonstrate to the petitioner and well
beyond what is factually the case - that decisions
within the targeted sanction regimes are reasoned, fair
and based on underlying information. That can only
serve to enhance the credibility and strength of the
regimes. This is therefore another example of how fair
process, by way of more detailed reasons, would aid the
effectiveness of sanction regimes.

My final point relates to the implementation of the
Ombudsperson regime, as established by the Security
Council. I can be brief, because it is a simple point.
While the Office of the Ombudsperson continues to
deliver on its mandate and to operate independently,
as envisaged by the Security Council, it does so based
on the good will and efforts of individuals within the
Office of the Ombudsperson and within the Secretariat.
Structurally, however, the Office of the Ombudsperson
does not exist, and the administrative and contractual
arrangements supporting it in practice do not provide
institutional safeguards for independence. Given
the extraordinary steps that the Council has taken to
introduce an independent review mechanism into a
targeted sanctions regime in aid of fair process, it
seems imperative that it be implemented in a manner
that ensures its sustainability as such.

In closing, I must acknowledge that it was recently
said that I am obsessed with fair process. Upon
reflection, I accept that categorization, and I think it
is a characteristic that the Council would expect from
the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
More importantly for the discussion today, it is a focus
motivated by the fact that improved due process has
a dual effect in the context of targeted sanctions. It
evidently enhances the protections for individual rights,
but at the same time it strengthens the credibility of the
regime and contributes to improved implementation
of these important sanctions measures, the ultimate
aim of which is to safeguard our collective rights to
life and security. In my view, cumulatively, these are
protections well worth obsessing about.

Once again, I thank the Council for the opportunity
to provide these comments for this important open
debate.

