Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Allow me to startby
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency and welcoming the new members of
the Council. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun for his briefing.

We have closely followed recent developments in
Iran. We condemn the excessive use of violence and the
deplorable loss of lives. The Security Council has an
essential preventive function and we should constantly
consider means to follow up on early warnings in the
most suitable and constructive manner, no matter what
country is affected or which situation is involved. We
do, however, have our reservations about the format
and timing of this meeting.

For Sweden and the European Union, human rights
have always been a core issue in our relations with Iran.
Sweden unequivocally supports respect for democracy,
human rights and the rule of law everywhere around
the world. The human right to peaceful assembly and
freedom of expression must be respected. This must be
the case in Iran as in any other country. The grievances
aired in the protests should be listened to and the issues
raised ought to be resolved through dialogue, as part of
a democratic process.

We have noted President Rouhani's reaffirmation
of the people's right to protest peacefully. We expect
the Iranian authorities to respond to protests in full
compliance with Iran's obligations under international
human rights law. In this regard, continued and close
dialogue with Iran is of utmost importance. Sweden has
been in contact with the Iranian authorities on recent
developments. In the spirit of frankness and respect,
we have made clear that we expect all concerned to
refrain from the excessive and disproportionate use of
force and to ensure and respect freedom of expression,
including on the Internet.

Human rights violations in Iran must be separated
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Sweden
and the European Union are very clear on their full
support for the agreement. Its continued implementation
is of crucial importance. The agreement is ensuring
the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme, which contributes to stability in the region
and beyond. It significantly contributes to strengthening
the global non-proliferation architecture.

