Major General Uba: First, I would like to respond
to the comments made by the Permanent Representative
of Senegal, concerning the quick reaction force. The
quick reaction force was established under the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI). Now that
UNOCI has closed down, the force is being prepared
and refitted for deployment to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). We understand the issues and the
problems. MINUSMA is a just a short distance from
there to Liberia, if the need arises and, at the same
time, under inter-mission cooperation we are supposed
to have the quick reaction force fulfilling an over-
the-horizon mandate in Liberia. That simply means that
the force that is being refitted must be flexible enough
to provide that over-the-horizon capacity. It must be
mobile enough to be able to move when requested
and be able to adapt to the terrain in which it is going
to operate.

When the force was a part of UNOCI, we had the
opportunity to exercise with it in April 2015. The force
came to Liberia and we had an exercise that went very
well. At the same time, we saw the capacity of the
force when it offered assistance in the Central African
Republic. Now, the force has changed, which is quite
normal, and its entire focus will also change. I am
aware that the Office of Military Affairs is working
on settling the unit requirements and the concept of
operations of the force. It is expected that once all of
that has been sorted out and the force is deployed in
MINUSMA, we shall have the possibility of exercising
together to understand each other.

The next point is on security in Liberia ahead ofthe
upcoming October elections. According to resolution
2333 (2016), the Government of Liberia is responsible
for ensuring security, as a result of the handing-over
of security responsibility to the Government. That
underscored the need for the final drawdown, which
kept only a residual force in Liberia. It is also wise to
mention that we have a force that is capable of only
just maintaining the security of the United Nations and
its assets. The military has a force of only 230 troops
and the police force has just 260 officers. Those are the
combined forces that keep the United Nations entities
and equipment safe and provide a platform when an
eventual force is required to assist the mission. In a
nutshell, we have just what is required for basic self-
sustenance in the Mission.

Another aspect was elections-related assistance,
which was mainly centred on logistics that suffered
from critical gaps. UNMIL was mandated to assist
where we observed critical gaps in logistics related to
elections. At the same time, when it came to security,
we were expected to interfere only when the situation
threatened a strategic reversal that was not palatable
to anybody.

With respect to lessons learned associated with
drawdown, a lot has been learned through UNMIL.
UNMIL has been a very important force, with all the
paraphernalia of a multidimensional and integrated
force. It interfaced with all facets of Liberian life. Now
we have drawn down, we are left only with a residual
force. The first aspect that we saw to be lacking was
early preparation for peacebuilding. Peacebuilding
in Liberia could have taken place much earlier. In a
nutshell, peacebuilding should begin concurrently with
peacekeeping in any mission so that the two can take
place together. While we keep the peace, peacebuilding
should be ongoing. We hope that Headquarters will
have a look at that and adopt a critical approach to
it so that there is no demarcating line where we say
"Now we have finished peacekeeping we can roll
back to peacebuilding", and so on. Development and
peacebuilding should go hand in hand withpeacekeeping.

At the same time, we have observed a trend whereby,
when it comes to drawdown, there is a need for robust
engagement. Naturally, a dependency syndrome will
emerge when a nation that has been given everything
suddenly sees its United Nations mission close. There
is a fear and apprehension that the nation may revert to
where it was at the start. There is therefore a need for
early, robust engagement between the mission and the
host nation. What this means is simply that, as a mission
is deployed, a time line and specific benchmarks should
be set so that an exit strategy can be worked out in the
meanwhile. We should be able to say that a mission is
likely to last two or three years, and within those years
we want the mission to achieve a, b and c, and then
drawn down and close. Inasmuch as that is not a given,
it leaves leeway for a mission to keep gallivanting,
neither here nor there, until such time that the Security
Council may decide to end it.

In a nutshell, a key lesson was that the transition
programme should be all-encompassing and involve the
host nation, international partners, strategic partners
and even the downtrodden people of the host nation.
They should all be taken on board in order to ensure
that they understand the concept of drawdown, mission
closure and departure.

The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.
