Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, allow me to welcome the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals and express my gratitude
for their reports (S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2013/310)
and briefings today. I would like to underline the great
contribution made by all of the staff of the Tribunals and
commend their efforts for the successful completion
of the Tribunals' mandates. My thanks also go to the
Guatemalan delegation for its work as chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.

Just this past month, we celebrated 20 years
of the existence and 19 years of the operation of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) - anniversaries whose importance
goes beyond the two ad hoc Tribunals. In reality,
their significance stands as testimony to and a living
embodiment of the spirit and promise of Nuremberg,
carried forward into the twenty-first century. The
triumph of justice over vengeance was the legacy of that
post-Second World War tribunal. It complemented The
Hague and Geneva Conventions through the principles
and precedents it established, eventually serving as an
inspiration and foundation for both the Tribunals and
the International Criminal Court (ICC).

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the establishment
of the ad hoc International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia as a legal framework to ensure
accountability and bring to an end a tragic period for all
of the peoples living in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
Tribunal's determined message, namely, that crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia will be punished
consistently and without exception, has been heard loud
and clear. The same can be said about the ICTR and its
contributions to reconciliation and sustainable peace in
its region.

In accordance with what I have just said,
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
consistently and constructively cooperated with the
Hague Prosecutor and the Tribunal since the end of
the war. That cooperation has been positively assessed
in the relevant periodic reports and noted in the latest
report of the Prosecutor. However, we take note of all of
the other assessments and concerns that the Prosecutor
has raised and remain fully aware that a great deal still
remains to be done. I wish to recall that Bosnia and
Herzegovina carries the greatest burden of prosecutions
for war crimes. Still, since 2005, when the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina became fully operational,
measurable progress has been made in processing war
crimes, and over 200 cases have been successfully
concluded. However, according to the relevant statistics
of domestic and international actors, there are a large
number of war crimes to be prosecuted in domestic
courts.

Nevertheless, the fact remains that the National
Strategy for War Crimes requires an improved
approach to implementation and to meeting deadlines.
The capacity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina system
to process war crimes cases fairly and in line with
international and national standards is not in question.
However, stronger efforts need to be made to effectively
increase the overall pace of the processing of cases at
both the State and the entity levels. As the Tribunals
are steadily heading towards their closure, the duty to
continue the fight against impunity and enhance the
reach of justice falls more fully on credible national
prosecutions. To that end, let me assure the Council
that our common goal remains that of ensuring that
all crimes committed are investigated and prosecuted
and the perpetrators appropriately punished. Given
our unfortunate first-hand experience, Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains resolutely faithful to those
principles.

As regional cooperation plays an additional
important role in that respect, we are certain that the
Protocol on the exchange of evidence and information
on war crimes, recently signed between the respective
Prosecutor's Offices of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia
and Croatia, will give an impetus for strengthening
communication and further enhancing coordination.
My country remains dedicated to the further promotion
and intensification of regional cooperation, given that
that is in the joint interests of the countries in the region.

Moving to the issue ofthe completion ofthe work of
both Tribunals, we note the exceptional efforts that the
Tribunals continue to make to successfully complete
their work and make the full transition to the Residual
Mechanism, fully mindful of the highest standards
of due process. It is our hope that further delays will
be avoided by progressively fulfilling the remaining
judicial functions. Victims and their families have
waited long enough, and some are still waiting for the
opportunity for redress and closure. Further delays
only undermine the solemn promise that justice will
unconditionally be served.

Finally, it is our hope that some lessons have been
learned. In that regard, I wish to remind the Council
of the words of Prosecutor Robert H. Jackson at the
Nuremberg trials, warning that: "The wrongs which we
seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated,
so malignant and so devastating that civilization cannot
tolerate their being ignored, because it cannot survive
their being repeated". That is a message we need
to carry with us in these turbulent times. As for the
Tribunals, one of their ultimate contributions will be to
demonstrate that administering justice can contribute
to reconciliation, in the Balkans and elsewhere. We can
only hope that the pioneering role of the two Tribunals
will be confirmed and expanded worldwide by the ICC.

