Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve Ladsous, as well
as the Police Commissioners of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for their informative
briefings. We also thank all of their staff for their
implentation in good faith of the task of maintaining
peace and security in difficult situations.

For us, this meeting is symbolic because in Russia
today it is Police and Internal Affairs Servicemen's
Day - the holiday of professional Russian police.
We see the police components as an integral part of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. They make
a contribution to carrying out the singular mandate
of each mission, as defined by the specifics of the
respective situations in the countries of deployment.

Today United Nations police face a daunting
task that has to do with the increasingly difficult and
complicated nature of the mandates of missions. They
monitor situations and report on violations of public
order, but they do more than just that. They provide
assistance to national bodies in the protection of
civilians and play an important subsidiary role in the
post-conflict reform of law enforcement institutions, as
well as in the improvement of the national capacities
of host countries. We are guided by the idea that,
while providing such assistance on behalf of the entire
international community, police, just as all United
Nations peacekeepers, must unstintingly comply
with Security Council mandates and uphold the basic
principles of peacekeeping. We must necessarily
acknowledge that the growing importance of police
places particular responsibility on peacekeepers and
leaders, and logically requires adapting the police
architecture of the United Nations.

We think that a crucial part of effectively
implementating mandates is establishing constructive
and confidence-based dialogue and relations with host
countries and, as necessary, with other parties to the
conflict. It is only in that context that assistance in
the protection of civilians can be tangibly effective.
While Acting in the difficult context of asymmetrical
threats, in close cooperation with local populations,
there is a need to carefully implement the so-called
people-centred approach. That approach consists
solely of the need, as necessary, of engaging in
confidence-based contact with locals. Any deviation
from upholding this principle creates the risk of being
accused of breaching the principle of impartiality.

Let me provide an example: the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei provide support to
the so-called community protection committees. Those
committees consist solely of one of the tribes of the
region, the Ngok Dinka. The other tribe, the Misseriya,
is against their establishment. In that way, the Blue
Helments seem to support unilateral actions of one party
to the conflict, the Ngok Dinka, which runs counter to
the principle of impartiality and the agreement of both
sides. Furthermore, we think that United Nations police
should not take on non-inherent political functions - in
the case of monitoring human rights, for instance. That
job is reserved for other United Nations bodies.

We would also like to mention the issue of the
gathering and analysis of information. We share the
view that without it, it is hard to work effectively in the
field. Nonetheless, those activities have to be carried
out solely with a clear operative end in sight and through
legal means and with the agreement of the host country,
while fully upholding that country's sovereignty. The
idea ofintelligence and the classical understanding of it
are not applicable in this instance.

One of the key tasks for the leaders of police
components and missions in general is to lend assistance
in bolstering the capacity of the host countries to
resolve law enforcement challenges, such as sharing
their experience and training staff. Local police bear
the primary responsibility for ensuring the security of
civilians. It is important to prevent situations in which
as a result of years-long presence of missions, United
Nations peacekeepers in fact substitute the efforts of
the local police.. Without increasing local potential,
there can be no sustainable exit strategy for United
Nations presence.

In that regard, another important aspect is that
United Nations police contingents must clearly
understand their tasks, act in a professional manner and
be appropriately equipped and trained. In that regard, we
support the initiatives of many regional organizations,
in particular those of the African Union, to increase
the training level of their police components. This is an
area of international cooperation that was particularly
recognized at the June Summit of Chiefs of Police,
attended by representatives of States Members of the
United Nations, the Secretariat and United Nations
field presences. During that meeting, the Russian
delegation declared that it would double the number of
its police officers in peacekeeping operations. That is
already being done. Twenty per cent of Russian police
officers are women.

We also intend to broaden our participation in the
training of international police. Over the past 16 years,
foreign police peacekeepers, including commanders,
from more than 50 countries, primarily in Africa,
have been trained at the training centre in the city of
Domodedovo. Russia has unique experience in the
area of the professional training of peacekeepers,
which we stand ready to share. We are convinced
that police peacekeeping should be the focus of due
attention from Member States. Outside independent
assessments cannot be a substitute for a discussion of
police issues within specialized agencies of the United
Nations. Discussions of the most difficult aspects - in
particular, the structure of police forces - should be
transparent. In that regard, we believe that the best
format for dialogue already exists in the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and the General Assembly's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, in which all troop- and
police-contributing countries are represented - without
the artificial exclusions that unfortunately occurred
during the police Summit - along with current and
potential host countries.

