Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, my delegation would like to congratulate Belgium on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of February. We would also like to thank Viet Nam for having successfully presided over the Council during the month of January. I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this very important meeting. Let me also thank the briefers for their very comprehensive briefings. The illegal trade in small arms and light weapons has worsened the situation in regions affected by armed conflict, violence, organized crime and terrorism, as highlighted in resolution 2220 (2015). Small arms trafficking also hinders international efforts to resolve conflicts and promote peace, and efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals in the aftermath of conflicts. Indonesia attaches great importance to ensuring that those efforts can be effectively implemented through a holistic approach. Indonesia would therefore like to emphasize the following points. First, States bear the primary responsibility. States are themselves responsible for regulating their legitimate arms trade, as well as curbing and eliminating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. Therefore, the implementation of a politically binding multilateral framework is of crucial importance. Various existing multilateral guidelines, including the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons (ITI) have provided the framework for States to address multifaceted challenge in countering the illicit trade in small arms within their territories. Furthermore, resolution 2117 (2013) underlines the importance of international assistance in building State capacity to implement the Programme of Action and the ITI. Moving forward, we need to ensure the adequacy, effectiveness and sustainability of such international assistance. Secondly, combatting the illegal trade in small arms requires cooperation among States, including regional organizations. Indonesia would like toemphasize the important role of regional organizations. This is in line with resolution 2457 (2019), which calls for further strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and regional organizations. The African Union Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative, similar initiatives in the Caribbean and the regional road map for the Western Balkans are noteworthy examples. In our region, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) continues to support the implementation of the Programme of Action to address arms smuggling and related issues, through, inter alia, the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN Working Group on Arms Smuggling, established in 2018, as a platform for collaboration on capacity- building, training and information-sharing. Indonesia therefore supports the strengthening and widening of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and interregional organizations to combat this crime globally. Thirdly, let me re-emphasize the need for a comprehensive and inclusive approach to combating this crime. Such a multifaceted challenge requires a multi-stakeholder response. Governments should substantially increase the participation and_ the ownership of different stakeholders in implementing policies to combat the illegal trade in small arms and light weapons. Indonesia would also like to emphasize that this effort should be undertaken as part of broader peacebuilding and nation-building. In conclusion, respect for sovereignty, the rule of law, national ownership and international cooperation are key to countering this challenge. States need to work together to build a global culture of rights and responsibilities, as well as respect for the rule of law, in addressing the threat posed by illicit small arms and light weapons.
