Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
My delegation welcomes your presence today, Sir, and
we thank you for presiding over today's meeting. Our
thanks also go to Ms. Frechette, Deputy Secretary-
General, for her briefing and her introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General.

Like other delegations, my delegation would like
to express its condolences to and solidarity with the
Afghan people, who have suffered great losses from
the earthquake.

In his report, the Secretary-General gives a full
analysis of the present situation in Afghanistan, and we
agree with that analysis. Since the signing of the Bonn
Agreement, the political process in that country has
gained headway, and there have been some important
changes in Afghan society. The Interim Administration
has made some important decisions and decrees since
its inauguration. The Special Independent Commission
is making is making preparations for the convening of
the emergency Loya Jirga. As a new school year has
begun, a large number of school dropouts - including
girls, who for the first time in six years are able to
receive education - are going back to school. The
situation of women has been improved.

Through cooperation with United Nations
agencies, the Governments concerned and relevant
non-governmental organizations, Afghanistan is setting
the stage for resuming agricultural activities and
starting economic reconstruction. It is improving its
relations with its neighbours. We congratulate the
country on the hard-won achievements that it has made
within a short period of time. The relevant agencies of
the United Nations system, and especially the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team,
have all made important contributions to achieving
progress in Afghanistan. We would like to express our
great appreciation to Mr. Brahimi and his team for their
effective efforts in difficult conditions for peace and
economic reconstruction in the country.

On the other hand, the overall situation,
especially the state of security in the country, remains
rather fragile. The eradication of the Taliban and Al
Qaeda remnants, the promotion of reconciliation and
confidence among different ethnic groups and putting
an end to the partition and military conflicts among
warlords and armed groups are all difficult challenges
facing the country. Especially with the coming of the
Loya Jirga, people are worried about the possible
outbreak of new conflicts triggered by the distribution
of power.

The Secretary-General's report contains a
thorough analysis of the security situation. He has also
produced pertinent recommendations and observations.
We support those recommendations, including the
extension of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) and its appropriate expansion.

In his report, the Secretary-General focuses on
the establishment of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and he details his
ideas about its mandate and structure. We believe that
given the current circumstances, it is necessary and
timely to establish such an integrated and unified
structure, which will synchronize the various assistance
initiatives of the United Nations, so that together these
combined initiatives will lend stronger support for the
peace process of Afghanistan. We support the
establishment of UNAMA and hope that the Security
Council will adopt a resolution on this, so that the
Assistance Mission can be established and put into
operation in a timely fashion.

As a neighbour of Afghanistan, China has always
been committed to the full settlement of the Afghan
question, and we actively support the Bonn process.
Since the establishment of the Interim Administration,
China has reopened its embassy in Kabul and has
provided emergency assistance. Our assistance in cash
has been disbursed, and the first shipment of material
assistance, which mainly consists of badly needed
medical equipment and school supplies, has arrived in
Kabul.

The Chinese Government is working in
coordination with the Interim Administration and with
Germany on the training of the Afghan police force.
China has signed an agreement with the Afghan
authorities to provide 20,000 police uniforms, 50,000
pair of military boots and other clothing. A
comprehensive assistance team assembled from more
than 10 departments in China has arrived in Kabul; it
will coordinate with its Afghan counterparts on
reconstruction assistance, and on the building of
hospitals. We are willing to work with other concerned
countries to make our own contribution towards the
economic reconstruction of Afghanistan.

