Mr. Mladenov: Today I devote my regular briefing
to the Security Council to reporting, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) during the period from 20 June to
20 September. In this third briefing, I will once again
focus on developments on the ground in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution, including on regional
and international efforts to advance the peace process.

During the reporting period, Israel did not cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, or fully respect all
of its legal obligations in this regard, as called for by
the resolution. Since 20 June, Israel's illegal settlement
activities have continued at a high rate - a consistent
pattern over the course of this year. Activity during
this period was concentrated primarily in occupied
East Jerusalem, where plans were advanced for over
2,300 housing units in July, 30 per cent more than for
the whole of 2016. That includes plans for some 1,600
units expanding a ring of settlements north of East
Jerusalem, as well as in the Palestinian neighbourhood
of Sheikh Jarrah, adjacent to the Old City. While no
plans were advanced in Area C during the reporting
period, in early September construction resumed
on the new settlement of Amihai, in the heart of the
West Bank.

The reporting period witnessed the eviction of a
Palestinian family in Sheikh Jarrah, residents for over
50 years, after a protracted legal battle. The building
is located in a section of the neighbourhood in which
several settlement plans were among those promoted
in July. Eviction proceedings are under way for some
180 Palestinian families in East Jerusalem, over 60 of
whom reside in Sheikh Jarrah.

Meanwhile, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the destruction
of Palestinian-owned property across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, continued, albeit at a
significantly lower rate. Overall since the beginning of
2017, 344 structures have been demolished, a third of
them in East Jerusalem, displacing some 500 people.
In Area C of the occupied West Bank in August, three
educational facilities, serving 175 children, were
demolished or confiscated, citing the lack of building
permits, which are virtually impossible for Palestinians
to obtain.

On 25 July, in the city of Hebron, 15 Israeli settler
families illegally occupied the Abu Rajab/Machpelah
House, despite ongoing legal proceedings over its
ownership. On 27 August, the Israeli Government
notified the High Court of Justice that it would evict
the settlers within one week. However, that process has
been put on hold by a temporary injunction issued by
the Court.

In other related developments, on 26 July an
amendment to the Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of
Israel passed a first reading in the Knesset. If approved,
the law would further cement Israeli control over East
Jerusalem. On 17 August, the High Court of Justice
issued a temporary injunction formally postponing
the application of the so-called regularization law. On
31 August, a military order was issued establishing a
civil services administration that upgrades the status
of settlements in the H2 area of Hebron, further
consolidating Israeli presence there and reinforcing
the existing separation and division in this highly
volatile area, where some 500 Israelis live among some
40,000 Palestinians. The United Nations considers all
settlement activities to be illegal under international
law and an impediment to peace. Resolution 2334
(2016) states that the international community will not
recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including
with regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed to by
the parties themselves through negotiations.

I will now turn to the issue of violence, which
persists as one of the main obstacles to resolving the
conflict. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on all sides
to prevent such acts and to strengthen efforts to
combat terrorism, including through existing security
coordination. Although the reporting period was
characterized by relatively low levels of fatalities, a
number of incidents occurred, particularly related to
the unrest following the fatal 14 July attack against two
Israeli policemen in Jerusalem's Old City.

During the reporting period, 19 Palestinians, five
of whom were in Area A of the West Bank, were killed
in attacks, clashes and Israeli military operations.
Eight Israelis were killed in clashes and attacks,
including the three Israeli-Arab perpetrators of the
14 July attack, who were killed by the security forces.
Of the 19 Palestinian fatalities, five were killed during
protests and subsequent clashes related to the unrest in
Jerusalem. On 21 July, a Palestinian brutally murdered
three members of an Israeli family in a terrorist attack
in the West Bank settlement of Halamish.

In a reaction to the events at the Holy Esplanade, on
21 July Palestinian President Abbas declared a freeze of
all contacts with Israel at all levels, including security
coordination. After three months of quiet, on 26 June,
23 and 24 July and 8 August Palestinian militants fired
rockets towards Israel, with no injuries reported. In
response, the Israel Defense Forces conducted five
airstrikes in Gaza, resulting in three Palestinians being
injured. On 17 August, one Palestinian was killed by
a suicide bomber, who was also killed, close to the
Egyptian border in Gaza. This appears to have been the
first suicide bombing affecting Hamas forces in Gaza.

During the reporting period, settler-related
violence also continued. Some 26 incidents were
documented, the majority involving the vandalization
of Palestinian agricultural property around Nablus, and
assaults against Palestinians in and around Hebron.
Meanwhile, at least 26 Palestinian attacks also took
place against Israeli settlers, resulting in casualties or
property damage. Punitive demolitions also continued
during the reporting period, with Israeli authorities
demolishing five homes belonging to families of
Palestinian perpetrators of attacks.

The reporting period also witnessed a shrinking
space for civil society and freedom of expression. On
24 June, the Palestinian President issued, by decree, the
Cybercrime Law. Since then, at least six journalists,
one human rights activist in Hebron and a number
of others have reportedly been arrested. While most
were subsequently released, these arrests raise strong
concerns that the law is being used to curtail freedom
of expression. In Gaza, a social media activist was
arrested by Hamas on 3 July and detained for almost
two weeks on charges of incitement against the de facto
authorities, while a journalist was detained for more
than two months on unclear allegations of collaboration
with the authorities in Ramallah.

Resolution 2334 (2016) called upon both parties
to refrain from acts of provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric, and to condemn all acts of
terrorism. At the height of the July crisis around the
holy sites of Jerusalem, officials and representatives
on all sides employed provocative rhetoric. In the
midst of what were largely peaceful protests, Hamas
and senior Palestinian Authority officials called for
an escalation and a day of rage across the occupied
Palestinian territory. Hamas and others continued to
openly glorify terror attacks, describing the murder of
three Israelis at their home in Halamish as "heroic".
Meanwhile, President Abbas explicitly condemned the
14 July attack and, in an attempt to calm tensions at
the holy sites, some Palestinian leaders and religious
authorities on both sides called on protestors to avoid
violence and provocation.

With regard to settlements, Israeli officials
continued to use provocative rhetoric in support of
expansion. On 3 August, the Israeli Prime Minister
delivered an inauguration speech at the launch of the
construction of 1,000 new housing units in the Beitar
Illit settlement, in which he praised the achievements of
his Government in promoting settlement construction.
On 28 August, he said that

"there will be no more uprooting of settlements in
the land of Israel . We will deepen our roots,
build, strengthen and settle".

Other senior Israeli politicians also made repeated calls
for annexation of the West Bank, with one Member of
the Knesset expressing his desire to "destroy" hopes
for Palestinian statehood, and stating that "there is
room to define and realize the national aspirations of
one people only - the Jewish people".

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the call of the
Middle East Quartet on both parties to take steps
to reverse negative trends on the ground that are
imperiling the two-State solution. On 10 July, an
interim power-purchasing agreement was signed
between the Palestinian and the Israeli electricity
companies, energizing the first Palestinian-owned
and operated sub-station in Jenin and allowing for an
increase in electricity supply in the northern West Bank.
On 13 July, the United States facilitated an agreement
between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, allowing
for an increase in water supply for Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza as part of the 2013 Red Sea-Dead
Sea Water Conveyance project.

In Gaza, the situation remains extremely fragile.
The chronic energy deficit has been substantially
worsened by the decision of the Palestinian Authority
to reduce electricity supply to the Strip. While
Egyptian fuel has enabled the Gaza power plant to
resume operations, electricity supply is still down to
about four hours per day. Basic services in some 190
health, water and sanitation facilities continue to rely
on back-up generators powered by United Nations-
provided fuel. As part of the Gaza emergency appeal
issued in July, an additional $4 million from the United
Nations Central Emergency Response Fund has been
released to support critical services. The appeal is now
51 per cent funded.

To end the standoff, the Palestinian Authority has
remained firm in its demands for Hamas to dissolve the
administrative committee it established in March and
allow the Government of National Consensus to take up
its responsibilities in Gaza. On 17 September, Hamas
officially accepted these conditions. It now remains to
be seen whether the agreement will be implemented
and electricity supply to Gaza restored.

I have just returned from a trip to the Gaza Strip,
and I am happy to brief the Security Council in
closed session on developments related to Palestinian
reconciliation and the Government returning to Gaza.

During the reporting period, there were no
developments related to Member States' distinguishing,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of
the State of Israel and the territories it occupied in
1967. Meanwhile, the international community has
continued its efforts to advance the goal of peace. The
envoys of the Middle East Quartet continue to meet to
discuss current efforts to advance peace, as well as the
deteriorating situation in Gaza. In August, a United
States delegation travelled to the region and met with
regional interlocutors, with a focus on reviving the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. All parties agreed to
continue working towards a sustainable peace and to
promote security and stability across the region.

Shortly thereafter, on 27 August the Secretary-
General arrived in the region for his first official visit to
Israel and Palestine. He strongly reaffirmed the United

Nations position that there is no alternative to the two-
State solution and suggested a three-track approach
to end the occupation and advance the prospects for
peace: first, a serious political process with a clear
end goal of two States living side by side in peace and
mutual recognition; secondly, a simultaneous effort to
improve the socioeconomic conditions of Palestinians;
and thirdly, active engagement with regional partners.
He conveyed his personal commitment to helping the
parties return to meaningful negotiations, based on
relevant United Nations resolutions, international law
and prior agreements.

In September, Egypt hosted delegations from
Hamas and Fatah in an effort to advance Palestinian
unity, which led to the breakthrough decision by the
de facto Gaza leadership to dissolve the administrative
committee and invite the Government to return to
the Strip.

On 18 September, Norway convened the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians in New York
with Palestinian Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Ziad
Abu Amr; Palestinian Authority Minister of Finance
and Planning, Mr. Shukri Bishara; and Israeli Minister
of Regional Cooperation, Mr. Tzachi Hanegbi, in
attendance. Those at the meeting agreed that additional
concerted action was needed to make progress on
fiscal sustuinability, economic development and
Gaza's reconstruction and recovery. It was also noted
that socioeconomic conditions cannot be adequately
addressed without progress in the peace process.

In conclusion, I would like to share some broad
observations on the reporting period.

Continuing settlement expansion, most notably
during this period in occupied East Jerusalem, is
making the two-State solution increasingly unattainable
and undermining Palestinian belief in international
peace efforts. In addition to illegal settlements, the
practice of demolishing Palestinian structures in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and displacing
Palestinians undermines the prospects of peace.
Continued violence against civilians and incitement
perpetuate mutual fear and suspicion, while impeding
any effort to bridge the gaps between the two sides.
I once again urge both parties to demonstrate their
commitment to rejecting violence, inflammatory
rhetoric and provocative actions.

The Jenin agreement was an important first step
towards a comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian power-
purchasing agreement that would lead to greater
Palestinian energy autonomy. I encourage the parties
to fully implement the Red Sea-Dead Sea agreement to
enable the delivery of much-needed water to the West
Bank and Gaza.

While all initiatives to improve the Palestinian
economy are welcome, much more needs to be done
as part of a political process aimed at establishing a
Palestinian State. Economic development, as critical as
it is, is no substitute for sovereignty and statehood. As
the Secretary-General has called for, efforts aimed at
achieving both sovereignty and statehood must proceed
in parallel.

Intra-Palestinian reconciliation remains critical to
preventing the continuing militant buildup and restoring
hope for the future. In that regard, I welcome the recent
statement by Hamas announcing the dissolution of
the administrative committee in Gaza and agreement
to allow the Government of National Consensus to
assume its responsibilities in Gaza.

I commend the Egyptian authorities for their
tireless efforts in creating such positive momentum.
All parties must seize the opportunity to restore unity
and open a new page for the Palestinian people. That
should facilitate the removal of Israeli closures on
Gaza, in line with resolution 1860 (2009). The United
Nations stands ready to assist all efforts in that respect.
It is critical that the grave humanitarian situation in
Gaza, most notably the crippling electricity crisis, be
addressed as a priority.

In closing, I would like to emphasize that collective
and determined action on the part of the parties, the
region and the international community is needed in
order to initiate a serious political process, drawing
upon all relevant United Nations resolutions, that will
realize a two-State solution and end the occupation and
resolve all final status issues. As the Secretary-General
said on his recent visit,

"the international community cannot simply turn
away and allow the situation to deteriorate. We
have a role and a responsibility to support the
parties in resolving this conflict".
With that responsibility comes an obligation to do
what is necessary in order to establish a peaceful,
prosperous and secure future for Palestinians, Israelis
and the entire region.

