We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for their briefings today. We are pleased to hear reports in the political arena of the consolidating rapprochement between the parties. We also welcome the convening of the fourth session of the small body of the Constitutional Committee just a few weeks ago, as well as the provisions agreed for the next session, to be held in January 2021. We sincerely hope that session, at which constitutional discussions will begin in greater depth, will be held against a backdrop of cordiality, solidarity and shared responsibility among the parties, upon whom the future of millions of Syrians depends. Turning now to the humanitarian situation in the country, I would like to focus our statement on the following points. The unclear situation regarding the coronavirus disease pandemic in Syria is of great concern. Nonetheless, reports indicate an obvious increase in cases, as well as the country's limited capacity to respond to the medical needs of its population. We stress the high price being paid by thousands of health-care workers because of the virus. The effects of a prolonged conflict, due to the inability of its leaders to resolve it, have placed the people of Syria in a deplorable situation. An additional concern is the vulnerable situation of women in the country. They continue to be disproportionately impacted by the effects of the pandemic, including by being subjected to clearly worsening gender-based violence. Another aspect is the hunger situation. Indicators show a disturbing trend that places millions of Syrians very close to malnutrition. Fifty per cent of households report very low levels of food consumption. Food assistance to a record number of nearly 10 million people is needed today more than ever. We urge all relevant parties to refrain from taking any violent action that could undermine humanitarian assistance that would literally save lives. Let us not allow hunger to become yet another pandemic in Syria. Education is another sector that has suffered the devastating effects of the various crises facing Syria. The conflict had already seriously affected access to education, and the pandemic has further exacerbated that reality. Now, in the midst of a profound economic crisis, many children have been forced to abandon their studies in order to work and help feed their families. No child should be put in such a situation. That in itself is a tragedy. During the 10 years of conflict, we have witnessed flagrant violations of international humanitarian law rarely seen elsewhere, at an unimaginable cost to the civilian population. Attacks on civilians, humanitarian workers and civilian infrastructure are violations for which the perpetrators must be held accountable. International humanitarian law was not created to be quoted and declared in statements. It is meant to be respected in order to ensure the protection of the lives and dignity of people who have been caught up in the interests of parties who have decided to resolve their differences with violence. We are starkly aware of the losses brought about by violence and unresolved conflict. What have Syrian children, women or young people gained from this conflict? What about Syria's ordinary people, such as its bakers, teachers and nurses? What about the millions of refugees and displaced persons? What are we supposed to tell the families of the reportedly almost 100,000 persons arbitrarily detained in Syria? Should they just give up, instead of continuing to wait in the dark for information about their loved ones? They need answers. They need justice. We reiterate that resolution 2254 (2015) and its full implementation can finally open the door to a promising future for Syria. We wish those who hold that sacred task in their hands every success. We hope, from the bottom of our hearts, that in the not too distant future, they can help to build a peace that has eluded us so many times but for which we must continue to strive.
