Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.

There are so many war crimes against Gaza and
its residents for which Israel is responsible. The
irrefutable evidence includes the high number of
civilian casualties, targeted hospitals, destroyed
schools and property, and the recent testimony of
Israeli soldiers who committed atrocities in that war,
documented reports of which have been issued by
several bodies and non-governmental organizations, as
Mr. Pascoe mentioned. I shall return to that topic later.

All those actions are grave violations of
international humanitarian law - the rules that govern
conduct during war and its outcome, including
occupation. Worse still is the fact that Israel has
essentially violated the provisions of international law,
which governs the conditions for the use of force,
always under the pretext that the United Nations
Charter, specifically Article 51, gives Member States
the right to self-defence in the case of armed
aggression until the Security Council takes the
measures necessary to maintain international peace and
security. Since Article 51 is an exception to the general
rule provided by Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter,
which prohibits the threat or use of force, we must
interpret Article 51 in the narrowest sense. Contrary to
that, throughout its history Israel has tried to cover up
its aggressive acts by suggesting that Article 51
justifies them.

Allow me to recall how, in the past several years,
every time that the security situation has deteriorated
in Gaza, Israel has flooded the Council with a series of
letters, most recently at the beginning of this month, in
which it claims the right to exercise self-defence. It is
true that Israel withdrew its troops from the Gaza Strip
in 2005, but it has maintained complete control over all
its land and sea boundaries and airspace. Thus, from
the standpoint of international law, Gaza has remained
an occupied land.

Needless to say, the right to self-defence, which
Israel invokes to justify its use of force, contradicts the
reality of the occupation. That was the opinion of the
International Court of Justice in the case on the status
of the separation wall. The Court responded to Israel's
claim of the right of self-defence by saying that the
right cannot also cover threats originating within,
rather than outside, the areas under its control.

The right to self-defence also requires the
existence of necessity and parity. Those two conditions
have never been fulfilled whenever Israel has used
force, as noted by the Secretary-General, who has
repeatedly condemned Israel's excessive use of force.
In fact, international humanitarian law governs all
occupied areas. That is the principle established by
international law and set out in the Hague Conventions
and the Fourth Geneva Convention. When Israel
invokes the right to self-defence in Gaza and Lebanon
it is in fact engaging in "self-help" by cherrypicking its
own rights. Confusing those two principles will only
undermine the principle that created the need for an
Organization such as the United Nations and, prior to
that, the League of Nations. It takes us back to a world
controlled by the law of the jungle and the logic of
force.

Returning to international humanitarian law,
which must govern the relationship between Israel and
the areas that it occupies, the principles of that law
require the occupying Power to ensure the safety of the
population of those areas and the protection of their

property.

After briefly enumerating various frequent
violations by Israel in that regard, I shall only mention
a few examples of the testimony of Israeli soldiers who
were invited to Oranim College in Kiryat Tivon to
evaluate their experiences in the war in Gaza. As has
been mentioned, on 20 March 2009, the Israel
newspaper Haaretz published a complete transcript of
that testimony. For example, one soldier stated that
instructions to his unit were, upon entering any house,
to start shooting indiscriminately against anyone on the
grounds that anyone remaining in Gaza was a terrorist.
However, the residents of Gaza were never able to
leave because of the blockade. Another soldier reported
how the soldiers wantonly destroyed property. Other
soldiers reported how snipers shot at civilians, women
and children, without any qualms.

Indeed, we have heard and read that the Israeli
army intends to investigate some of those practices, but
that does not alter the fact that this is a sample of the
conduct of soldiers in an army that the Israeli Defence
Minister, Ehud Barak, after reviewing those
testimonies, still described as "the most moral army in
the world". As to the morality of that army's members,
I refer to an article by Uri Blau, also published in
Haaretz on 20 March 2009, in which he described
certain drawings and logos that the soldiers had chosen
to put on their T-shirts after graduating from training
courses or returning from combat duty. Those included
an image of a child as a target in the sight of a gun with
the logo "The smaller they are - the harder it is", or
drawing of a pregnant woman as a target in the sight of
a gun with the logo "One shot - two kills" or the
image of an Israeli soldier blowing up a mosque or a
Palestinian woman weeping at a cemetery. This is
merely a small sample of the morality that Mr. Barak
talks about.

While Israel was spreading destruction in Gaza, it
was also continuing to build the racist separation wall
and intensifying settlement activities in the West Bank.
As soon as military operations ceased in Gaza, tractors
and bulldozers returned to destroying Palestinian
houses in occupied Jerusalem in a clear policy aimed at
completing the Judaization of the city, and removing its
original inhabitants. This is another form of ethnic
cleansing carried out by Israel since its establishment.

Another aspect of this policy is the fact that Israel
has prevented Palestinians from celebrating Jerusalem
as a culture capital for the Arab world. It complements
the following statement made by Mr. Michel Sleiman,
President of Lebanon, during the debate on a culture of
peace in the General Assembly last November:

"Therefore, Jerusalem, the city of peace,
where believers in the monotheistic religions
09-27993
come together, would not realize its historic
mission unless the injustice imposed on its sons
and on the Palestinian people as a whole is
redressed and the occupation is ended."
(A/63/PV46, p. 16)

In Lebanon, while my Government reaffirms its
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), Israel continues to procrastinate and to
avoid carrying out its obligations under that resolution.
It continues to occupy parts of southern Lebanon; to
commit daily violations of Lebanese airspace, always
under the pretext of self-defence - in yet another
example of its misinterpretation of Article 51 of the
Charter - and refuse to provide its maps for the
cluster bomb strikes that it carried out during its 2006
aggression. The Council knows full well that Israel has
not responded to the request of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon concerning a withdrawal of
Israeli forces from the Ghajar area. With regard to the
Shaba'a farms and the Kafr Shuba Hills, we appeal to
the Secretary-General to intensify diplomatic efforts to
find a solution that will ensure an Israeli withdrawal
from these areas.

In closing, we ask only that the Council ensure
the full implementation of its resolutions concerning
Lebanon, beginning with resolution 1701 (2006). We
ask only that the Council ensure the full
implementation of its resolutions concerning the
question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli conflict so
that a comprehensive and just solution to this conflict
can be found. We have no doubt that the Council is
fully aware that every day that the implementation of
its resolutions is delayed will not only undermine its
credibility, but also increase the risk of crises in our
region and the threat to international peace and
security.

