Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
also like to begin by thanking Stephen O'Brien for the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2016/714) and for
his briefing this morning.

The Security Council is meeting publicly in order to
give the humanitarian situation in Syria the attention in
deserves, as the picture is dreadful. In Aleppo, 250,000
people are facing what the Secretary-General calls
an uprecedented humanitarian catastrophe. Civilians
endure endless aerial bombardments. Moreover,
chemical-weapons attacks were documented in Aleppo
on 10 August, as they were in Saraqeb nine days prior.
Such attacks constitute a violation of resolution 2118
(2013) and yet another instance of a war crime and
attack against civilians.

Three years ago, almost to the day, Bashar
Al-Assad's regime massacred over 1,000 civilians
through the use ofchemical weapons in Ghouta. I would
like to take the occasion of this notorious anniversary
to reaffirm France's determination to ensuring that this
crime is not forgotten and does not go unpunished.

Aleppo joins the list of cities besieged by the
regime and its allies, using the same methods. Last
February, the cessation of hostilities sparked new
hope. The regime seeks to quash that hope. It has never
truly desisted from its efforts to plunge the city into a
humanitarian chaos of unprecedented scope. In fact, it is
clear today that its agreement to a cessation ofhostilities
was merely an attempt to mask an exclusively military
strategy. Aleppo must not become the new Homs. It is
the responsibility of the Security Council to check the
military course currently at work.

Elsewhere in Syria, the situation is no longer
sustainable. Given that air strikes have become
incessant, Syrians are trying to survive under the
bombs. Humanitarian access continues to be hampered
in Dar'a, Darayya and Madaya, endangering the lives of
hundreds of thousands of civilians. As Stephen O'Brien
has reminded us, the United Nations humanitarian plan
for the month of August is a serious failure. With regard
to the month of July, the report is just as disappointing,
as less than half of the population under siege was able
to receive food aid, while medical supplies continued
to be removed from convoys by the Syrian regime.
Syrian civilians lack everything, and we know where
responsibility lies.

What has happened? On 22 December 2015 the
Security Council adopted resolution 2258 (2015), which
demands that,

"[a]ll parties, in particular the Syrian authorities,
immediately comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law and international humanitarian
rights law as applicable" (resolution 2258 (2015),
para. 1).

Since then, after a brief pause, the brutality again
escalated. On 4 May, after the resumption of hostilities
by the regime and its allies, we organized with the
United Kingdom delegation an open meeting on Aleppo
(see S/PV.7687) to call for compliance with the Council's
demands regarding the humanitarian situation and, in
particular, for the cessation of attacks against civilians
and adherence to the timetable agreed by the Council in
resolution 2254 (2015).

But none of those commitments has materialized.
As Mr. O'Brien has just said, we are moving in reverse.
The relentless bombing has continued, humanitarian
access to besieged cities has been continuously denied
and the prospect of establishing a transitional authority
by 1 August was scratched out in a pen stroke through
the regime's operations supported by its allies. The
tragedy in Aleppo was fully described during the Arria
Formula meeting on 8 August. The poignant story of
CNN journalist Clarissa Ward and the statements made
by Aleppo doctors drew attention to the scandalous
practice of targeting medical facilities. As Mr. O'brien
has just mentioned, Khaled Harrah of the White Helmets
died several days later. I, too, would like here to pay
tribute to him, as well as to all humanitarian workers.

The negotiations in Geneva on the terms ofa truce in
Aleppo must be completed. International humanitarian
law and the principles governing humanitarian
efforts are not negotiable. The introduction of weekly
humanitarian pauses is a strict minimum requirement,
which, moreover, should have been implemented much
earlier. But above all, what is required is respect for
one of the most fundamental rights in situations of
armed conflict, namely, unconditional, safe, full and
unhindered humanitarian access - in Aleppo and
throughout Syria - for all people in need of it.

Similarly, a lasting cessation of hostilities is
pressing and crucial throughout the country. Depriving
people of their rights and all protection seeds the
ground for their radicalization. We must break that
spiral, which has caused too much suffering. Only a
cessation of hostilities will allow for credible political
negotiations. We remind everyone that there is no
military solution to the conflict and that only a political
solution can bring back stability and lastingly staunch
the source of radicalization. As called for in resolution
2254 (2015), France again calls for the implementation
of

"[a]n inclusive and Syrian-led political process
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, with a view to full implementation of the
Geneva Communique of 30 June 2012"(resolution 2254 (2015),fifth preambularparagraph).

France again expresses its adamance in that regard,
so that the supporters of the regime work towards
implementing the commitments collectively undertaken
in this forum.

