Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui for her
briefing today. I want to express our appreciation to her
personally and to the entire team of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for their tireless efforts in
support of peaceful elections and the consolidation of
stability in that country.

I would also like to thank all of our briefers,
especially Mr. Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Mr. Joseph Malanji and Monseigneur
Marcel Utembi, for their contribution to our discussion.
I also thank all the observer missions engaged in the
process, such as the Conference episcopale nationale
du Congo, the African Union and the Southern African
Development Community, for their extremely important
work in challenging conditions on the ground.

Poland congratulates the Congolese people and
praises their restraint and determination to participate
in the elections and to execute their democratic rights.
Poland takes note of the announcement made by
the Commission electorale nationale independante
(CENI) of the provisional results of the elections in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the same
time we note that these results are disputed by some
important national actors. Therefore, we call on CENI
to publish the data from all local results collecting
centres, in accordance with the electoral law, as the
most important way of addressing concerns about the
transparency and legitimacy of the election.

We do hope that the presidential, legislative and
provincial elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will constitute an important step in the
consolidation of peace, stability and democracy in the
country. We hope that elections will be the beginning
ofa period ofpeaceful transition and necessary reforms
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge all
the political and civil society actors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to explain any doubts through
dialogue and call upon them to use only legal channels
for possible recourse. We hope that all the stakeholders
will remain constructively involved until the final
conclusion of the electoral process.

Peaceful assemblies should not be restrained by
unproportionate measures. No violence should be
tolerated towards the peaceful expression of the public
opinion of the sovereign Congolese nation. Poland
welcomes the reports of the observatory missions,
indicating that despite some irregularities the elections
were held under satisfactory conditions. Poland shares
the view ofthe African Union Commission Chairperson
that the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo requires genuine national consensus based on
respect for democratic principles and human rights, as
well as the preservation and consolidation of peace.
To conclude, there is no doubt that the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has significant
impact on the stability of Central Africa and the whole
of sub-Saharan Africa. Therefore, Poland emphasizes
the critical role that regional and neighbouring
States need to play at this historic moment. Thus, we
encourage them to maintain their effective support for
the credibility ofthe political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as the only way to bring peace
and stability to the Congolese people.

