Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I join others
in thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Valdes for his briefing and in welcoming
President-elect Preval to the Council. Denmark aligns
itself with the statement to be made shortly by Austria
on behalf of the European Union.

Denmark congratulates Rene Preval on his
electoral victory. The elections on 7 February were of
historic significance. The high voter turnout and
relatively peaceful conduct of the elections augur well
for the future of democracy in Haiti. We look forward
to the second round of elections, to be held on
21 April, which will benefit from the lessons learned
during the first round. The timely conduct of local and
municipal elections will also be crucial to ensuring that
democracy takes hold at all levels of government in
Haiti.

The security situation generally appears to be
stable, and has improved significantly compared to a
few months ago, including in Cite Soleil. The number
of kidnappings has decreased dramatically in recent
months. Nevertheless, violent crime is still widespread
and remains a serious concern. We fully support the
efforts of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) to assist national authorities in
further improving the security situation.

The new Government in Haiti will face a number
of serious challenges, all of which are closely
interrelated. Reconciliation is one of them. Denmark
believes that a broad-based Government would help
promote national reconciliation and calls on all Haitian
political leaders to reach out and to come together in
meeting those challenges. It is important that
reconciliation efforts be institutionalized at each and
every level of Haitian society. Successful
reconciliation will facilitate progress on the other
challenges faced by the country.

One such challenge is to strengthen the rule of
law, including respect for human rights. That will
require effective police reform supplemented by
judicial reform, to address the serious problem, inter
alia, posed by the fact that over 90 per cent of prison
inmates remain in pretrial or preventive custody,
including former Prime Minister Yvon Neptune. We
fully support the continued efforts made in the area of
police reform under Haiti's police chief, Mr. Andresol,
supported by MINUSTAH. In addition, we look
forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations
on how MINUSTAH can best support the reform and
strengthening of key Government institutions. We hope
that those recommendations will include a substantial
section on reform of the justice sector.

National reconciliation and the rule of law will,
hopefully, also provide a more conducive environment
for achieving progress on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR). Increased trust in the national
authorities will help encourage people to hand in their
weapons, especially if combined with socio-economic
programmes that will allow for alternative livelihoods.
Socio-economic assistance, including quick-impact
projects, will be key in strengthening support and
legitimacy for the new Government. Both DDR and
efforts to tackle extreme poverty will contribute to
improved security in Haiti.

Haiti's numerous challenges are closely
interlinked. Neither Haiti's new Government nor the
international community can afford to ignore any of
them. In order to meet those challenges, a continued,
long-term international commitment will be required.
They cannot be resolved overnight, as the recent
history of Haiti has vividly demonstrated. We are
confident that the new Government will be fully
committed to the task. We hope that the international
community, this time around, will also be ready to stay
the course.

I would also like to pay tribute to Special
Representative Valdes and to the MINUSTAH team for
their tireless efforts in assisting Haiti on its path to
democracy, stability and development.

Finally, we thank the Argentine delegation for the
presidential statement, to which we fully subscribe.

