Mr. Annabi: Since Mr. Kamel Morjane, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, last briefed the
Security Council on the situation in that country on 24
July, the Secretary-General has appointed Mr. Amos
Namanga Ngongi to succeed Mr. Morjane as his
Special Representative. Mr. Ngongi will be arriving in
Kinshasa today. As members of the Council are aware,
the Secretary-General will himself be visiting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
starting on 1 September. The Secretary-General will be
accompanied by Mr. Guehenno and other senior
Secretariat officials.

The overall situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo continues to be favourable in many
respects. The ceasefire along the confrontation line has
continued to hold, by and large, since January. The
disengagement of forces from the confrontation line
and their redeployment to new defensive positions is
largely complete. Namibia continues to withdraw its
forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
accordance with the schedule announced by the
Namibian Government. And Uganda has withdrawn
significant numbers of troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition, the preparatory
meeting of the inter-Congolese dialogue reached
agreement on a time and a place for the actual
beginning of the dialogue.

At the same time, there are still a number of areas
of concern. Fighting - at least some fighting -
continues in the East, primarily in the form of attacks
by armed groups that are not signatories to the Lusaka
Agreement on the forces of the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD) and the Rwandese
armed forces (RPA). Serious human rights violations
continue, and the humanitarian conditions for many -
in fact, millions - inhabitants of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remain very poor. I will now go
into more detail on some of these developments.

On the political side, the preparatory meeting for
the inter-Congolese dialogue was held in Gaborone
from 20 to 24 August. It was remarkably successful.
The parties have agreed to conduct the dialogue in
Addis Ababa, starting on 15 October, for an estimated
period of some 45 days. Approximately 70 delegates
from the Congolese signatory parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, as well as from civil society and
every province of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, took part in the preparatory meeting in
Gaborone, which was conducted in a constructive
atmosphere.

The Gaborone meeting also resulted in an
agreement by the participants on key issues such as the
liberalization of political life in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, respect for human rights,
release of political prisoners and prisoners of war,
freedom of movement of people and goods throughout
the country, re-establishment of communication links
in the country and the rehabilitation of the
infrastructure, restitution of seized property, protection
of the population from arbitrary arrests, protection of
natural resources from illegal exploitation, and the
withdrawal of foreign troops from the country in
accordance with the Lusaka Agreement.

Another key development that emerged in the
margins of the preparatory talks was the convening of a
meeting between President Kabila and rebel leaders,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Bemba, of the Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo (MLC), and Mr. Adolphe
Onusumba (RCD). This meeting was facilitated by Sir
Ketumile Masire and reportedly contributed in setting
the positive tone for the Gaborone talks.

At the conclusion of the meeting, Foreign
Minister She Okitundu of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo declared that the war in the country had
ended, a view which was echoed by many others,
including Mr. Bemba, who pledged to pursue the
political track. However, reports of harassment of some
political opposition delegations on return to Kinshasa
demonstrate that many challenges still remain as the
date of the dialogue in Addis Ababa approaches.

Over the recent weeks, the two rebel movements
have continued to undergo internal leadership and
membership changes. The RCD has reportedly expelled
17 of its 51 founding members, while the two
movements that together formed the Front du
Liberation du Congo (FLC)- that is, the RCD-ML
and the MLC - now appear to be drawing apart amid
clashes between their respective forces in the Ituri
district.

Relations between MONUC and the Congolese
parties have generally continued to be satisfactory. The
Mission continues in particular to enjoy good
cooperation from the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On the other hand, MONUC
staff have been subjected to occasional harassment by
the RCD in the East, which MONUC has taken up with
the authorities concerned on a number of occasions.

Turning to military developments, the
disengagement and redeployment of forces in
accordance with the Harare plan of 6 December 2000 is
complete in two of the four military sectors, with only
a handful of sites awaiting verification in sector I and
sector 4. In fact, a total of 88 of 96 agreed new
deployment positions have been verified by MONUC.
The delay in completing verification of the remaining
sites in Equateur Province - sector I - relates to a
request by MLC to maintain its civilian administration
in order to protect the population from what it fears
may be reprisals by Government forces. In sector 4, the
RCD has indicated that it does not intend to occupy the
remaining four new defensive positions, which is
considered acceptable under the Harare subplan.

In the meantime, MONUC continues to insist on
the need to demilitarize Kisangani, as demanded by the
Security Council in its resolution 1304 (2000). Though
the RCD appears willing to discuss the issue, no
concrete progress has yet been achieved in this regard.

The parties have reported more than 100 alleged
cease-fire violations, which MONUC has sought to
investigate. In many cases, inquiries revealed that the
allegations could not be substantiated. Moreover, many
RCD complaints involve alleged attacks on their forces
by armed groups that are not party to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. It should also be noted that the
RCD has repeatedly declined to guarantee the security
of the unarmed MONUC military observers expected to
conduct the investigations, making it impossible, in a
number of instances, for MONUC to dispatch such
missions.

In the meantime, in agreement with the RCD,
MONUC military observer teams were deployed in
Uvira and Bukavu earlier this month and received a
warm welcome from the population. A reconnaissance
mission was also carried out at Beni on 20 August, and
the deployment of a United Nations team in that
location is taking place as we speak.

On 16 August, a MONUC helicopter came under
small-arms fire as it flew from Uvira to Kalemie,
sustaining 14 bullet holes. Fortunately - I would say
almost miraculously- there were no casualties and
the helicopter landed safely. Since the incident,
MONUC has taken additional security measures. To
date, the identity of the assailant or assailants is
unknown, and MONUC has requested the RCD, the
local authorities in the area, to investigate the matter.
However, this is an area where the armed elements of
the Front pour la de'fence de la democratie (FDD) are
known to operate in significant numbers.

The coordination centres at Ilebo, Basankusu,
Boende and Manono are being established, and the
deployment of guard units in those locations will start
in early October. Council members will recall that this
was approved under resolution 1355 (2001). The
purpose of these centres is to improve MONUC's
logistical support of its operations in the interior of the
country, and in particular to enhance the medical
evacuation capacity.

MONUC military observers also continue to
verify the withdrawal of Namibian forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with
the timetable announced by the Namibian Government,
which had announced that their forces would be
withdrawn before the end of August. The Ugandan
armed forces, - the Ugandan People's Defence Force
(UPDF) - have also been observed to withdraw from
Equateur province. However, the Ugandan Government
has announced its intention to retain a presence in Buta
and Beni, in the Northeast and North of the country,
pending a review of the security situation there.

Turning to human rights, serious violations of
fundamental human rights persist throughout the
country. On the Government side, opposition political
parties still encounter severe restrictions when they
seek to undertake political activities. The military
court continues to try ordinary cases, despite the
Government's declarations to the contrary. The trial has
now opened in Likasi, Katanga province, of some 80
persons accused of involvement in the assassination of
President Laurent-Desire Kabila, but human rights
groups have complained that the accused have not had
access to legal counsel.

In RCD-controlled territory, in north Kivu, the
climate of insecurity has also worsened, amid
movements by armed groups towards Rwanda.
Arbitrary arrests and extra-judicial executions are also
continuing in the area. During the course of this month,
frequent clashes between RCD forces and armed
groups in south Kivu have resulted in killings, looting
and population displacement. In MLC-held territory in
the north-west of the country, the human rights
situation is also reportedly deteriorating.

In general, humanitarian agencies have access to
fewer than half of the 2 million internally displaced
people in the country because of the prevailing security
conditions. Humanitarian assistance activities in Ituri
district have been seriously hindered following the
killing in April of six relief workers from the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Access in
south Kivu has deteriorated significantly in the last few
months, and in areas where humanitarian agencies have
gained access, such as northern Katanga, the
population has been found to be in a very bad state,
raising concerns over conditions in the areas currently
beyond the reach of the humanitarian community.

Reports from Zongo, an MLC-controlled town in
Equateur province bordering the Central African
Republic, indicate that some 20,000 refugees have
crossed into the Democratic Republic of the Congo
following recent unrest in Bangui.

On the positive side, the first humanitarian
convoy escorted by the MONUC "peace boat" left
Kinshasa on 31 July for Mogalo, in Equateur province.
The barges were carrying 650 tons of medical,
educational and other relief supplies. The convoy is
expected to return to Kinshasa on 1 September, with
1,000 tons of corn, to be distributed in the city.
MONUC is also working with the parties to establish a
quadripartite commission on the use of the river.

MONUC has launched some 35 quick-impact
projects. So far, projects totalling some $458,000 have
been initiated countrywide, with priority being given to
the repair of hospitals and health centres, the provision
of medical supplies, the restoration of electricity, water
purification and the rehabilitation of schools.

During a visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo this month, Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund,
launched a second National Polio Immunization Day in
the south-western part of the country. The campaign,
which is also being conducted simultaneously in
Angola, Gabon and the Republic of the Congo, is
aimed at halting transmission of the polio virus. During
the first round, in July, 9.7 million people - 84 per
cent of the targeted population of children under five
years of age- were immunized against polio for the
first time.

Ms. Bellamy also met with President Kabila and
rebel leaders, and they reaffirmed their commitment to
discontinue the use of child soldiers and to facilitate
the demobilization of children.

In conclusion, I should like to say that MONUC
is continuing to plan and prepare for the third phase of
its deployment. The Secretary-General intends to revert
to the matter in his report to the Security Council in
October and, in the light of the cooperation extended
by the parties, to make further proposals, as
appropriate, to enable the mission to initiate phase III
operations.

As we indicated earlier, the tasks that will
confront MONUC during its third phase will be very
complex and difficult. The difficulties and dangers
associated with the disarmament and demobilization of
the armed groups, as well as initial indications of the
approach that the Secretary-General intends to take in
this regard, were outlined in his most recent two
reports, including his report of 8 June (S/2001/572).
When they signed the Lusaka Agreement, the parties
committed themselves to the full withdrawal of all
foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration of armed groups, that are
not party to the Agreement. However, since the parties
have not so far provided the necessary information, the
precise mechanisms by which armed groups should be
disarmed are not yet clear. The full support of all
parties will therefore be required to enable the
Secretary-General to submit to the Security Council
proposals that the Council can support.

In the final analysis, the success of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
will depend on the willingness of the parties to reach
agreement on a clear and practicable political
framework. During his forthcoming trip, the Secretary-
General will encourage the parties to move resolutely
in that direction, as it is clear that there can be no
military solution to the problem of the armed groups or,
for that matter, to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

