Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
please allow me to clarify that I am representing my
Permanent Representative, who had to be elsewhere
because of the slight delay in our being able to speak.

India would like to thank the Nigerian presidency
for organizing this thematic debate on the issue of the
protection of civilians. This is a theme that, in our
understanding, falls within the broader rubric of
peacekeeping, which, with more than 100,000
peacekeepers and an $8-billion budget, remains the
most visible operational activity of the United Nations.
The fact that both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have organized thematic debates on
peacekeeping within two weeks of one another is a
reflection of the centrality of peacekeeping both to the
Council and to the Assembly.

This is the second time in less than a year that the
Council debates the issue of the protection of civilians.
There has been considerable movement in the
normative sphere in the period intervening those
debates. The protection of civilians and other
associated concepts have been discussed in detail by
Member States during the deliberations of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. Work is also
under way on developing operational doctrines that
will actually bring succour to the weak and the helpless
in the face of violence and conflict. The debate is no
longer on whether we protect civilians; it is about how
we protect them.

My delegation is in favour of intergovernmental
discussions to develop the normative and operational
framework for the protection of civilians. As our record
establishes, we stand ready and willing to engage. We
would, however, like to caution against the tendency,
evident in recent debates on important strategies, to
pay lip service to or even bypass the consultative
process that is built into a multilateral decision-making
structure. Those attempts will fail and undermine the
trust and credibility that are integral to the efficient and
effective functioning of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support.

International humanitarian law, particularly those
provisions that protect civilians, arose to deal with the
terrible suffering of civilians in war. The Security
Council, in its wisdom, attempted to apply some of the
provisions of those laws to intra-State conflict.
Unfortunately, the situation on the ground in the areas
where the United Nations operates is not entirely
satisfactory. Civilians continue to suffer today. It is
non-belligerents who continue to bear the brunt of
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations.

The operational reasons behind the United
Nations inability to fully translate the Security
Council's intent to protect civilians on the ground were
spelled out with clarity and precision by the
independent study commissioned by DPKO last year. It
is clear that the major share of the blame lies with the

Council itself. Over more than a decade, it has been
unable to develop a clear understanding of the nature
and extent of the problem, has been unable to give
clear directions to DPKO about what it wants and what
and how DPKO should operate, and has not taken into
account the experience and inputs of countries whose
troops are actually on the ground. As the report
succinctly states, the confusion over the Council's
intent is evident in the lack of policy, guidance,
planning and preparedness. As a representative of a
country that has been an active participant in United
Nations peacekeeping since 1956 and has contributed
more than 100,000 peacekeepers to 40 of its
operations, my delegation cannot claim to be surprised
by the findings.

More than 8,000 Indian peacekeepers are on the
ground today and, as I speak here, protecting civilians
in some of the most challenging operational
environments. They operate in situations where
violence is low-intensity and often confusing, where
belligerents are not necessarily combatants under
international humanitarian law, where information is
deficient, and where resources and infrastructure are
woefully inadequate. Working within those
deficiencies, our men and women are trying their
utmost to prevent conflict and to stabilize post-conflict
situations.

My delegation has concluded that peacekeepers
on the ground find it difficult to connect to the debates
taking place here. They find that there is insufficient
appreciation of the operational challenges of actually
executing the mandates of the Security Council. They
find that there is an emphasis on normative aspects
rather than on implementation. They find that they are
being asked to do more and more with less.

Today, 80 per cent of peacekeeping resources are
devoted to operations that are more than five years old.
Those operations are being called upon to transition
into peacebuilding missions, even as they have not
entirely overcome the challenges of peacekeeping. In
that context, the normative debate associated with the
protection of civilians runs the risk of becoming a
debate on the strategy to fight yesterday's battle.

We are meeting in the shadow of a demand for
reduced United Nations presence in certain key
operational areas. It is unlikely that this demand arises
out of the success of the United Nations. It is more
likely that the United Nations is now of limited

relevance in responding to the challenges facing
national authorities as they struggle to consolidate
peace. There is no better way of protecting civilians
than by consolidating peace. Debates on issues such as
strategic consent will not be found helpful by national
authorities. That is not what host countries want as
they struggle to build institutions and stimulate
economic growth.

Attempts to obfuscate the difference between
Chapter VI and Chapter VII of the Charter do not serve
the ideal purpose of peacekeeping. There is a time and
a place for both. Backdoor efforts to evade the
Council's special responsibilities, while retaining its
privileges, will affect the credibility of the institution.

There is only so much that peacekeepers and
DPKO can do. It is important to remember at all times
that the primary responsibility for maintaining peace
under a Chapter VI operation is that of the host
Government. The role of the United Nations is to
support their authorities in accordance with their
priorities and the relevant ground realities.

We hear from national authorities that the Office
of Rule of Law and Security Institutions is now as
important as that of the military component in
protecting civilians. We also hear that an augmented
police presence is required while security sectors are
reformed. Security sector reform must be driven by
national requirements, and not by donor priorities. The
capacity-driven approach that has been adopted needs
to become an exercise in understanding and providing
what host Governments require, not one of collating
what donors can give. Security sector reform will fail
to consolidate the hard-earned gains of peacekeeping
unless it is based on organic growth and related to the
realities of the developing world.

There are countries that have overcome post-
colonial challenges similar to those we are concerned
with today. There are nations that have faced these
obstacles in democratic and open settings while giving
primacy to human rights and the rule of law. We need
to look at such examples.

The success of the Indian female formed police
unit in Liberia is testimony to the power of an example
that is relevant to ground realities.

In conclusion, let me thank you again, Madam
President, for organizing this debate. India is
committed to contributing, through its peacekeepers
and its national capacities, to the promotion of peace
and security and to the role of the United Nations.

