Mr. Pressman (United States): I wish to thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing today. The
United States continues to support his mandate under
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. We
commend his work and offer him our strong support
for his role as a member of the Peace Implementation
Council.

Before commenting on High Representative
Inzko's briefing, I would like to say a few words about
the resolution that was just adopted by the Council
(resolution 2183 (2014)). This Chapter VII mandate
renewal reaffirms the Council's willingness to support
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in their efforts
to sustain a safe and secure environment with the
assistance of the European Union military mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) and NATO
headquarters Sarajevo, and to implement the civilian
aspects of the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
with the help of the Office of the High Representative.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has expressed without
reservation its strong support for this mandate renewal
and for all of the language therein. The United States
joins Bosnia and Herzegovina and the members
of the Security Council and the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council in our continued support for
the EUFOR mandate. We are disappointed that one
delegation did not join the consensus in responding to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's own request for continued
Security Council support.

This has been a highly eventful and important year
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. In February, thousands of
protesters in cities across the country joined together
to express dissatisfaction with the economic and
political stagnation. Although the protests briefly, and
regrettably, turned violent, and although some political
actors attempted to use the protest to discourage public
discourse and stoke ethnic tensions, the plenums that
resulted from the protests provided a positive and
peaceful venue for active political engagement.

Shortly after our May debate in the Council (see S/PV.7176), Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced
severe flooding that resulted in dozens of deaths and
displaced thousands from their homes. The flooding
also contributed to economic concerns, causing
billions of dollars in damage. As the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina work towards recovery, they are
undoubtedly more aware than ever of the need for
properly functioning democratic institutions and for
political leaders who will work together at all levels to
make social and economic progress.
In that regard, the United States commends Bosnia
and Herzegovina on having held general elections this
October. The elections were orderly and conducted in
a competitive environment, although we also cannot
ignore the fact that there were several irregularities, as
noted by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe observation mission. As finalized results
are expected today, it is our hope that governments
will form as quickly as possible and that the elected
representatives of the people will look for ways to move
the country forward positively and to compromise
where needed.

Further, we call on the political parties and
institutions to meet their obligations to implement the
ruling of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court on the electoral system for Mostar.

We support Bosnia and Herzegovina's long-
expressed goal of Euro-Atlantic integration and
continue to believe that the integration process is the
surest and most expeditious path to the country's long-
term stability and prosperity. We note that Bosnia
and Herzegovina reiterated this goal during the
recent general debate, in which Serb member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina Radmanovie
stated unequivocally that his country's ultimate goal
was "full legal integration into the European Union"
(see A/69/PV.12).

Euro-Atlantic integration will not happen without
continued efforts by a variety of stakeholders. We
welcome the reform initiative proposed by the British
and German Foreign Ministers last week to get the
country back on track for European Union (EU)
membership, and we will work with our European
partners to support the adoption and implementation of
this reform agenda. We also will work with Bosnia and
Herzegovina's newly elected leaders to press for the
resolution of the listing of defence properties in order
to activate its NATO membership action plan.

We hope that the new Government seriously
engages on the reform agenda to build a more effective,
democratic and prosperous State and to progress towards
the country's goals of EU and NATO integration.

As the High Representative noted in paragraph 12
of his report (S/2014/777), authorities have again failed
to make any concrete progress on the outstanding
"five plus two" objectives and the conditions for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative. We
also share his concern over the Republika Srpska's
lack of compliance with its obligation to provide the
High Representative with timely access to officials,
institutions and documents, and we urge the relevant
authorities to comply.

The United States strongly supports the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
guaranteed by the Dayton Peace Accords. We note that
some political leaders persist in their attempts to use
divisive rhetoric to distract the public from economic
and political stagnation. The recent elections prove
that an increasing majority of citizens are tired of
these distractions and seek true leadership from their
officials. We condemn divisive rhetoric and during
the coalition formation period we urge parties to seek
partners that are prepared to work towards a future for
all of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, I wish once again to reiterate the support
of the United States for the renewal of the EUFOR
mandate under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. The United States commends the work of
NATO headquarters Sarajevo and the EUFOR mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we believe that EUFOR
and NATO headquarters Sarajevo, successors to the
Stabilization Force, are essential in sustaining a safe
and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
providing vital capacity-building to the Government
and offering reassurance across ethnic lines that the
international community is committed to the country's
stability.

We remain hopeful for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and we will continue to work with
the international community and with the country's
institutions to encourage progress in each ofthese areas
and to improve the lives of its citizens.

