Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

For a long time now, some Western States have made
Syria's so-called chemical dossier, which the Security
Council considers every month, into a tool for putting
pressure on the authorities in Damascus - a tool that
destroys the foundations of international cooperation
in the area of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction.

Syria's chemical-weapon stockpiles were removed
and eliminated under the supervision of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The
former military-chemical programme's facilities have
been destroyed. Inspections of the scientific research
centre have revealed no undeclared activities, and after
the missile strikes on the installations by the United
States and its allies any inspection activities would
be pointless.

The subject of Syria's initial declaration under the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) has become
particularly ritualized. For all these years, the Syrian
Government has conscientiously cooperated with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat. It has provided all
the information it possesses, but the number of so-
called unresolved issues is only increasing. Damascus
has reached a point where it has no more data. Any
possibility of shedding light on a host of issues has
gone, but they have been artificially kept on the agenda.

The investigations conducted by the former OPCW-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
have gone down in history as blatantly unprofessional
and outrageously politicized. They were artificially
directed at one goal, tarnishing the international
reputation of the Syrian authorities. Our attempts
to bring the JIM's work into alignment with CWC
standards were firmly blocked. The logical outcome of
those manipulations was the closure of the Mechanism.
I should add that we have yet to hear a reasonable
explanation from the Secretariat about how effectively
the principles of the confidentiality and inviolability
of the former JIM's archives are being ensured, as
established in the scope of its authority. We have had
information that there have been unacceptable leaks of
sensitive data, which must stop immediately.

So far we have not been able to change the
parameters of the operations of the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, which prefers to
work remotely and base its research on dubious sources
that are known to be hostile to the Syrian authorities.
Attempts to reform the Mission in accordance with
the provisions of the CWC have been met with stiff
resistance from those whom this state of affairs suits.

Meanwhile, Damascus's opponents continue to
design new structures, needless to say according to
their own rules, as a result of which the OPCW has
lately been literally bursting at the seams. In June,
a decision by an absolute minority vote of the States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention was
pushed through assigning to the organization in The
Hague the job of determining those responsible for the
use of chemical weapons. The decision is illegitimate,
because it contradicts the letter and spirit of the CWC
and would require substantial amendments to the text
of the Convention that would require the consent of all
member States. Besides that, it is a blatant infringement
on the Security Council's exclusive prerogatives.
The people behind that initiative are now attempting
to extract budget funds for implementing the attribution
resolution and tailoring the OPCW's programme ofwork
for the coming year accordingly. That is being done with
violations of the rules of procedure and severe pressure
being put on the parties to the CWC. The OPCW, which
began as an effective mechanism for international
control in the area of chemical disarmament, is losing
its authority and becoming an instrument for putting
political pressure on undesirable countries.

Against that backdrop, we continue to receive
alarming information that terrorist groups in Syria
are pursuing their preparations for large-scale
provocations through the use of toxic substances,
in cooperation with the White Helmets. Our Syrian
colleagues regularly bring indications of this to the
Council's attention and the Russian military also
has information on it. For example, we know that on
27 October, militias from the Turkistan Islamic Party
in Syria transferred 20 decalitre containers of chlorine
from Maarrat Al-Nu'man. Local residents reported to
the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic that White Helmet
activists were looking for people willing to take part
in filming staged video footage in exchange for food.
We have received similar information from Aleppo
province, where the White Helmets brought canisters
of toxic substances and professional video-recording
equipment to the towns of Azaz, Marea and Al-Rai.
Those provocations are clearly designed to pin a label
on the violator of the non-proliferation regime in
Syria, create a reason for renewed acts of aggression
against Damascus and hold Russia up to shame as an
alleged enabler of the "heinous crimes of the regime".
Our military experts are monitoring the situation. We
have radiation, chemical and biological reconnaissance
vehicles deployed at posts in the immediate vicinity of
the demilitarized zone in Idlib province that will help
us analyse the situation.

The negative side of the politicization of the topic
of Syria's former chemical warfare programme is the
lack of an adequate response to the genuine threat of
chemical terrorism in Syria and the Middle East. The
initiatives that Russia has launched in that regard are
being deliberately obstructed. However, we hope that life
will compel an end to such unconstructive approaches.

