Mr. Diouf (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to convey to the Council the sincere regrets
of Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, who was unable to
make the trip here today due to severe constraints on
his time, as well as to share with the members of the
Council our common concerns with regard to ensuring
a protective environment for children.

I would also like to express my gratitude for
Benin's invitation, as well for its Government's
excellent initiative. I say that in particular because
Benin is a member of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) that has already
demonstrated its commitment to protecting children,
even though it is a country that, thank God, has not yet
experienced conflict.

Allow me further to welcome and commend the
Council's commitment to issues of peace and security
in general and, specifically, to the protection of
children, especially those affected by conflict. That
commitment is reflected in the Council's adoption of
various resolutions, in particular resolutions 1261
(1999), 1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003). In
accordance with the President's request regarding what
he would like us to address today - namely, our
thoughts concerning future prospects for the situation
of children in Africa - I would like to share with the
Council the current experiences of ECOWAS in the
field of child protection.

As I begin my statement, I would very much like
to thank the Government of Canada, which for years -
from the outset - supported ECOWAS in the
establishment of its child protection programme,
namely, from 2002 to 2004. I would also like to thank
UNICEF and its Regional Office for West and Central
Africa, which since 2004 has been ensuring the
development, operation and organization of the
programme.

It should be said that, overall, the situation of
children in West Africa is not exactly brilliant. Given
the goals set out at the World Summit for Children, the
first of its kind, West Africa today is among the regions
in which there has not been significant progress in the
field of child protection. I therefore fully endorse the
comments made by Mr. Olara Otunnu and Ms. Rima
Salah with regard to the overall state of children in
armed conflict. That is a situation that West Africa
shares with other regions of the world experiencing
conflict. With the Council's consent, I would like to
dwell a bit on the characteristics we have noted in our
subregion, in particular with respect to countries that
have experienced conflict, namely, Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Guinea-Bissau and, more recently, C6te
d'Ivoire.

Generally speaking, as we have worked out our
programme on the ground, we have realized that
children are actually victims of wars in several ways.
Children are not merely directly involved in conflicts
as combatants; they are sent to the front as soldiers
specifically because they are completely unaware of
the dangers facing them. Once injured in combat, such
children are left to their own devices. Children who
find themselves in the midst of conflict must also fend
for themselves if their parents are killed of if they are
separated from them. We have seen that phenomenon
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Cote d'Ivoire. The
problem of children affected by war is also evidenced
by the large number of children in refugee camps.

The main result of the participation of children in
armed conflict in our subregion is that their normal
development is hampered because they are deprived of
access to educational systems and training institutions.
Children are very often left behind at the end of
hostilities, forcing them to resort to criminal activity
for survival. We have noted that such situations are
quite simply the result of the existence of armed non-
State actors who are resolutely opposed to the
cessation of conflict and who continue to use children
in combat.

While we have noted that some children in West
Africa have been forcibly enlisted, others have
voluntarily joined warring groups due to hunger, the
desire to play the hero or a longing to find a second
family. In that connection, it is very interesting to note
that studies are being carried out to determine possible
links among children who are victims of trafficking,
children who easily fall prey to recruiters and street
children seen in various West African cities.

Generally speaking, therefore, ECOWAS supports
the establishment of a protective environment and
shares the concerns of UNICEF in that regard. We
know that the absence of a sustained protective
environment jeopardizes any rehabilitation effort. It
was necessary to establish such programmes in West
Africa in the light of the use of the first child soldiers
in Liberia in the 1980s, a phenomenon that continued
with the war in Sierra Leone. Moreover, field visits to
Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea-Bissau revealed that children
were also involved in the armed conflicts there. That is
why ECOWAS heads of State or Government took
action to ensure that ECOWAS was one of the first
regional economic communities to place on its political
agenda the overall issue of protecting children,
especially those who have been the victims of conflict.
For that, we commend them.

ECOWAS has put in place a number of
mechanisms that today enable it to monitor the
instruments it has adopted. I would like to mention
several of them here. They include the April 2000
Accra Declaration on War-affected Children in West
Africa, the 2000 decision on combating trafficking in
children, the Declaration on the Decade of a Culture of
the Rights of the Child in West Africa and our peer-
review mechanism to address the situation of children.
That commitment on the part of ECOWAS heads of
State or Government has also benefited from the
present environment, which has led to all its member
States having ratified the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. All ECOWAS member States have also
submitted their initial reports to the United Nations
Committee on the Rights of the Child, and several are
submitting periodic reports.

With regard to the core child protection
instruments - Convention No. 182 of the International
Labour Organization (ILO), concerning the elimination
of the worst forms of child labour and the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and
on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography - we are proud that much progress has
been made in West Africa. ILO Convention No. 182 on
the elimination of the worst forms of child labour has
been either ratified, signed or adopted by 12 of the 15
member States of ECOWAS. The Optional Protocol on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict has
likewise been either ratified, signed or adopted by 11
of the 15 member States. And the Protocol on the Sale
of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography
has been ratified, signed or adopted by 12 of the
Community's members.

On that basis, ECOWAS has established a Child
Protection Unit directly under its Executive Secretariat.
Its mandate is very straightforward, and involves four
basic goals: to monitor the situation of children
affected by war, to ensure the promotion of conflict-
prevention mechanisms, to take part in child
rehabilitation and reintegration efforts in the context of
peacebuilding and to set up an early warning and
emergency assistance mechanism.

With respect to monitoring the situation of war-
affected children, we have undertaken a number of
joint activities with UNICEF that have allowed us to
participate in the "Back to School" programme
established by UNICEF in Liberia.

With respect to the promotion of conflict-
prevention mechanisms created during the negotiation
of the Accra peace agreements on Liberia, we can see
that the issue of child protection has been taken into
account in those agreements. Similarly, we are now
involved in the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire to
ensure that the Government to be established after the
elections in that country takes the issue of child
protection into account in the peacebuilding process.

Our current activities include the training of West
African armed forces in children's rights and protection
in armed conflict; ensuring that child-related issues are
taken into account in peace agreements, as I mentioned
earlier; sending fact-finding missions to conflict zones
in Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-
Bissau; the training of security personnel, judges and
social workers in children's rights and the protection of
child victims of trafficking; the establishment of
reintegration programmes for child victims of violence
and other crimes; and the establishment of links with
child-protection agencies.

One highlight of the programme that I wish to
share with the Council is the training of West African
armed forces in the area of the rights and protection of
the child. A training workshop has been held to
establish core groups of 26 officers designated as
trainers. The higher-ranking officers, of at least the
rank of colonel, are key in that field. Increased
numbers will allow us to establish broader core groups
among the West African forces of some 300 officers
who are currently training the trainers. The
programme, which began in 2002, is currently reaching
some 6,000 peacekeeping soldiers in the ECOWAS
region and elsewhere. There are a number of ECOWAS
elements operating in the Sudan, the Congo and other
countries that have already received such training and
awareness-raising.

Our monitoring of the situation of children is
another of the programme's key points. Such
monitoring includes site visits that have enabled
ECOWAS to assess the situation of the 11,780
demobilized children in Liberia, 11,673 of whom have
been returned to their families in neighbouring
countries. Among those, some 2,000 girls have been
demobilized. The visits have allowed ECOWAS to take
part in UNICEF's "Back to School" programme and to
identify specific child-protection programmes.

The programme's weak points are its ongoing
focus on children and armed conflict and its failure
sufficiently to address the issue of child trafficking.
The picture of the situation in West Africa clearly
shows that there are other categories of children who
need protection and that, if such protection is not
provided, conflicts will clearly make those children
more vulnerable still. Finally, the lack of resources
ensures that many of these projects remain in the
planning phase.

In terms of prospects, given the will expressed by
our heads of State and Government to give greater
attention to child-related issues in the programmes and
policies of ECOWAS, and taking account of the great
gains achieved in the implementation of the current
child-protection programme, the Executive Secretary
intends to incorporate child protection into its agenda
and to expand its mandate to other categories of
children in need of protection.
The Executive Secretary wishes thereby to ensure
better participation by the member States in the
implementation of the programme, particularly since
the ECOWAS foreign ministers meeting, in Accra on
18 January, agreed to convene this year a conference of
ECOWAS ministers for foreign affairs on child soldiers
and to proclaim a week of truce in solidarity with
children affected by war. We commend the spontaneity
with which the Government of Benin agreed to host the
conference. With respect to the first feedback received
from that Government, I believe that we can look
forward to an excellent conference. The conference and
the week of truce are key activities that will enable us
better to mobilize ECOWAS' partners on behalf of
children. The Executive Secretary therefore intends to
make the issue of children a priority in the context of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

In conclusion, ECOWAS' child-protection
programme was designed in a subregional context and
to provide a lasting alternative in the creation of an
environment conducive to a culture of non-violence
and peace. We must place the issue of children and
their rights at the heart of the political agendas of our
decision-makers. To that end, we must be able to
ensure that all children enjoy all their rights in all
circumstances.

While ECOWAS focuses its activities on
protection, we also know that the issue of children's
rights are intimately linked to four areas: development,
survival, participation and protection. We also know
that the rights to development, survival and
participation require less political involvement, but that
with respect to child protection we need to adopt, ratify
and implement protocols. In that regard, Governments
are called on to act and must make child-related
questions a policy issue, because it is thereby that such
issues will become a choice of society and a political
lodestar.

In the near term, we must work to see to it that
West Africa ceases to be the world's laggard in the
protection of children and their rights. The economic
and social development of our region depends on it.

