Mr. Kolby (Norway): Several people, including
children, were killed in the attack on an apartment
building in Gaza only two days ago. Norway strongly
regrets the loss of the lives of children and other
innocent civilians. Norway calls on Israel to stop its
attacks on civilian Palestinian targets.

Norway has no sympathy for terrorists. Terrorist
acts of violence are a serious obstacle to peace in the
Middle East and must be stopped. Norway once again
calls upon everyone with any influence within the
Palestinian Authority to prevent terrorist attacks.

We have expressed understanding for Israel's
security concerns, but we cannot accept Israeli actions
that are in conflict with important principles of
international law and that only serve to exacerbate the
conflict. Norway has repeatedly made it clear to the
Israeli authorities that we strongly deplore the
extrajudicial liquidation of suspected terrorists.
Suspects must be tried in a court of law in accordance
with the principles of the rule of law.

The Israeli attack came after representatives from
both sides had reported progress in the negotiations of
the past weekend. We hope that the attack will not
obstruct the political progress and urgently call on the
parties not to allow this attack to destroy the progress
made over the weekend. Norway once again calls upon
both parties to act responsibly and to demonstrate the
leadership necessary to bring an end to the vicious
cycle of violence. They must continue their efforts to
restore confidence and clear the way for a political
solution to the conflict.
Norway welcomes the outcome of recent
meetings within the frameworks of the "quartet" and of
the Task Force on Palestinian Reform. International
structures are being streamlined and strengthened.
Norway will do its utmost in working with partners
within the Task Force on Palestinian Reform as well as
with members of the "quartet". The international
community must respond positively and publicly to
genuine reform measures that are undertaken. Such a
public display of support will be of great importance in
consolidating the reform process and in strengthening
reform-oriented forces in the eyes of the Palestinian
public. The mobilization of financial and technical
support from the international community is urgently
required. At this critical juncture, our readiness to react
rapidly is essential. We must avoid delays, which in the
current situation could be very costly politically.

Israel must do its share to facilitate the reform
process. Israel must cease closures, lift curfews, release
all Palestinian revenues and facilitate donor projects.
Without an Israeli commitment to assist to the best of
its ability, the reform process will fail. The result -
the further radicalization of Palestinian society - will
increase the threat to Israel's security.

The Palestinians, the Israelis and the international
community must continue their efforts to restore
confidence and open the way for a political solution to
the conflict.

