Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Madam
President, allow me first of all to warmly welcome you
here to New York and to say how honoured we are to
see you presiding over today's meeting. This is proof
of the importance that your country, South Africa,
attaches to the issues of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations in the area
of international peace and security. I take this
opportunity also to welcome Mr. Said Djinnit,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU).

I am grateful to your delegation for having given
us an opportunity to participate in this debate, which is
very timely and extremely important. I also welcome
your desire to steer this debate in a new direction, as
seen in the terms of reference that you kindly
submitted. We share your desire and your ambition to
bring a fresh perspective to cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations and to give
it a new framework that is based on the dynamic and
evolving interpretation of Chapter VIII of the Charter
and that takes into account new realities.

We are convinced that the time has come to build
a new partnership with the African Union, in particular,
that goes beyond the simple recognition of sacrifices it
makes on behalf of the international community and
that complements the role of this Council, when it does
not replace it, in the maintenance of peace and the
management of conflicts in our continent. The dynamic
that has been created thanks to, in particular, the
creation of the AU Peace and Security Council and the
expansion of the responsibilities of AU Commission,
has rendered somewhat obsolete the approach and the
framework that still govern cooperation between the
two organizations.

We should thus enter a new phase in
strengthening the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations. In the case of the
African Union, we should strive to strengthen the
benefits of this cooperation and to broaden its
horizons. We welcome the fact that the relationship
between the United Nations and the AU has become
more intense over the last few years. Coordination and
consultation between the secretariats of both
organizations and between the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council in particular have
further expanded. This is undeniably a very positive
development that should be encouraged.

We also welcome the fact that the Security
Council takes into account more or less systematically
the Viewpoint and the decisions of the African Union
and those of its subregional organizations in the
decisions it must take relating to African conflicts
before it. This is especially the case with regard to
Darfur, Cote d'Ivoire and Somalia. This close
cooperation is likely to make the international
community's action more effective, since it will
strengthen the political and moral authority of its
decisions. By acting in this way, the two organizations
reinforce each other in the interests of the peace and
stability of our continent.

However, we are obliged to note that the
established mechanisms for cooperation that operate at
the moment are lagging behind the political
commitments undertaken, particularly at the global

summit and in other United Nations decisions, since
they do not always express a will for sharing the tasks
that is based on the principles of complementarity and
comparative advantage. The Security Council's
hesitation stands out against the voluntary action
displayed by the African Union and its member States.

We are not talking about reducing the Council's
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and for political
management of peace operations. What we are talking
about is a clear, coherent doctrine, separate from ad
hoc solutions, which are based on reciprocal
commitments. Once the Security Council authorizes a
peacekeeping operation, that operation must be treated
as a United Nations operation and, in that capacity,
eligible for logistical and financial support under the
United Nations budget. Accepting such a principle
would open the way for a series of political, legal and
operational adjustments that the United Nations and the
African Union could decide on together. The details of
these arrangements may be difficult, but the task is not
insurmountable, provided that the political will exists.

Indeed, by exploring the concept of a hybrid
operation in the case of Darfur, the United Nations and
the African Union will be taking a big step in this
direction. Somalia also constitutes an opportunity that
could have been explored to seek innovative solutions.
The AU and African countries, including Algeria, have
taken risks so that peace can finally return to that
country, and they are waiting for the international
community to assume its responsibilities.

Moreover, in observing the cooperation that has
been set up between the African Union and the United
Nations, one can see that a division of labour has de
facto been established. African missions, frequently
deployed on an urgent basis, are relieved by United
Nations Blue Helmets, since the AU has neither the
means nor the expertise to maintain or manage
multidimensional and complex operations. Thus, it is
important that the international community, the United
Nations and donor countries focus their efforts on
strengthening Africa's capacities for mediation and
conflict prevention upstream and on rapid intervention
downstream. One area of priority action concerns the
Standby Force that the African Union is planning to set
up by the year 2010.
I will conclude by stressing that updating
instruments of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, and the African Union in
particular, is necessary, because reality is evolving
much more quickly than our practices. We hope that
this debate will be a starting point for thinking about
the best ways to achieve this objective. However, this
is a question that is global in nature and thus goes
beyond the competences of the Security Council. Thus,
the General Assembly, in consultation with regional
organizations, must take up this problem, for it alone is
empowered to decide on the political, legal and
budgetary framework for which the Security Council
and the Secretariat will give it responsibility, each in
its respective area.

