Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I have the honour to deliver
this joint statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council: Angola, Senegal and
my country, Egypt. I would like to begin by making
two generals remarks.

First, today's open debate bears testimony to the
genuine interest of all United Nations Member States in
enhancing the transparency, inclusivity and openness
of the Security Council's work so as to ensure that
it truly acts on behalf of the entire membership, in
accordance with Article 24 ofthe Charter of the United
Nations. Secondly, Security Council members shall take
advantage of the several notes and improvements that
have been agreed over the past years. Myjoint statement
today is one further step taken the three African
members of the Security Council in that direction.

While there is a need for additional improvements
in many aspects of the Security Council working
methods, this statement will focus only on three key
areas where our collective efforts are most needed, as
requested by the President ofthe Council. The first area
is the preparation of the Council's outcomes or the so-
called penholdership, and in that regard I would like to
stress the following.

The work of the Council is a collective
responsibility. It is fundamental to ensure the equal
participation and contribution of all Council members,
permanent and elected, in the conduct of activities and
the formulation of outcomes as penholders. In May, five
elected members, in a unique exercise, jointly drafted a
resolution and conducted extensive consultations with
other Council members and all relevant stakeholders,
leading to the unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), the first of its kind, on the protection of medical
personnel. This indeed demonstrated the benefits of
collective work in enhancing the credibility of Council's
decisions. In that connection, we believe that the Chairs
of the sanctions committees, who acquire considerable
expertise on the country situations with which their
respective committees are concerned, are particularly
well positioned as co-penholders to contribute to the
drafting of relevant Security Council outcomes.

This leads to our second area of focus, which is
the work of the Security Council's subsidiary organs.
In that regard, we welcome the recent adoption of the
President's note S/2016/170, which, among other things,
enhances the transparency of the consultation process
through which the new Chairs of the subsidiary organs
are selected, and enables the newly elected members to
be prepared to assume their responsibilities.

As a considerable amount of the Council's work
takes place in its subsidiary bodies, the need for greater
transparency is self-evident. One example is the need
to allow the country to which the sanctions regime
is applied more timely access to the reports of the
panels of experts and other documents of the sanctions
committees, especially in light of the fact that that
country is the most concerned with those documents.
We encourage the Chairs of the sanctions committee
to continue to conduct field visits in order to better
engage with countries under sanctions and countries of
the relevant region, as well others stakeholders.

The third and last area is the engagementbetween the
Council and other relevant stakeholders. We stand firm
in favour of a more robust engagement with the wider
United Nations membership, including and foremost
those countries particularly affected by a particular
situation under consideration, as well as troop- and
police-contributing countries. We also stress the need
for practical and more meaningful partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, particularly
the African Union (AU), not only in managing conflicts
but more importantly in preventing them. The Security
Council should build upon the two informal dialogues
held this year with the AU Peace and Security Council
by advancing more frequent and timely consultations,
as well as collaborative field missions with it. The
Presidents of the Council should be encouraged to
organize meetings that would promote such cooperation.

Lastly, and before I conclude, I would like to
reaffirm the commitment of the three African members
of the Security Council to continuing their efforts to
improve the working methods of the Security Council,
thereby enhancing the inclusivity and credibility of
its work.

