Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by welcoming both Lord Ashdown and Judge
Meron and thanking both of them for the very
important and significant briefings that they gave us
this morning on a situation that is evolving well.

We welcome the commitment of the international
community, which has been a determining factor in the
remarkable progress set out in the report before us.
Thanks to the international community, the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have a unique, historic
opportunity to advance towards a leading group of
nations whose standard and quality of life is relatively
high.

I am quite sure - and we all agree on this - that
the two-pronged approach outlined in the report
presented to the Council by Lord Ashdown is the
appropriate strategy to lead the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to an era of sustained freedom, well-being
and economic reform in a State based on the rule of
law. Indeed, the road map would lead to the attainment
by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina of their
fundamental freedoms - freedom from fear and from
unjust persecution; freedom to fully develop their
potential; freedom to belong to a society of people
equal under the law and enjoying equal opportunities;
freedom to respect each other's differences as the basis
of rich social interaction; freedom of all nations of the
Federation to understand that unity of purpose and
effort is praiseworthy; and freedom to become an equal
partner in the community of nations.

It is my delegation's view that the efforts
deployed by the international community and by the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina should be
relentlessly pursued until the medium- and long-term
objectives are fully met - that is, the creation of a
modern society in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
investment by the international community and the
efforts of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina must
be sustained, as the final result will surely be
rewarding.

I would now like to turn to the question of
judicial reform. In its resolution 1503 (2003) adopted
in August, the Security Council reiterated the planned
strategy for the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia, which called for all investigations
to be completed by the end of 2004, all trial at first
instance by the end of 2008, and all the activities of the
court by the end of 2010.

As recognized on different occasions by the
Security Council, the deferral of cases involving low-
level indictees to competent national jurisdictions is
likely to be the best course of action, allowing the
ICTY to achieve its objectives and focus on the trials
of those who bear greater responsibility for crimes
under the Tribunal's jurisdiction. Deferred to domestic
courts, the trial of low-level cases would help enhance
rebuilding of the shattered national identities of the
people of the region and strengthen their awareness of
law enforcement ownership.

This meeting offers a good opportunity to revisit
the challenges faced by the ICTY, as well as the
international community's readiness to contribute, as
appropriate, to the strengthening of national and local
judicial systems of the States of the former Yugoslavia,
in order to facilitate the implementation of the agreed
strategy for the International Criminal Court.

To conclude, we strongly encourage the High
Representative to maintain the consistent policies
outlined in the report. Strengthening of the rule of law,
building local, national and federal institutions,
effective judicial and law enforcement systems, a
modern civil administration, economic reforms
promoting economic freedom and development are, in
my delegation's view, and I believe in the view of all
delegations, the essential elements for building a multi-
ethnic and tolerant community with solid and
functioning democratic institutions.

The relevant agencies of the United Nations, the
European Union and the international community have
joined in the coordination of efforts towards that
endeavour. It is my delegation's hope and expectation
that Bosnia and Herzegovina will stand as another
success story of post-conflict reconstruction.

