Mr. Wapakhabulo (Uganda): It is a great
pleasure for me to address members of the Council on
the final report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2002/1146). I am particularly happy to see you, Sir,
presiding over the proceedings of the Council. Africa
will always remember the commitment and support
extended by the People's Republic of China to our
people in the struggle for independence, justice, peace
and sustainable development. I can assure you of my
delegation's continued cooperation in the search for
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region. Allow
me also to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou of Cameroon, for the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Council in
October.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his commitment to conflict resolution and peace-
building in Africa and for his dedication to a broad,
sustained and global fight against terrorism. His
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Ambassador Namanga Ngongi, and his
Special Envoy, His Excellency Mr. Moustapha Niasse,
have traversed the Great Lakes region and beyond to
ensure progress in the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and of the related Pretoria and
Luanda Agreements, and the finalization of the inter-
Congolese dialogue on the establishment of an all-
inclusive transitional government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Thanks to the support of the Security Council and
the Governments of South Africa, Kenya, Gabon and
Tanzania, prospects for peace in the Great Lakes region
seem greater than ever before. We are most obliged to
all members of the Council for the interest and
commitment they have collectively shown on issues
relating to the maintenance of peace and stability in
Africa. Indeed, the annual visits by Council members
to the Great Lakes region since 2001 are a clear
demonstration of the Council's commitment.

The Government of Uganda has welcomed the
release of the final report of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I wish to thank the Security Council for giving
us the opportunity to respond to the contents of the
final report.

We have prepared a detailed response to the final
report, which has already been circulated in document
S/2002/1202. It covers the strengths and critical
weaknesses of the report. It responds to the major
categories of allegations against the Uganda People's
Defence Forces and outlines Uganda's views on the
overall picture and on the challenges before the
Security Council in the search for peace in the Great
Lakes region.

With respect to Uganda's position on the
principle of investigation, the Council will recall that
in 2000 His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni
gave his personal and strong support to the proposal to
establish a United Nations panel to investigate
allegations of illegal exploitation of natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since 2001,
Uganda has extended its maximum cooperation to
Panel members, during their visits to Kampala in
November 2000, August 2001 and March and
September 2002.

With the endorsement of the Security Council,
Uganda established in May 2001 the Porter Judicial
Commission of Inquiry to investigate allegations against
Ugandan military officers, individuals and companies in
connection with the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As
stipulated by our Commission of Inquiry Act, the Porter
Commission has the judicial powers of the High Court
of Uganda, including the power to subpoena witnesses
and documents and to perform audits. I should say here
that the Porter Commission has cooperated with the
United Nations Panel, including through the exchange of
information and materials.

The final report of the Porter Commission is
expected by the middle of this month. Its mandate
expires on 15 November, so it should be reporting any
time now. The Government of Uganda will therefore
await the release of the Porter Commission report
before making any comments on allegations against
specific Ugandan senior military officers and business
people that are contained in the final report of the
United Nations Panel. The Government of Uganda
reiterates its commitment to the implementation of the
recommendations of the report. Uganda - and this is
important - will without doubt keep the United
Nations security Council advised of whatever measures
it takes in implementation of the recommendations of
the Porter Commission.

Uganda is a country that became involved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo out of genuine
security concerns. We believe that, in the interest of
promoting peace in the Great Lakes region, there
should be transparency in the activities of parties
involved directly or indirectly in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I will now comment on the positive aspects of the
Panel's final report. As pointed out in my press
statement of 23 October 2002, the Government of
Uganda has noted that the final report contains a
number of positive elements.

The report recognizes the fact that the Republic
of Uganda established the Porter Judicial Commission
of Inquiry as an internal mechanism to address the
allegations of illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with the Security Council recommendations
contained in the presidential statements of 3 May
(S/PRST/2001/13) and 19 December 2001
(S/PRST/2001/39). The United Nations Panel also
made a positive effort to cooperate and share
information with the Porter Commission, in spite of the
marked differences between the Panel and the
Commission on methods of investigation.

The report also confirms the fact that neither the
Ugandan Government nor any of its companies are
involved in the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Indeed, the addendum to the previous report of the
United Nations Panel (S/2001/1072) concluded that
Uganda's involvement in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was based on, first, a bilateral protocol
between Kampala and Kinshasa of 26 April 1998 and,
secondly, the legitimate security concerns emanating
from the threat posed by the negative forces operating
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo: the
Allied Democratic Forces, the West Nile Bank Front,
the Ugandan National Rescue Front II and the more
recently formed People's Redemption Army.

The report also shares Uganda's View that an
embargo or moratorium on exports of natural resources
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo would not
be a "viable means of helping to improve the situation
of the country's Government, citizens or natural
environment" (S/2002/1146, para. 155). As Uganda
stated in its response (S/2001/1163) to the addendum to
the first report, such a moratorium not only would be
difficult to enforce but, in a very large measure, would
hurt the Congolese small-scale farmers and artisan
miners whose livelihood depends entirely on earnings
from the traditional cross-border trade.

The report also positively covers more, and a
wider range of, participants by covering the end-user
countries. By doing so, the final report provided the
missing link and, in our view, improved the scope of
the investigation to cover all parties involved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, in our
view, a deeper historical analysis of companies and
criminal organizations based outside Africa would have
definitely helped create a proper understanding of the
failure to build viable State institutions and structures
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the era
of King Leopold II of the Belgians.

Also positively, the report also focuses on
recommendations that will create conditions and
incentives for encouraging all parties to implement
their obligations under the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, the related Pretoria and Luanda
Agreements and the Sun City resolutions. They relate
also to deepening regional integration; calling for
strong international financial support for building State
institutions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
post-conflict reconstruction in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and regional neighbours; deterring
international organized crime syndicates from
continued illegal activities in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

We in Uganda found these to be positive aspects
of the Panel of Expert's report. But we also had
difficulties, and we have areas we consider to be of
concern to us. I will outline these. The first is the
downplaying of Uganda's security concerns in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Unlike the
addendum report of November 2001 (S/2001/ 1072), the
final report completely ignores Uganda's legitimate
security concerns as recognized in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and the bilateral agreement between
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
signed on 6 September 2002 in Angola.

Let me reiterate that Uganda got involved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as a result of
genuine security concerns. These included the
operations of the terrorist groups I mentioned earlier
and other forces such as the genocidal members of the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR) and
Interahamwe. Those groups have used the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to launch
persistent and indiscriminate terrorist attacks on the
people of Uganda.

I will cite a few examples. This included the
grisly incidents at Mpondwe in 1996, when more than
1,000 troops invaded Uganda from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at a border point called
Mpondwe and at Kichwamba in 1998, where more than
100 college students were locked up in their dormitory
and killed. I would also cite the Bwindi terrorist
massacres of 1999, in which foreign tourists - from
Britain, the United States, Australia and New
Zealand - were killed, together with Ugandans.
Bwindi forest is one of the last gorillas sanctuaries in
the world. There continue to be persistent Interahamwe
attacks in the Kisoro district of Uganda on the border
with Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Another area of concern to us is the application of
an invalid hypothesis to find Uganda guilty. There is
the hypothesis of the elite networks, which are claimed
to have curved out separate self-financing areas and to
be responsible for the continuation of microconflicts
over natural resources and revenues in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This hypothesis, to us, is
fundamentally flawed and invalid. A simple analysis
will show that the basic assumptions of the hypothesis
are wrong: the evidence of the existence of Ugandan
elite networks is untenable and the motive of the
hypothesis, to us, is ill-intentioned. I will elaborate on
this.

The hypothesis makes the incorrect assumption
that the Rassemblement Congolais pour la Democratie-
Mouvement de Liberation (RCD-K/ML) and the
Mouvement de liberation Congolais (MLC) are mere
facades and militias in the so-called Ugandan-
controlled area. Since May 2001, Uganda has
withdrawn from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; recently we withdrew from Beni and Gbadolite.
We are left with one battalion, which remains in Bunia
at the request of the Secretary-General, conveyed in his
letter of May 2001, and also in accordance with the
provisions of the Luanda Agreement between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. My
country is still committed to complete Withdrawal,
even from Bunia itself, and I will comment on this
later. But I would like to say that the MLC and the
RCD are right now effectively responsible for the
administration of the areas under their respective
control, and are not just facades; they actually control
territory and are recognized under the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and by the Security Council.

The Panel of Experts does not appear to be
cognizant of the history of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since the time of King Leopold II -
including the fact that Uganda has been a victim of
repeated terrorist attacks from that country's
territory - when it says that Uganda really went there
to loot. Furthermore, we find no evidence of the
creation of an elite network in the so-called Uganda-
controlled area.

We find the composition of the Panel of Experts
and their method of investigation not to demonstrate a
capacity to sift through deliberate falsehoods, war
propaganda and political intrigue involved in the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This
may be due to the fact that membership of the Panel
constantly changed, which also created some weakness.

But in a conflict such as that in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, one has to be careful when
listening to or believing any evidence. For instance, the
Panel believed the testimony of some Lendu chiefs that
the Hema are responsible for protecting mineral-rich
areas for purposes of exploitation. What we know is
that it is not wise to believe what a Lendu says about a
Hema, and vice versa. We also found it professionally
dishonest to extrapolate data from one area of the vast
Democratic Republic of the Congo to try to prove that,
in the area where Uganda is, similar situations, such as
deaths, are of the same magnitude. Even in my own
country, one part of Uganda cannot be used to
extrapolate for another.

More so, it is contrary to the mandate issued by
the Council that the Panel elected in most cases to
overlook the requirement for the inclusion of
comments and reactions from States and other actors
cited in the report. That was a major weakness in the
work of the Panel. We can illustrate this by citing a
number of examples. In paragraphs 102, 103 and 122,
the Panel makes a muddled analysis of the recent
power play in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and wrongly concludes that General Saleh, a
retired Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF)
officer, is training a private militia, that Uganda is
intent on breaking up MLC to boost the
Rassemblement Congolais pour la Democratie (RCD- Congo), and that there is an attempt to replace Mbusa
Nyamwisi with Roger Lumbala of the Rassemblement
Congolais pour la Democratie-Nationale (RCD-N).

Those who know the Congo can explain that the
politics of the area is as follows: RCD-Congo is a
splinter group of RCD-Goma; they disagreed with each
other following the Sun City agreement, signed in
South Africa. Roger Lumbala is actually allied to Jean-
Pierre Bemba and the MLC. There is no evidence to
suggest that UPDF officers are in the process of
undermining Bemba to bring him down. To the
contrary, Bemba remains a close ally of Uganda. RCD-
ML is allied to the Kinshasa Government and has been
receiving military and other support from it in an
attempt to open a rear front against Bemba; hence the
fight between Mbusa Nyamwisi and Lumbala in the
Isiro area. RCD-ML has been arming and training the
Lendu against the Hema in the Ituri region. So, Hema
elements have consequently deserted to form their own
army under former RCD-ML Defence Minister Thomas
Lubanga. The Union des Patriotes Congolais (UPC)
has been seeking alternative sources of arms because
we have refused to give them arms. Importantly, the
Hema-Lendu conflict is historical, and not a result of
the fact that UPDF went to Ituri.

The allegations that the UPDF is involved in
commercial operations (para. 122) and that the Chief of
Military Intelligence, Colonel Mayombo, signed a
Protocol d'Accord on 22 February 2002 in exchange
for a monthly stipend of $25,000 and exemption from
taxes are, in our view, based on forged documents. The
Panel had a chance to meet Colonel Mayombo in
Kampala, but it never took advantage of this to clear
this sort of material. It should have met authorities of
the Uganda Government if they were in doubt. But
there is no such Protocol d'Accord, as alleged in the
report. And when you look for the evidence, there is no
corroborating evidence. The Panel claimed that its
findings would be based on the testimony of
eyewitnesses and that it would operate under
reasonable standards of proof, with fairness and
objectivity. Unfortunately, the final report still contains
serious factual errors, uncorroborated information,
contradictions and clear distortions. The uncorroborated
allegations against UPDF and those against the
Government of Uganda could have been checked up on
if the Panel had cared to do so. Let me comment on
some of them to illustrate the point that I am making
about serious errors.

In paragraphs 12, 14, 101 and 102, the Panel
alleges that the UPDF presence is the cause of the
instability in the Ituri area and that it is designed to
create conditions for the continued illegal exploitation
of the resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I wish to point out that the UPDF remains in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the request of
the Secretary-General. We could have moved out
completely, because we gave notice in July last year
that we would do so. It remains there as a stabilizing
force. Otherwise the process of the Lusaka Cease-fire
Agreement in that area would have collapsed.

We were requested by the Secretary-General to
Withdraw UPDF from the area in the context of the
Kampala disengagement plan. Through a special
envoy, Uganda had notified the Secretary-General of
its withdrawal from the Lusaka process and, therefore,
of the unilateral withdrawal of its forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Uganda has signed
bilateral agreements with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, such as one signed in Angola; that will
provide for the total withdrawal of UPDF and the
creation of the Joint Pacification Committee on Ituri. I
will return to that after I have addressed a number of
other issues.

The Hema-Lendu conflict is historical and was
triggered by a fight over land. The late Mobutu Sese
Seko sided with the Hema and gave land to them, to the
annoyance of the Lendu. We found this conflict there
when we went into Bunia. We did not create the
conflict, as seems to be alleged by the Panel. In fact,
the situation is that, where Uganda has withdrawn - as
in Gbadolite, Gemena, Buta and Beni, - there is
relative peace. Many of those areas have more natural
resources and larger populations than Bunia, where
there has been persistent Hema-Lendu ethnic conflict
over land. In other words, why should we leave Buta
and Gemena and come to set up business operations
and networks in a conflict-prone area? Right now,
Uganda is prospecting for hydrocarbons and other
minerals in areas adjacent to Ituri. What we need when
we do this is peace in the neighbourhood, not
confusion.

I will clarify that we are drilling for oil in the area
on the floor of the Rift Valley, with very good
prospects. We do not want war or conflict in the
neighbourhood so that we spend our time managing
refugees instead of drilling in our area as we are doing
right now. As proof of the creation of conditions for the
continued presence of UPDF for commercial
operations, the Panel alleges that a Protocol d'Accord
was signed on behalf of Uganda; as I said, that
Protocol does not exist.

The Panel then alleges that UPDF is maintaining
local militias in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo to protect elite networks. I should point out that
Uganda, through UPDF, has never trained any personal
militias. But what we can say is that the Uganda
Government has trained armies on behalf of its allies,
namely the MLC and the RCD. The trained troops in
the hands of the MLC continue to provide effective
security and administration in the area under MLC
control. Unfortunately the RCD has suffered numerous
divisions in its leadership. As a result, some of the
troops are under Mbusa Nyamwisi, in North Kivu, in
the Beni-Butembo area. Others are under the former
Defence Minister, Thomas Lubanga, who has since
formed his own political group. The confusion in the
report arises from the fact that the Panel did not
understand those political situations in the area.

The fact that reference is made to UPDF as
running militia groups that operate through intimidation
is totally untrue. We operate on a very strict code of
conduct, and many of our development partners here
have complained to us that we are sometimes too strict
in our application of our statute on the code of conduct.
In fact they call it harsh, to say the least.

The United Nations Panel tries to hit a soft target
by making a false allegation that 165 children between
the ages of 14 and 16 were recruited and trained at a
UPDF military camp at Tchakwanzi, in Uganda. The
Council may wish to know the facts regarding this
allegation, because it is serious and it involves
children. Tchakwanzi is not a UPDF camp. It is a
political school where we take our children for
education in political matters. The children in question
were rescued from a mutiny by Mbusa Nyamwisi and
John Tibasima against Professor Wamba dia Wamba in
Bunia, and we took them to Kampala or to Entebbe,
complete with their weapons, and disarmed them as a
way of assuring that there would be no deaths. I was in
charge of that school because I was then national
political commissar and we took those children to that
place for counselling and for care. The children were
subsequently handed over to the United Nations, which
processed them and sent them back to their parents. No
other training of children is known to us.

What is the way forward? Uganda remains
convinced that the Security Council should put priority
emphasis on the speedy implementation of the Lusaka
Cease-fire Agreement and the supporting agreements
made in Pretoria and Luanda. That would lead to the
establishment of a new transitional government and a
State capacity to guarantee against the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Uganda believes in the speedy implementation of
programmes for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR)
which remain key to peace and security in the Great
Lakes region. We have sorted out our programmes but,
as I said earlier, Interahamwe continues to harass our
territory in Kisoro. Therefore, Uganda calls upon the
Security Council to strengthen MONUC and to support
capacity-building programmes for peacekeeping and
peace-building by African countries in order to
implement DDRRR programmes.

The way forward for Ituri is through the
implementation of Luanda Agreement, which provides
for the creation of the Joint Pacification Committee on
Ituri. The international community should provide
adequate material support to the Committee. At this
stage, the Council should assume its responsibility and
provide adequate deployment of MONUC for the
purpose of maintaining law and order in the area, given
that UPDF is committed under the Luanda Agreement
to complete withdrawal from Bunia by 15 December
2002.

This is a very serious matter. Under the Agreement
we signed in Luanda, we said that on D-day - 6
September - plus 50 days Uganda was to submit a
detailed plan of how we propose to withdraw from
Bunia, and I will check whether we have done so. On
D-day plus 70, which is next week, Uganda begins to
withdraw troops from Bunia. And on D-day plus 100,
which is 15 December, Uganda completely withdraws
UPDF troops from Bunia. So, under the Agreement, the
Council has to tell us what to do, because very soon, by
virtue of the agreement, we shall be going out; this is
to be completed by 15 December.

In our View, the proposed international conference
on peace, security and sustainable development should
take place under the auspices of the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) soon after the establishment of
a transitional government in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and a ceasefire in Burundi. Issues to be
discussed at the conference, in our view, should be: post-
conflict rehabilitation, reconstruction and development
in the Great Lakes region; measures to support the
deepening of regional economic integration, especially
in the areas of infrastructure and human resources
development; capacity-building for peacekeeping and
conflict resolution; and strengthening African Union
capacity to monitor post-conflict reconstruction in the
context of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD).

Uganda calls upon the countries cited in the final
report, including the end-user countries, to establish
independent judicial commissions of inquiry to
investigate and recommend appropriate measures on
allegations of illegal exploitation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Secretary-General should
cooperate and should share information with Member
States who wish to establish such judicial mechanisms.
Uganda would be happy to share with other countries
the experience of our Porter Commission of Inquiry in
this respect. It is in such a context that individual
companies and entities mentioned can, in our View, be
fairly tried and punished.

In conclusion, let me say that we should focus on
the big picture. Today, as I said earlier, we stand at the
crossroads of a major breakthrough for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and in the
Sudan through the Machakos process. The prospects
for peace in the Great Lakes region have never been
greater. The ongoing inter-Congolese dialogue in
Pretoria has finalized agreement on a power-sharing
arrangement for a transitional government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The intransigent
Burundi rebels are expected to join the transitional
government sometime in the near future, as far as we
can see from what is going on in Dar es Salaam. And
for the first time in history, President Al-Bashir of the
Sudan and General Garang of the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) met in Kampala in mid-2002.
In our View, the challenge before the Council,
therefore, is to seize the moment and focus on the big
picture, establishing the necessary conditions for peace,
stability, regional integration and development in the
Great Lakes region.

In our view, the Security Council should,
therefore, while protecting the wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, focus on five key
elements of the big picture. The first is to strengthen
United Nations Security Council support for the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
the related Pretoria and Luanda Agreements and the
inter-Congolese dialogue resolutions which were
arrived at with a View to establishing an all-inclusive
transitional government in Kinshasa. In my capacity as
incoming Chairman of the Political Committee of the
Lusaka Agreement, I promise to work closely with the
Council on this issue.

Secondly, we would like to see support for
regional and subregional integration in the framework
of the African Union and NEPAD. In our case, the East
African Community will soon agree on a customs
union to pave the way for the admission of Rwanda and
Burundi. As Chairman-in-Office of the East African
Council of Ministers, I must applaud Ambassador
Kassem's Panel in respect to this question of regional
integration, which is supposed to help resolve some of
the issues in our area.

Thirdly, we advocate strengthened cooperation
among the United Nations as a whole, the Security
Council, the African Union and the subregional
security mechanisms in the resolution and prevention
of conflict at the regional and continental levels in
Africa as a solid basis for the implementation of
NEPAD. Uganda will soon assume the leadership of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), a very important regional body. I can assure
the Council that the efforts of my President as head of
IGAD and mine as Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of that body will be applied towards the
realization of peace in Sudan and Somalia.

Fourthly, we would like the United Nations to
encourage all countries cited in the Panel's report to
establish independent judicial commissions of inquiry
and to report back to the United Nations on measures
to implement the relevant recommendations.

Finally, we call again on the Council to find
immediate ways to ensure adequate MONUC
deployment in Ituri for the maintenance of law and
order as the Uganda People's Defence Forces withdraw
from Bunia by 15 December 2002.

I apologize for having taken so long, but this is a
very important matter, and I thank the Council for
having given me the opportunity to make a contribution
to this very important body of the United Nations, the
Security Council.

