Mr. Fedotov: At the outset, allow me to ask you,
Mr. President, to convey my heartfelt condolences to
the British Government and the people of the United
Kingdom on the occasion of the terrorist attack in the
centre of London. Our sympathies are with the families
of the victims of this barbaric act.

The adoption today of resolution 2347 (2017) and
the Security Council's continued commitment has
helped to keep the spotlight on the involvement of
terrorist groups and organized crime networks in the
destruction, looting, trafficking and sale of cultural
heritage. The need for action is more urgent than ever
in the face of the mass destruction of heritage sites in
Syria and Iraq and the seizure of thousands of objects
near the borders of those countries, which may represent
just the tip of the iceberg.

The destruction of landmarks - such as the
Buddhas of Bamiyan, the Roman monuments in Palmyra
and shrines and mosques in Tikrit and Mosul - are
reprehensible attempts to erase human history. But the
destruction and looting are also generating profits for
terrorists through trafficking, carried out in collusion
with organized crime groups. Those profits fund further
acts of terrorism and enable yet more destruction and
looting of cultural sites and archaeological treasures.
This crime cannot be allowed to continue unabated.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) has been working in close cooperation with
ourpartners at UNESCO, as well as with INTERPOL, the
World Customs Organization and others, to strengthen
national, regional and international responses. UNODC
is providing technical assistance and capacity-building
and facilitating international cooperation to prevent and
combat trafficking in cultural property. That includes
support to implement the International Guidelines for
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with
Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and other
Related Offences, adopted by the General Assembly
in 2014.

Our support to Member States has its firm
foundation in the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, the United Nations
Convention against Corruption and the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. Those conventions enjoy near universal
membership. They are applicable to organized crime,
corruption and terrorism, and they provide the
framework the international community needs and can
use to prevent, criminalize, investigate and prosecute
trafficking in cultural property, as well as its use to
finance terrorist groups and to support return and
restitution. Those conventions, which apply at all times,
represent important foundations in peacebuilding and
post-conflict interventions. they are our best hope for
preventing and countering this crime and bringing
perpetrators to justice.

The full implementation of the United Nations
Convention against Corruption is especially essential,
as trafficking relies on corrupt officials and dealers
to enable looted items to cross borders and be offered
for sale. This framework, alongside international
instruments developed under the auspices of UNESCO
and the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law, can help ensure that national legal
frameworks can deal with this crime; that investigative
agencies are set up and able to act; that law enforcement
and judicial officers have the training they need; that
sound border management, as well as customs and
anti-money-laundering controls, are in place; that
international cooperation is supported; and that public
and private actors, including museums, dealers and the
tourism sector, assume their responsibilities.

We have treaties. We have tools. We have guidelines.
And we have training materials. But we need to
operationalize commitments more effectively, and we
need Member States to provide more resources in the
spirit of shared responsibility. In response, UNODC is
seeking to shed more light on the dimensions of this
crime to help the international community better target
joint action.

We are pursuing funding for aproject, in cooperation
with UNESCO and other partners, to undertake a
global study to, first, identify the main trafficking
routes, modus operandi, extent and patterns involved
and, secondly, to determine the critical criminal justice
challenges countries are facing and to provide tailored
assistance. I hope we can rely on members' support.
UNODC'S experience and research expertise in
confronting transnational organized crime, corruption
and terrorism remain at the Council's disposal to
stop criminals and terrorists from profiting from the
destruction and theft of our shared cultural heritage.

