Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. We wish you every success. I extend our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2002/737) describing the
present situation in Afghanistan. I would also like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Brahimi, for his briefing today,
and to commend him and his colleagues for their
efforts in trying to promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

Turkey has already aligned itself with the statement
just made by Denmark on behalf of the European Union.
I would, however, like to highlight some aspects of our
assessment of the current situation in Afghanistan.
Following the successful leadership of the United
Kingdom, Turkey assumed command of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) as of 20 June 2002,
and has established a harmonious working relationship
with the Afghan authorities as part of its efforts to
implement the objectives of the international community
in Kabul and the surrounding areas. The situation in and
around Kabul is generally calm. The city is beginning to
thrive, with increased commercial and social activity.
ISAF has been well received by the local community. At
the request of the Minister of the Interior, Mr. Wardak,
the ISAF commander has decided to increase ISAF's
joint patrolling activity with the Afghan police.
Nevertheless, the security situation still requires our full
attention. The assassination of Haji Abdul Qadir, Vice-
President and Public Works Minister in the Transitional
Administration, on 6 July 2002 in Kabul, has brought to
the fore the necessity of enhanced coordination between
intelligence organizations and internal security
institutions. To that end, ISAF has proposed the
formation of a working group composed of officials from
the relevant institutions.

Afghanistan and the international community are
faced with important tasks and challenges. Creation of a
genuine national army to serve the interests of the entire
Afghan nation should continue to retain our particular
attention. Several nations, including Turkey, as well as
ISAF, are willing to continue to provide assistance in the
formation and training of such an army. While national
efforts are under way to train individual Afghan
battalions, we believe setting up an overall institutional
structure and devising command and control
arrangements for a new national army are matters of
great urgency.

In order to help the Afghan Government in its
efforts to restructure and to consolidate its authority,
sustained international aid, as called for in resolution
1419 (2002), is essential. Inability to pay salaries on time
to police and army officers and to civil servants will not
help bring about long-sought stability and security in the
country, a sine qua non for success. The Afghan people
displayed tremendous determination and maturity at the
Loya Jirga. The international community now owes them
its full commitment.

The high rate of return of refugees, which
continues unabated, is flooding the city of Kabul and
increasing the pressure on already scarce resources. More
than a million people are estimated to have returned to
the country in the past six months. Experts estimate that
the figure will reach 2 million by the end of the year. It is
also important to reinforce Government and United
Nations efforts to stem the narcotics trade.

There have been a number of references to the need
to expand the area of responsibility of ISAF. To envisage
going beyond the present mandate of ISAF, which is
confined to Kabul and the surrounding areas, would not
only call into question the existing conceptual approach
with all the particular repercussions that such an
expansion would entail, but would also require careful
consideration of securing additional contributors and
substantial financial and logistical support.

Although the overall security circumstances still
pose a challenge, the outlook gives cause for optimism.
Thanks to civilian-military cooperation, many projects
have already been implemented, and more than 80 are at
the planning stage. The transition from relief to
development, which is key to sustainable peace and
normalcy, can be achieved with a stronger commitment
by the international community and by fulfilling the
pledges made so far.

Finally, I thank those representatives who have so
kindly expressed words of support and confidence with
respect to my country's assumption of the lead nation's
role in Afghanistan.

