Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me begin
by expressing New Zealand's sincere condolences
to the people and the Government of Turkey over the
attacks at the Istanbul airport.

The United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) plays a critical role as a stabilizing
force in an extremely troubled region. We strongly
support the mission and we want to see it return to full
functionality as soon as possible. Therefore, we are
open to an incremental return to the area of separation,
but we need to bear in mind the circumstances that led
to UNDOF withdrawing in the first place.

The deteriorating security situation had generated
a sustained crisis, which saw several long-standing
contributing countries withdraw from the mission,
and culminated in October 2014 with the kidnapping
of 45 Fijian peacekeepers by armed extremist groups.
These incidents were extremely damaging to UNDOF
and to United Nations peacekeeping more generally.
United Nations personnel were put in unacceptable
situations of risk, with inadequate plans for a rapid exit.
The incidents in the Golan exposed concerning flaws
within the United Nations processes for assessing risk
and engaging with troop-contributing countries. We
need to be confident that we have changed the way we
operate to ensure that such events are not allowed to
happen again.

The security situation in the area of separation
remains dangerous and unstable. It is a war zone
in which armed extremist groups remain a real
and constant threat, and the reality is that UNDOF
personnel are likely to continue to be targeted. New
Zealand argued strongly in the process leading up to
the adoption of resolution 2294 (2016) today that, as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) takes
forward its plans for an incremental return, it must
be clear that any return should take place only if the
necessary conditions being met to ensure that it can be
done safely and effectively. It must be based on a robust
assessment of the security situation, which must be
kept under continuous review, and DPKO needs to keep
the Council updated regularly. UNDOF personnel must
also be provided with the technology and equipment
necessary for them to carry out their mandate safely.

As the Secretary-General has made clear, it is
essential that the parties to the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement play their part in enabling the return of
UNDOF, including by facilitating the establishment of
secure temporary crossing procedures and enabling the
mission's use of technology and equipment necessary
for its safety.
In early May, New Zealand hosted a meeting for
troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
Council members as part of our triangular consultations
initiative. We also engaged bilaterally with a number
of the most affected troop-contributing countries in
the lead-up to today's adoption. Troop-contributing
countries shared our concerns about the ability of
UNDOF personnel to operate safely in the area of
separation. They emphasized the need for UNDOF
troops to have the equipment they need to do their jobs.

New Zealand proposed a number of amendments to
the draft text. We are pleased that some changes were
made, even though they do not fully reflect the extent
of our concerns or those conveyed to us by some troop-
contributing countries. This outcome is in no small part
due to the brief time we had to consider the resolution.
Given the serious issues involved, particularly with
regard to the safety of United Nations personnel, one
working day for consultation is unacceptable.

We will continue to engage with Council members
and troop-contributing countries further in the months
ahead, particularly in advance of the 90-day review in
September and the next UNDOF mandate renewal in
December. We also encourage DPKO and those that
assert the right to hold the pen on this issue to stay
in close contact with troop-contributing countries as
their plans advance to ensure that they retain the full
confidence and support of troop-contributing countries.
We trust that the next mandate renewal will allow for
more time for Council members to consider the serious
issues at stake.

The meeting rose at10.15 a.rn.
