Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany thanks
Ambassador Peter Wilson for years of excellent
cooperation and wishes him Godspeed in his new
functions on the continent of Europe. Germany would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for the third report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515).

Allow me to make three brief points.

First, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015) is an
outstanding success of diplomacy in an extremely
volatile region. It is a well-thought-out agreement
that builds on and strengthens the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

One and a half years into JCPOA implementation,
there is no doubt the deal as such is working. All
participants are keeping their commitments and the
deal has clearly promoted security and stability in the
region. But all parties to the agreement must continue
adhering to the JCPOA for the full duration, if the deal
is to fulfil its long-term objectives. What matters most
is that all participants continue to strictly implement
the deal in all its aspects.

Secondly, to date the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has verified, in six reports, that Iran
is abiding by its nuclear-related commitment. Going
ahead, verification and monitoring by the IAEA will
remain essential to re-establishing trust and confidence
and to reassure the world that Iran's nuclear programme
serves exclusively peaceful purposes. The casing of
sanctions resulted in economic consolidation and
growth in Iran's gross domestic product. The full and
comprehensive implementation of the JCPOA provides
a basis for this trend to continue. Germany remains
committed to the goal of fully re-establishing economic
ties with Iran to the benefit of all parties concerned.

Thirdly, equally important for the building of
mutual trust and confidence is the full implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) itself. Germany remains
particularly concerned by Iran's missile programme.
While the ballistic missile test conducted by Iran in
January did not violate the JCPOA, we regard such tests
as inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). We call
upon Iran to refrain from any activities that exacerbate
tensions and deepen mistrust. We urge Iran to play
a constructive role in the region and to contribute to
lasting political solutions.
In eonelusion,the Vienna agreement and resolution major international challenges. Germany is proud
2231 (2015) are a victory for the principles ofthe United Of its involvement in the JCPOA and remains firmly
Nations, The JCPOA negotiations showed the power committed to its continued and full implementation.

of persistent multilateral diplomacy in addressing The meetingmse a15.45p.m.
