The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.

At the outset, let me also thank Under-Secretary-
General Ibrahim Gambari for his briefing.
We cannot but share the sentiments of other
members of the Council that the current uneasy calm
prevailing in the Middle East could suddenly worsen,
with negative consequences, unless all the parties
refrain from provocative acts which could be deemed
as unjustified and which could lead to retaliatory
measures. We therefore wish to commend the
Secretariat for the expeditious manner in which it has
gone about implementing resolution 1701 (2006).

It is in this light that we express serious concern
about the raid by Israeli commandos on the village of
Boudai in the Bekaa valley last Saturday. Irrespective
of the reasons given for that action, we View it as a
violation of resolution 1701 (2006), which called, inter
alia, for a full cessation of hostilities. All parties'
acceptance of and commitment to that demand by the
Council is imperative if we are to make any headway
and witness a positive change in the current precarious
and fragile situation in Lebanon. We therefore demand
nothing less from all parties than their scrupulous
adherence to all the provisions of resolution 1701
(2006), including the arms embargo.

A factor critical to the sustenance of peace in the
volatile area of southern Lebanon is the deployment of
Lebanese troops in conformity with paragraph 2 of
resolution 1701 (2006). To that end, we welcome the
prompt decision of the Lebanese Government which
has led to the positioning of its troops in the area. That
action taken by the Lebanese Government must be
fully supported by the international community without
much delay.

It is imperative that an international force with a
robust mandate be sent to southern Lebanon as soon as
possible. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) should act expeditiously to remove any
lingering doubts and anxieties about the concept of
operations and the rules of engagement lest the
ceasefire unravel.

It is our fervent wish that, following the
resolution of pertinent issues relating to the
enlargement of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL), potential troop-contributing
countries will see their way clear to redeem their
pledges and, as a matter of urgency, dispatch their
troops to Lebanon. It must be our objective to meet the
request for 3,500 troops by 2 September 2006. The
attainment of that goal would demonstrate the
Council's resolve, as well as that of the international

community, to implement resolution 1701 (2006) in its
entirety. It would also bolster the confidence of the
Lebanese Government as it strives to bring succour and
hope to the traumatized people of southern Lebanon. In
recognition of Ghana's role as one of the four troop-
contributing countries to UNIFIL, my Government has
already indicated Ghana's readiness to increase its
current troop strength from 650 to 850.

I would be remiss if I did not express
appreciation for the contribution of the gallant UNIFIL
personnel who exhibited courage and professionalism
during the critical period of armed hostilities. We also
pay tribute to those who made the ultimate sacrifice in
the course of their duty to humanity.

It is encouraging that, despite the fragile security
situation in southern Lebanon and the Bekaa valley,
many of the internally displaced persons who sought
sanctuary elsewhere have begun returning to their
original places of abode. However, it is disheartening
to stress that most of the returnees have come back to
witness desolation and hopelessness, having lost their
houses and personal property. Given these dire
conditions, the response of the humanitarian agencies
to alleviate their predicament has been encouraging,
but it has not measured up to the required needs, since
the flash appeal has achieved only about 52 per cent of
its target. We hope that the international community
will be more generous when the revised flash appeal,
which will give an up-to-date assessment of the
humanitarian needs, is launched next week.

Meanwhile, we wish to encourage the United
Nations to continue its leadership role in this sphere
and to coordinate effectively with other agencies in the
field to ensure maximum delivery to the affected
people. That goal cannot be achieved if the current sea
and air blockade is not lifted and if the deplorable
conditions of the roads and bridges are not vastly
improved.

We also look forward to the conference to be held
in Sweden later this month in the hope that it will lead
to the provision of assistance for the long-term
recovery and rehabilitation of southern Lebanon.
While we have of late been preoccupied with the
Lebanese crisis because of the intensity of the conflict
and its devastating consequences, we should not let the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories fall off
the radar screen. That situation too has the potential of
degenerating into another all-out war with its attendant
effects on regional peace and security. It has been
generally acknowledged that the Palestinian question is
at the core of the Middle East problem. Admittedly, it
is not easy to resolve a conflict which is not only a
clash over territory, but also a clash of rights and
memory, a struggle between nationalist mythologies.
The Middle East cannot be allowed to continue to be a
cemetery of missed opportunities.

That the Palestinian question remains unresolved
more than half a century after the original United
Nations partition resolution is an indictment of the
international community. The Security Council, which
has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, should live up to its
role and use its creative energies for a comprehensive
and fair solution to this conflict. Otherwise, peace and
security will continue to be elusive in the Middle East.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

