Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me thank you, Sir, for
convening this important meeting.

I wish to extend my delegation's condolences to the
Governments and those families who lost people in Sierra
Leone. Our thoughts are with those being detained by the
rebels.

Let me also pay special tribute to the countries who
have contributed troops to the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Force
Commander of UNAMSIL for their leadership and
untiring efforts to keep the peace process on track under
the most adverse conditions. We also wish to salute the
men and women of UNAMSIL for their courage under
extremely difficult conditions.

The presence of the Secretary-General here tonight
is appreciated by my delegation. We thank you,
Mr. Secretary-General, for your statement, and we
commend you for the efforts you are making to bring
peace to Sierra Leone.

 

When we adopted resolution 1270 (1999) on 22
October last year, we did so, among other reasons, to
commit the international community, and in particular
United Nations Member States, to assist the people of
Sierra Leone in restoring their democratically elected
Government. Indeed, by resolution 1270 (1999) the Security
Council acted to carry out its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security.

After the continuing long series of most brutal and
barbaric atrocities that the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) unleashed on the people of Sierra Leone - notably,
children and even infants - the Government and people of
Sierra Leone, who needed peace more than anything,
accepted the Lome Agreement. Indeed, we all had hoped
that, given what the people of Sierra Leone were subjected
to, the way to peace was not to isolate those who stood in
the way of peace but to include them.

Today, the RUF has clearly demonstrated that it was
never interested in peace. As a party to the conflict, the
RUF did not have the political will to abide by the
provisions of the Peace Agreement. They have, and
continue to, openly and explicitly challenged the United
Nations, if not embarrassing the international community.
This we must not allow. Therefore the events in Sierra
Leone should galvanize the international community to take
effective measures to address this unfolding crisis. We must
do so indeed because UNAMSIL is a collective
undertaking. If it fails, it will be collective failure. When it
succeeds, we all will have succeeded.

It must be stressed that UNAMSIL did not have the
necessary deterrent capacity. The first test by the rebels
confirmed the extreme vulnerability of the Mission.
UNAMSIL was outnumbered and did not have the required
equipment. The mandate of UNAMSIL was inadequate for
the task at hand. We hesitated to set ourselves clear and
realistic goals.

This is not an attempt to apportion blame, but rather
an effort to establish why we went wrong. More
importantly, however, we must exercise our collective
responsibility in determining what we can do now, together,
to put back on track the peace process in Sierra Leone. Of
course, some have more capacity than others, but we must
all act. In this connection, let me express our profound
gratitude to the Government of the United Kingdom for
sending troops to secure Lungi airport. Our thanks also go
to all those Governments that have offered transportation to
bring reinforcements to Sierra Leone.

The task before us is clear. The political realities on
the ground and the continued detention of United Nations
personnel demand that we review the mandate of
UNAMSIL. In fact, the summit of the leaders of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
recently held in Abuja has facilitated our task. Namibia
therefore fully supports a reinforced UNAMSIL. The
strength of UNAMSIL must be boosted. The mandate of
UNAMSIL must be brought fully under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, without modifications.
Namibia welcomes the decision of ECOWAS to put
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) troops
immediately at the disposal of UNAMSIL so that they
can be integrated into the Mission.

Our collective responsibility demands that the
strengthened UNAMSIL be augmented with the necessary
equipment. Many troop-contributing countries do not have
equipment that will make a Chapter VII mandate
meaningful. Therefore, we appeal to those in a position to
contribute equipment to UNAMSIL to come to the rescue
of humanity and peace in Sierra Leone.

We cannot and must not abdicate our responsibility
in Sierra Leone and pass it to ECOMOG. If we do, the
least we can do is provide ECOMOG with financial and
logistical support. To this end, we look forward to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and the speedy
adoption of a relevant draft resolution.

We are already seeing mass population displacement,
and unless we act, there is going to be a humanitarian
crisis, given that many humanitarian workers have already
been evacuated to neighbouring countries for safety.

We are grateful to all Member States who have
committed their forces and made other contributions to
the UNAMSIL operations in Sierra Leone. N o doubt, the
success or failure of UNAMSIL can have an impact on
the future of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Notwithstanding this possibility, the crisis in Sierra Leone
should not determine the future of peacekeeping
operations in Africa. We must not fail the people of
Africa, for this will have catastrophic consequences for
international peace and security.

