Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-
Taranco for his update on recent developments in the
Middle East. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their presence and contributions to our
debate. Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the acting head of the European Union
delegation on behalf of the European Union.

Austria is gravely concerned that peace talks
remain deadlocked despite the ongoing efforts, in
particular those of the United States administration, to
bring the parties back to the negotiation table. We urge
the parties to overcome the current standstill, which
plays into the hands of violent extremists rather than
leaders who embrace peaceful and democratic ways to
achieve the legitimate aspirations of their peoples. An
independent, democratic, contiguous and viable State
of Palestine, living in peace and security with the State
of Israel, is the realization of such Palestinian
aspirations, a key contribution to stability and peace in
the wider region, and the best long-term guarantee for
Israel's security.

Negotiations to achieve this two-State solution
must be urgently resumed. Such negotiations should be
pursued under an agreed time frame, respect previous
agreements and undertakings, and tackle all final status
issues, including borders and security, settlements,
Jerusalem, refugees and water. A genuine peace
requires the parties to find a way, through negotiations,
to ensure the status of Jerusalem as the future capital of
two States. To restore their faith in the negotiation
process, Palestinians need to see an end to illegal
activities that create obstacles to the viability of their
future State, such as the construction of settlements and
the separation barrier on occupied land in the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem, house demolitions and
evictions.

We have taken note of Israel's decision on a
partial and temporary settlement freeze. This can be
seen as a first step in the right direction. However,
ongoing settlement construction, the inclusion of
settlements in the National Priority Area programme,
and the most recent endorsement of the construction of
almost 700 new settlement units in East Jerusalem put
into question Israel's overall readiness to seriously and
comprehensively negotiate the settlement issue. We
therefore call on the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activities in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.

We strongly encourage the Palestinian Authority's
efforts to build the infrastructure and institutions of a
future State that will provide opportunities, justice and
security for its citizens, and address the legitimate
security needs of its Israeli neighbours. Austria, both
bilaterally and within the overall efforts of the
European Union, will continue to assist Palestinian
State-building. Normal economic activity is key to
funding these efforts. We welcome steps taken by
Israel to ease some of the restrictions; these have
contributed to economic growth. We look to Israel for
decisive reinforcement of the removal of obstacles to
movement and access in the West Bank. Every job
created through improved freedom of movement
contributes to sustainable peace and security for all.

One year after the end of the military operations
of Israel in Gaza, it is highly disconcerting to note that
the full implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) is
still overdue. As delivery levels of basic commodities
remain far below needs, Austria once again urges the
immediate, sustained and unconditional opening of
crossings for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza.

We recognize the right of Israeli citizens to live
free from fear and from indiscriminate attacks
emanating from Gaza. And, of course, we also
recognize the right of the Government of Israel to
protect its population against such violent attacks. At
the same time, we, like others, believe that what is still
a de facto blockade is not the right instrument to
achieve this goal, that it cannot be justified in view of
existing obligations under international humanitarian
law, and that it leads to unacceptable humanitarian
consequences.

We wish to underline the continued need for
thorough and credible investigations of all allegations
of grave violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in relation to the Gaza conflict.
There must be accountability and an effective remedy
for victims of such violations. We expect all parties to
cooperate with the Secretary-General as he prepares his
report to the General Assembly on their investigation
efforts.

In connection with this wider issue of addressing
the legacy of the Gaza conflict, we note with
satisfaction that Israel has recently agreed to make a
payment of $10.5 million to the United Nations in
respect of the losses sustained by the Organization
during the incidents that were investigated by the
United Nations Board of Inquiry. We appreciate the
constructive engagement of Israel in this process and
hope that Israel will also consider such steps in similar
cases. However, as the United Nations has rightly
pointed out, providing these financial means will not of
itself repair the damaged buildings and facilities. We
therefore join the United Nations in its call for the
unhindered and expedited passage to Gaza necessary to
facilitate effective reconstruction.

In view of the recent tensions between Lebanon
and Israel, Austria reiterates its call on all parties to
comply fully with resolution 1701 (2006). We call on
Israel to halt violations of Lebanese air space and urge
the parties to avoid any rhetoric or acts that could
endanger the current cessation of hostilities. In view of
the discovery of explosives by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon near Al-Khiam, we also wish
to underline the importance of efforts to ensure that the
area south of the Litani River is kept free of
unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons.

In conclusion, we wish to underline the shared
responsibility of all parties, as well as all partners in
the region and in the international community, to
transform the unsustainable status quo of what can, at
this stage, only be called a situation of fragile calm into
a comprehensive and durable settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, which also requires decisive steps
towards a settlement between Israel and Syria and
Israel and Lebanon.

Austria, together with its European Union
partners, stands ready to support concrete and early
results on the path towards a comprehensive peace.

