Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the leading organ of the
United Nations. I would also like to thank and
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
I also commend, and express my gratitude for the
quality of, the briefing by the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, as well as for
the outstanding statement by the Secretary-General of
the Economic Community of Central African States.

The question that brings us together today is of
major importance for my country, the Central African
Republic. Mine is a State that faces many internal
challenges and, since 2008, has been in the throes of an
external rebellion. We are still asking ourselves today
what the motive and justification is for that barbarous
aggression. To tell the truth, the only fault of my
country - which does not share a border with Uganda,
I might add - is merely that we are living on our own
territory in peace. In talking today about transnational
or transborder terrorism, our specific case provides a
perfect illustration. One morning in March 2008,
heavily armed men, coming from who knows where,
arrived, pillaged, burned, raped, murdered and forcibly
enlisted men to carry off the spoils of war and later to
become soldiers. They also recruited women to become
sexual slaves and children to become child soldiers.

Villages that not long ago were genuine havens of
peace and breadbaskets for major towns suddenly
became emptied of their populations, who fled the
insecurity and now live in a situation of unprecedented
precariousness. Like internally displaced persons in
makeshift shelters, thousands today depend on the
generosity of international institutions, organizations
and charitable humanitarian groups, both national and
international. It would not be going too far to point out
that to that we must add the thousands of Congolese
refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
spread out over the two towns of Zemio and Obo.

The insecurity created in the area, which is quite
far from Bangui, accentuates poverty, which is already
a source of concern in a country facing great
difficulties. For three years now, the Central African
Republic, a fragile, post-conflict State whose defence
and security forces are undergoing restructuring with
limited resources, while also fighting internal
rebellions and highwaymen, has deployed three
platoons to the area to track those bandits. However,
we have not been able to completely neutralize those
criminals, who are spread out in the prefectures of
Upper Mbomou, Mbomou and Upper Kotto, in the far
eastern part of the Central African Republic.

Exercising its right of pursuit, with the agreement
of the Government of the Central African Republic, a
unit from the Ugandan defence forces has been
deployed and is carrying out joint patrols with Central
African Republic forces in that eastern part of our vast
territory.

For some time now, the African Union, the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and, recently, the United Nations through UNOCA,
have been holding increasing numbers of meetings to
jointly consider what collective and coordinated efforts
could be undertaken to find a comprehensive solution.
We very much welcome that and thank those partners
for all of their initiatives. I would like to take this
opportunity to express to France the gratitude of the
people and the Government of the Central African
Republic for the many forms of support it has provided
the Forces armees centrafricainesus in our struggle for
peace in this corner of our country.

The Central African Republic very much
welcomes and appreciates the recent involvement of
the United States of America through its President,
Mr. Barack Obama, who, through a courageous
decision on 21 October, fully committed himself to this
cause by sending 100 personnel to strengthen the
operational capacity of the soldiers of the four States of
the subregion in order to provide greater effectiveness
in the fight against one of the most cruel barbarities of
our time. I can say that this is already producing
positive effects in the subregion. We would be all the
more pleased if that commitment could inspire other
partners that have until now been silent - indeed
sceptical - to join our ranks in this just fight.

Before I conclude my statement, I would like to
point out that my fellow citizens - men, women and
children - face many challenges, including threats to
peace and stability and the daily and ongoing fight
against poverty. Mr. Kony, his movement and his horde
of criminals are hampering our progress in this just and
legitimate battle. The Central African Republic
reaffirms its commitment, here as elsewhere, to
ensuring that as long as that rebellion exists on our
territory, we will not let down our guard, much less
spare any effort in this battle.

However, the regional nature of this scourge
makes all isolated action complex and ineffective. That
is Why we must mobilize commitment, forces and
resources in order to act together to once and for all
prevent the LRA from carrying out these crimes and
atrocities with impunity against innocent people who
only aspire to live in peace, security and dignity
through the fruits of their labours.

