Mr. Akunwafor (Nigeria): Please allow me at the
outset to join those who have spoken before me in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Knowing your country' s particular interest in and concrete
contributions to the subject of today's debate, my
delegation is confident that the deliberations of the
Council will be conducted with skill and wisdom, and in
a manner that will enhance the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter.

Maintaining and restoring international peace and
security is a fundamental purpose of the United Nations.
When, in October of this year, my delegation addressed
the General Assembly on the report of the Security
Council, we stressed the great importance which we
attach to activities the Council undertakes in the discharge

 

of its primary responsibility on matters that directly affect
our region. In the past year, the Council devoted about 60
per cent of its activities to conflicts in the continent of
Africa.

Today the international community has to deal with an
ever increasing number of new conflicts which must be
promptly contained. True enough, there has been no large-
scale regional conflict; yet many local wars have continued,
and Africa has had more than its fair share. These conflicts
have greatly impeded the socio-economic development of
the continent, reduced the population to abject poverty and
deprivation, created swarms of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and generated serious apprehension on
the part of the international community about the
continent's future. My delegation too is disturbed by this
trend of events. We are, however, pleased that the United
Nations system is giving special consideration to the root
causes of these conflicts, with a view to designing strategies
for their resolution. The short-, medium- and long-term
consequences of conflicts require a holistic approach that
includes the full range of humanitarian and development
assistance.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that
post-conflict peace-building must involve coordinated and
integrated activities that address the root causes of violence,
with a View to laying the foundations for a lasting peace.
This comprehensive approach, which links peace, security,
good governance, respect for human rights and sustainable
development, represents a major paradigm shift in the
activities of the United Nations. This innovation is quite
unique. Nigeria firmly supports all United Nations efforts
to strengthen its conflict-prevention and crisis-management
capacity, and has always welcomed the initiatives of the
Secretary-General in this field. My delegation believes that
development is a prerequisite for creating a stable, secure
and prosperous society.

As a long-term conflict-prevention strategy,
post-conflict peace-building must be vigorously promoted,
bearing in mind the specific circumstances of each case.
Economic reconstruction, the rehabilitation of basic health
and education facilities, and the safety of lives and property
should help to ensure that the cessation of violence is real;
these elements will contribute to the consolidation of peace,
which is a prerequisite for sustainable growth and
development.

Peace and prosperity are mutually reinforcing. The
participation of donor Governments, non-govemmental
organizations and host Governments in this process has
been critical to the successes witnessed in many regions,
especially in the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) subregion.

In Sierra Leone and Liberia, the United Nations and
the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) are deeply
involved in post-conflict peace-building activities. They
monitor human rights violations and help the
Governments to implement their disarmament and
demobilization tasks. This kind of cooperation between
the Security Council and a regional organization, already
envisaged in the Charter, deserves recognition and
support.

Finally, my delegation hereby requests the Security
Council not to relent in its efforts to provide ECOMOG
with the logistic, financial and technical assistance that it
sorely requires to execute its mandate in our subregion. In
this regard, I wish to draw the Council's attention to
relevant presidential statements and to resolution 1216
(1998), adopted only two days ago, on the implementation
of the Abuja Accord with regard to the crisis in
Guinea-Bissau, signed by President Joao Bernardo Vieira
and the Commander of the Self-Proclaimed Military
Junta, General Ansumane Mane.

Although the ceasefire is holding, the situation is
tense and could erupt at any time. Rapid deployment of
ECOMOG interposition forces is critical to the restoration
and consolidation of peace in that country. However,
ECOWAS member States lack the means to do this. This
explains the appeal to the international community to
enable ECOMOG to undertake an operation of that
magnitude. Although it is an internal crisis, it has the
potential to threaten the peace and security of the
ECOWAS subregion. Timely response to this request,
therefore, will help nip this incipient crisis in the bud. We
are more aware today of the risks associated with
dispatching operations with inadequate resources. We
have also learned that inaction in the face of a threat to
international peace and security anywhere in the world is
unacceptable.

