Mr. Yankey (Ghana): I wish to commend the
delegation of Mexico for organizing this open debate
on children and armed conflict during your presidency,
Sir. I welcome the opportunity to participate in this
meeting.
Ghana will continue to support the Security
Council's efforts to protect children in situations of
armed conflict, be they combatants or displaced,
orphans or victims of sexual violence. We believe that
the dehumanization and brutalization of such children
do not augur well for the long-term stability and
advancement of society in general. In this connection,
we are grateful to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their
statements this morning. We applaud them for their
determined efforts to achieve the objectives outlined in
resolution 1612 (2005).

To Ms. Grace Akallo, we wish to express our
admiration for her courage. Her dramatic personal
testimony put a human face on a tragedy that often
seems remote, but is in fact closer to us in many ways
that might not be apparent. We also extend a hand of
solidarity to countless other unlucky child victims who
are caught up in the whirlwinds of violence and
destabilization all over the world, and particularly in
Africa.

Ghana welcomes the substantial progress that has
been made in developing strategies and mechanisms to
curb the abuse and exploitation of children in conflict
situations. The monitoring and reporting mechanisms
that are now in place have facilitated the exposure of
grave violations of the rights of children in those
unfortunate circumstances. We trust that the Security
Council will respond appropriately.

Despite the substantial gains that have been
reported, formidable problems persist. The recruitment,
abuse, torture and exploitation of children are still
commonplace among armed groups. We strongly
condemn the perpetration of widespread and systematic
rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children, which have become the ugly characteristics of
several ongoing conflicts. The rampant impunity with
which these crimes are committed has emboldened the
perpetrators to defy the authority of the Security
Council and the will of the international community.
Consequently, Ghana endorses the call by the
Secretary-General for the expansion of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism trigger to include rape and
other grave forms of sexual violence.

As we consider the next constructive steps
forward, we wish to highlight, among others, the
following points.

There is a need for increased focus on prevention
to ensure that children are protected against current and
future recruitment and exploitation as soldiers. We call
for legal safeguards to prohibit children under the age
of 18 from being deployed in armed conflict. The root
causes of recruitment invariably lie in poor governance
and its effects, including human rights abuses, which
create a fertile ground for child recruitment. Related to
this are the cultural and economic factors that
encourage child recruitment.

The demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers remains a significant challenge, especially
where gainful employment is not easily available. This
brings to the fore the issue of development, especially
in the health and education sectors. Comprehensive
donor support for the demobilization efforts of affected
Governments is thus imperative, if the incidence of the
recycling of child soldiers within conflict areas is to be
curbed. Existing international instruments, including
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, contain
much of what is required to offer adequate protection
to children. Those instruments need to be
supplemented with vigorous implementation of
existing mandates.

In conclusion, further efforts and better
coordinated actions are needed to advance this process,
which started a decade ago, to eliminate the
recruitment and exploitation of child soldiers. Such
efforts must take into account new and appalling
trends, including such atrocities as the killing and
maiming of children, rape and other forms of grave
sexual violence, abductions, attacks against schools or
hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access to
children.

