Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start, Mr. President, by extending to you my
appreciation for having convened this meeting. This
initiative is extremely important in the light of the
pivotal role played by the African Union as far as
peace and security on the African continent is
concerned. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his very important introductory comments
and the report he submitted for our consideration today
(S/2010/514). Of course, I would like to thank
Mr. Lamamra for his important statement.

I would like to associate myself with my
colleagues in welcoming His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.

The Security Council, as part of its responsibility
for maintaining peace and security, depends on close
knowledge of the region and the background of its
conflicts, as well as possessing the necessary tools to
resolve its problems. It is clear that regional
organizations possess these capacities, and that there is
a need therefore to strengthen the role of those
organizations.

The authors of the Charter of the United Nations
devoted a whole chapter, Chapter VIII, to regional
organizations, thereby enshrining their complementary
role to that of the United Nations in this field. That is
why it is important that, to achieve peace and security,
there be cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union and that their specific qualities be
beneficial to each other.

The African Union plays a primary role: in the
pre-conflict period, through preventive diplomacy;
during conflicts, through efforts to contain and mitigate
the impact of a conflict; and in the post-conflict period,
by contributing to peacebuilding.

Having considered the Secretary-General's
report, we should like to focus on the following points.

With respect to the strategic relationship between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations,
successful collective action depends on a successful
and effective strategic partnership between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council. We
therefore welcome the annual consultative meetings
between the two Councils, which have thus far focused
on the best ways to enhance the capacity-building of
the AU and to finance its missions in the fields of
peace and security, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. The success of this partnership strategy
will depend to a great extent on close cooperation
between the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission.

In this regard, we welcome the establishment of
the United Nations Office to the African Union on
1 July. The Office pools and combines the mandates of
many agencies and support mechanisms for
peacekeeping operations in Africa, including Somalia
and the Sudan, and represents an additional framework
for joint action to prevent conflicts and promote
disarmament and elections. We also welcome the
creation of the Joint Task Force on Peace and Security
last month. The implementation of the partnership
strategy is reflected in support for the African peace
and security architecture. I would stress the importance
in that regard of the AU 10-year capacity-building
programme and the multi-year initiatives referred to by
the Secretary-General, as well as joint action within the
country framework.
With regard to peacekeeping, the deployment by
the African Union of peacekeeping operations
authorized and sanctioned by the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security is
most important. We therefore urge the United Nations
to increase its assistance to the African Union in the
deployment of and support to its peacekeeping
operations, including by enhancing the African standby
force and current operations in Somalia and the Sudan.
In that context, we await the outcome of the evaluation
of the African standby force, known as Amani Africa,
which should be issued this month.

Similarly, we welcome the joint work of the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission in establishing a series of basic guidelines
for the AU in the protection of civilians, as well as the
support of the United Nations for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the strengthening
of its capacities in the protection of civilians. We
anticipate greater future support through a long-term
capacity-building road map enabling the partners to
provide enhanced assistance to the African Union.

Finally, with regard to the United Nations
contribution to the success of the African Union's
peacekeeping operations, such success will depend
largely on the provision of adequate resources for these
operations. However, securing sustainable, predictable
and flexible financing, pursuant to resolution 1809
(2008), represents a major challenge. AU peacekeeping
operations should not be financed by voluntary
contributions, which, while we appreciate them, do not
guarantee the sustainability of operations. When it
deploys peacekeeping operations, the African Union
acts on behalf and relies on the support of the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The African Union's request for the consideration
of using assessed contributions to finance its
operations in specific cases is therefore eminently
justified. In this regard, we recall the Secretary-
General's statement that the logistics support package
for AMISOM. would greatly improve the living
conditions of its personnel, as was reaffirmed by the
AMISOM. Force Commander in yesterday's debate (see S/PV.6408).

