Ms. Fogh (Sweden): Sweden fully aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by Italy on behalf of
the European Union.

Let me first of all thank you, Mr. President, and
the United Kingdom for bringing matters of justice and
the rule of law to the fore. The principle of the rule of
law is at the very heart of the United Nations, whose
Charter preamble specifically mentions justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law. All Members of the
United Nations have an obligation to respect and
ensure respect for the rule of law in international
relations.

While the need to address rule-of-law issues in
the aftermath of conflict is commonly accepted, it is a
special challenge to identify and address causes of
conflict at an early stage. Deficiencies in the rule of
law inhibit efforts to prevent armed conflict. Among
the common root causes of conflict are the lack of
independent judiciaries; illegal activities by and lack of
civilian control of armed and security forces;
corruption; organized crime; and impunity. Increased
attention must be given in time to these threats to
peace.

Full use should be made of information and
analyses on such issues from the United Nations human
rights mechanisms and bodies. This information should
be brought to the attention of the Council and lead to
concerted action to remedy such threats to human
rights and peace. Such action must be coordinated
among United Nations agencies, Member States and
other relevant actors.

The late High Commissioner for Human Rights
understood those links well. When Mr. Vieira de Mello
pledged, in the Third Committee last fall, to make the
principle of the rule of law the centrepiece of his
approach as High Commissioner, he said:

"A comprehensive strategy to establish global
security must be grounded in promoting respect
for human rights through upholding the primacy
of the rule of law, fostering social justice and
enhancing democracy".

Mr. Vieira de Mello went on to underline that
efforts to counter terrorism must enhance, rather than
undercut, the rule of law. He also urged us to resolve to
commit in a more serious way to prevention, rather
than picking up the pieces afterwards.

In the context of conflict prevention, we welcome
the increased use by States of the International Court of
Justice, which is the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations and a central institution in solving
inter-State conflicts at an early stage.

As already mentioned by Italy, on behalf of the
European Union, international courts and tribunals
have an important role to play in ensuring the rule of
law at the international level. The newly established
permanent International Criminal Court has endowed
the international community with an optimal tool for
combating impunity, even when States fail to act
domestically. The Security Council can have an
important part to play in triggering the jurisdiction of
the Court by referring situations to it under article 13
of the Rome Statute. Sweden believes that, as evidence
of the universal norms underpinning the very essence
of the rule of law, there should be no obstacle for the
Rome Statute's eventually achieving universal
application.

I would also like to stress the importance of the
work carried out in the justice and rule-of-law area by a
wide variety of non-State actors, such as non-
governmental organizations. They should receive our
full support, both in terms of finance and of know-how.

The rule of law must be distinguished from rule
by law. Institution-building and the legal infrastructure
are important, but not enough by themselves. The legal
system must be just and must be perceived as just by
the population. The legal system must build upon
international human rights norms and standards. Law
enforcement agencies, judges and lawyers must be
trained to understand and apply human rights.
Corruption and impunity must be fought. This applies
not only in post-conflict situations. By upholding just
legal systems that enjoy the trust of the population, we
can also eliminate many causes of conflict in our
societies. Justice, the rule of law and human rights go
hand in hand in peaceful societies.

