Mr. Graf zu Rantzau (Germany): The representative
of France, in his capacity as representative of the
presidency of the European Union, will express the concern
of the European Union about the difficulties the Middle
East peace process is currently encountering. We fully
subscribe to his statement. Like our European partners, we
too attach utmost importance to the necessity of
re-establishing the momentum of the peace process.

It is obvious that the peace process cannot be
interrupted for too long without the risk of its being
harmed. Both sides have to understand the other's concerns
and fears. For the Israeli side, the increase in terrorist
attacks on its citizens and the resulting security concerns
are of paramount importance. For the Palestinian side,
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied territories are
one of the major obstacles to the peace process.

The German Government condemns the brutal and
indiscriminate acts of terrorism against Israeli citizens. We
fully understand that these attacks raise serious and
legitimate questions of security. They must be addressed by
the Palestinian Authority. Recent steps taken by the
Authority indicate its increasing understanding of how
important it is to make every effort possible in the attempt
to stem such terrorist attacks. The enemies of the peace
process must not be allowed to succeed in their efforts to
derail the process by violent acts.

At the same time, we are concerned at seeing a
growing feeling of disenchantment within the Palestinian
population. People are disappointed at how little their living
conditions have improved as a result of the peace process.
The repeated closures of the territories have in fact
contributed to a deterioration in the economic situations of
many Palestinian families. Moreover, the confirmation of
Israeli settlement activities in the occupied territories is a
major concern for many Palestinians.

Germany and its European partners have declared, on
numerous occasions - most recently through the statement
of the European Union of 5 January 1995 - that a
cessation of settlement activities is vital to the smooth
functioning of the peace process.

In View of these worrisome developments, it is
encouraging that both parties remain committed to the
peace process. There is no credible alternative.

 

We call upon Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
redouble their efforts to reach agreement on the most
important and pressing issues of security, redeployment of
Israeli troops, elections, settlements and the question of
the transfer of authority to the Palestinians. The bilateral
negotiations are the appropriate channel for solving these
urgent questions.

Germany, together with its partners in the European
Union, remains committed to supporting the peace
process fully.

