Mr. Yamamoto: One year ago, the people of
Afghanistan celebrated an unprecedented three-day
Eid ceasefire across the country. Those moments of
peaceful celebration gave them a glimpse of a life
without conflict and allowed them to direct their
gaze towards a more peaceful future. But the ensuing
12 months have also shown how arduous the path to
peace is.

Unfortunately, the Bid ceasefire was not replicated
this year. Yet the foundations laid over the last year
have not been lost. Six weeks ago, thousands gathered
to exchange ideas on peace at the consultative peace
jirga. Grass-roots movements continued to march for
peace. But before I speak further about this progress,
allow me to first update the Council on preparations for
the presidential election.

The presidential elections scheduled for
28 September will be a key moment to reaffirm the
legitimacy of Afghanistan's democratic political
structure. Afghan citizens have displayed an enduring
commitment to choosing their political leaders
through elections in the face of threats and adverse
security conditions. The electoral management bodies,
State institutions, political leaders, candidates and
international partners owe it to them to deliver credible
and timely elections and to accept the outcome of
this process.

The decision of the Independent Election
Commission to prioritize the holding of the presidential
elections on 28 September gave much-needed clarity
to the electoral calendar. However, timelines remain
very tight. Significant operational and technical
challenges need to be overcome in order to deliver
credible elections as scheduled. The Commission has
made important progress in the past few weeks: the
operational plan and the budget were finalized, and
top-up voter registration started across the country in
addition to full voter registration in Ghazni province.
However, after last year's highly controversial
parliamentary elections and the subsequent dismissals
of all electoral commissioners, the most daunting
task for the new electoral management bodies is
regaining public confidence. The Commission needs
to demonstrate that it can address the problems that
marred the parliamentary elections and integrate the
lessons learned into preparations for the upcoming
vote. These preparations must include improved
procedures for publishing voter lists in good time,
the training of electoral staff, more robust outreach
and voter sensitization, and the timely rollout of
electoral technology.

The United Nations is working with the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission on all aspects ofthe electoral preparations,
with more than 170 national and international staff. This
includes four international non-voting commissioners,
two for the Independent Election Commission and two
for the Electoral Complaints Commission, who directly
support the Commissions in their task.

The political stakes are high, and the competition
is intense. It is the responsibility of all political actors,
including presidential candidates, and of security and
Government agencies to ensure that the elections are
contested on a level playing field. Iremind all candidates,
and their supporters, of the code of conduct they signed
when submitting their nomination papers. I also urge
all actors to exercise restraint, to show respect for State
institutions, most importantly for the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission, and to refrain from taking any action that
could give any candidate an undue advantage.

As my predecessors in this forum have stressed
ahead of previous elections, all candidates must have
equal access to State resources. Similarly, Government
officials must respect the principle of non-interference
and refrain from using their position or resources to
support a particular candidate. This vital political
groundwork needs to be laid now in order to ensure
that the vote will be credible and the outcome accepted.
Afghanistan cannot afford a contentious and protracted
post-election crisis that could result in a presidency
with brittle domestic legitimacy. This would also
harm the new President's ability to bring the Afghan
people together in a meaningful and representative
peace process.

Today the minds of the Afghan people and their
international partners are more focused than ever on the
need to reach a negotiated settlement. This momentum
must not be lost. Direct talks between the United States
and the Taliban continue, with broad international
support. Afghanistan and some of its international
partners, in particular Germany and Qatar, are
preparing for an intra-Afghan dialogue, which would
bring together the voices of people representing a wide
spectrum of society. Some prominent Afghan actors
have already had the opportunity to exchange views
with Taliban representatives in Moscow in late May. All
these efforts need to be directed towards one common
objective: to start formal negotiations between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban to reach a
peace agreement.

I am encouraged by signs ofincreasing consultations
between the countries leading these initiatives in
support ofa political settlement. The common message
to the Taliban is clear: come to the table and negotiate

directly with the Afghan Government. I call upon all
those countries with direct contacts with, or influence
over, the Taliban to intensify their efforts towards
that goal. But, ultimately, there is no substitute for the
Afghan people taking ownership and advancing their
inclusive dialogue towards a peace process. Government
and political leaders must foster consensus and create
structured arrangements to effectively represent the
interests of all Afghan people in their engagement with
the Taliban. Preparations for the presidential elections
should not distract from that necessary work.

The pursuit of peace is at the forefront of the
work of the United Nations in Afghanistan. We work
on a broad spectrum of initiatives to help create the
conditions for peace, ranging from support to Afghan
grass-roots organizations and dialogue with all parties
concerned, including the Taliban, to convening
discussions on behalf of the international community.
As we know from experience, even if an overall peace
agreement is reached, implementation can be derailed
by unaddressed local conflicts that have the potential
to escalate. UNAMA has been working with local
communities to support and strengthen their own
mediation mechanisms so that they themselves can
resolve their conflicts. As just one example, a 50-year-
long dispute over water resources between two tribes
in Nangarhar was resolved through local mediation
supported by UNAMA. Women played an important role
in building bridges across the communities. Initiatives
such as these are a vital counterpart to global and
regional efforts, where the United Nations comparative
advantage of impartiality is of particular relevance.

Only an inclusive peace process involving all those
affected by the conflict- including women, youth,
victims and business and religious leaders-can lead to
sustainable peace. Afghan society will need to confront
many difficult questions in a peace process, and much is
at stake, such as the preservation of gains over the past
18 years; the role ofwomen; questions of accountability;
and how to reintegrate those who carried arms. The
United Nations stands ready to support Afghans as
they tackle those fundamental issues that run through
the very fabric of society. The United Nations is also
committed to giving priority to progress in the areas
of women and peace and security, which are very
important. We know from experience that this is the
best and the only way to secure a sustainable peace
agreement, and much needs to be done in that regard.
Afghanistan's people have the most to win from
an end to the conflict. But they are also the ones who
continue to lose most. Afghan civilians lose their
lives, children are kept from classrooms and people
are deprived from fulfilling their economic potential.
In the first quarter of this year alone, almost 1,800
Afghan civilians were killed or injured - less than in
previous quarters, but still far too many. I should like
to point out here the egregiousness of anti-Government
elements deliberately targeting civilians. It is a war
crime and must stop. I am also concerned about
increasing harm to civilians from search operations, as
well as related human-rights abuses. I reiterate the need
for more transparency and accountability surrounding
such operations.

The impact ofthe conflict on children is particularly
alarming. Attacks on schools almost tripled between
2017 and 2018. Additional schools were closed due
to insecurity, leaving almost half a million children
unable to exercise their right to education. Schools used
as voter registration sites and polling centres will be at
enhanced risk in the upcoming electoral period. I urge
all anti-Government elements to ensure that schools
and health facilities used during the election remain
protected from attacks, and the parties to the conflict
to take the necessary measures to reduce the impact of
the conflict on children and education.

We cannot forget that 80 per cent of the country's
people live on less than $1.25 per day and in extremely
precarious conditions marked by climate change and
war. The impact of last year's drought is still felt today,
with up to 10 million people food insecure. Internal
displacement remains high, with the single-largest
cause this year being the fighting between the Taliban
and the Islamic State-Khorasan Province. I am grateful
to all donors who have already generously contributed
funding for humanitarian programming this year.
However, the response remains underfunded at 23 per
cent, and I would ask again for the Council's support to
boost funding.

Afghanistan has vast economic potential, yet it
remains untapped because of the conflict. The State
has made progress in anti-corruption and public-sector
reforms. Development partners have started to look
beyond immediate needs and are exploring modalities
for development assistance in a post-settlement
context. But that important work can bear fruit only
if a settlement is achieved. The road to peace is still
long, but with our united support for Afghanistan's
full ownership of the peace process, I am cautiously
optimistic that we are moving in the right direction.
