Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, we would like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing on recent developments
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We also thank
Ms. Hary for her briefing. We reiterate our full support
to Mr. Mladenov for his efforts to calm the situation
and prevent clashes, particularly in the light of the
Israel's recent provocations, shelling and strikes against
the Gaza Strip. We firmly condemn those strikes,
which have killed and wounded dozens of innocent
Palestinians. We commend Egypt's efforts to facilitate
a ceasefire and to stop Israeli attacks on Palestinian
civilians and infrastructure.

In the Fourth Committee last Friday, 170 Member
States voted to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the

Near East (UNRWA) for an additional three years. The
international community thereby sent a clear and firm
message that underscores the importance of UNRWA's
role and the essential services it provides to about
5.5 million Palestinian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon,
Syria and the occupied Palestinian territory, and this
despite concerted efforts to change the firm position
that UNRWA has maintained since it was established in
1949 under General Assembly resolution 302 (IV). My
country is proud to be one of UNRWA's main partners.
In the past five years alone we have voluntarily
contributed $118 million to its support.

Accordingly, we believe that the Palestinian
refugee issue is the essence of the Palestinian
question. That is why we in the Security Council
have a special responsibility to uphold the inalienable
right of generations of Palestinian refugees and their
descendants to return to the homes from which they
were displaced, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy and General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948 in particular. As
the occupying Power, Israel is legally, politically and
morally responsible for creating the problem of the
Palestinian refugees and perpetuating it. We reject any
attempts by any party to nullify Palestinian refugees'
right of return or to distort the refugee issue by
attempting to resettle them, dismantle UNRWA, stop
its funding or deprive their future generations of their
right of return through a so-called redefinition of their
legal status.

We also call for granting Palestinians a dignified
standard of living and freedom of movement, while
maintaining their refugee status until they can exercise
their right to return and compensation. While we
thank former UNRWA Commissioner-General Pierre
Krahenbiihl for his efforts during his tenure, we
commend the steadfast Palestinian people, who have
demonstrated resilience on their land. We reiterate our
full support to their legitimate right to resist the Israeli
occupation by defending their holy places and land and
theirinalienablerightsinthe face ofIsrael's attacks aimed
at strengthening their occupation and undermining
any opportunity for true peace, as well as its arbitrary
arrest campaigns, its demolition and confiscation of
buildings, its continuing blockade of the Gaza Strip, its
attacks on Muslim and Christian holy sites, the attempts
aimed at changing Jerusalem's historic status and its
demographic composition, the excessive construction
of new settlements and expansion of existing ones
and the forced displacement of Palestinian refugees,
all of which are gross violations of international law
and international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
reiterate our rejection of any attempts to legitimize
Israel's illegitimate expansionist settlement policy
in all of its manifestations throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. As we
said, it is a flagrant violation of international law and of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016). It is an obstacle to peace. We
want to reiterate that Israeli settlements are an activity
that is null and void and cannot in any way constitute an
acceptable fait accompli.

In conclusion, as I said at the beginning of my
statement, the strong message sent by most Member
States and their unwavering position in support of
the Palestinian people and their right to exercise their
inalienable rights reflects the special importance that the
Palestinian question has for millions all over the world.
And as we saw and heard from most of the Heads of
State and Government in the Assembly's recent general
debate, the world has echoed the key importance of the
question of Palestine and of ensuring that a lasting,
just and comprehensive resolution of it is based on a
two-State solution. The Arab-Israeli conflict should be
resolved according to the resolutions of international
legitimacy and international law and the Arab Peace
Initiative, with all its elements, which calls for Israel to
fully end its occupation of all the Arab territories it has
occupied since June 1967, including East Jerusalem,
before a comprehensive peace with Israel and the
normalization of relations can be achieved.

