Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I wish to thank the United States, which is presiding
over the Council for the month of April, for having
taken the initiative to organize this important meeting
on the review of peacekeeping operations, a subject of
great importance to my country.

The Council has entrusted us with the chairmanship
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
More importantly, Senegal has been involved in
peacekeeping operations since it became independent
in 1960, when it deployed a military contingent
in the Congo. Today, the Senegalese security and
defence forces are deployed in eight United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Given their importance, I
will enumerate them. There is the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'lvoire - which is now
concluded - and the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau. Overall 3,638 people,
including 97 women, are deployed.

Senegalese army officers hold the following
posts: Force Commander of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, Deputy Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, Deputy Force
Commander of the police component of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
Chief of Staff of the Office of Military Affairs in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations here at the
Secretariat in New York. That places my country fifth
among troop- and police-contributing countries and
first among police-contributing countries.

My country is not committed to United Nations
peace operations alone. Senegal currently fields a
company size combat force, a level two rural hospital in
Guinea-Bissau and a unit of 250-strong in the Gambia,
under the auspices of the Economic Community of
West African States.

I mention those details to highlight the importance
of today's meeting to us. United Nations peacekeeping
operations continue to face political, security,
strategic, operational and financial challenges in
ensuring effective peacekeeping in an ever-changing
environment. Such missions are often called upon to
protect civilian populations in very complex situations,
with limited, and, at times, inadequate resources and
operational capacity. They are increasingly deployed
in complex environments that are hostile and pose a
threat to their own security, not to mention, at times,
misunderstandings that emerge during coordination
efforts with host countries and local partners.

In addition, it must be acknowledged that there
is now a genuine need to adapt peace operations to
each area's unique challenges because each operation
involves risk. We discussed the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) earlier today (see S/PV.7917).
Despite the signature of a peace agreement between the
Government and the main armed groups, MINUSMA
operates in a difficult environment, characterized by
attacks that target United Nations personnel and civilian
populations and infrastructure. Despite the adoption
of a revised strategic concept, in line with resolution
2285 (2016), several needs remain unmet and it is
still difficult for MINUSMA to marshal the resources
necessary, in particular independent logistical support
and important materials.

It is therefore important to provide United Nations
missions with the capacity and resources necessary to
enable them to effectively discharge their mandates, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians. It
would be even better to ensure that their mandates are
feasible and appropriate to the situation on the ground.
That is why my country convened a high-level debate
here in the Council in November 2016 (see S/PV.7802),
during its presidency of the Security Council. The aim
of that meeting was to put greater emphasis on the
assymetric threats that peace operations face. When
designing mandates, we need in-depth analysis that
is as objective and as comprehensive as possible. That
entails conducting an earnest and clear assessment of
human resource, financial and logistical requirements
prior to the deployment of missions.

When clear, realistic and feasible mandates exist,
with the political support required, peace operations
are some of the Organization's most flexible and
appropriate tools for meeting the challenges in
maintaining international peace and security. Today,
however, peace operations encounter major difficulties
and restrictions that prevent them from fully carrying
out their mandates, such as conflict or the hostility
they face in many areas. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, MONUSCO and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan are but a few
examples that illustrate the importance of the political
dimension in allowing peace operations to effectively
carry out their mandates.

In a country such as South Sudan, in which a viable
political process is emerging, there is a vast and urgent
need for protection. A political, interdependent effort is
therefore imperative to enable missions to successfully
discharge their duties, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians. Similarly, above and beyond
receiving the consent of host States, we must also seek
to secure their cooperation because it is the best way to
overcome some of the challenges. In addition, missions
must make every effort to establish and maintain trust
with host States and populations.

The issue of accepting risk when peacekeepers are
deployed in conflict situations in which civilians are the
targets of direct attacks must be analysed objectively
to prevent the credibility of missions from being
undermined by their lack of action in such circumstances.
In addition, a viable political strategy must underpin
the work of United Nations missions. Reviews must be
conducted, such as those commissioned by the United
Nations in 2015 on peace operations, peacebuilding and
the women and peace and security agenda. There is no
doubt that peace operations, as political tools, could
assist in advancing the fundamental goals of conflict
prevention, mediation, the protection of civilians and
peacekeeping. Without a political settlement that leads
to the presence of a legitimate Government in a State
willing and able to ensure the safety of its population,
essential duties, such as the protection of those
populations, cannot be properly guaranteed.

It is also true that Blue Helmets could assist in
establishing and supporting a political process to
protect civilians by helping national stakeholders
to fulfil their obligations. The Blue Helmets
cannot replace them, however. Because its primary
responsibility is the maintenance of international peace
ans security, the Security Council has a central role
to play in making peace operations more suitable for
their respective environments and contexts. An early
political commitment from the Security Council prior
to deployment and for the duration of missions is vital.

In our view, it would be wise to underscore the
importance of inclusive national reconciliation that is
tied to the twin process of security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and social reintegration
in order to draw up a new social contract that is
informed by the trust of civilian populations and the
professionalism of security and defence forces. Such
efforts are geared towards preventing the resurgence of
conflict. Together with the African Union, the Security
Council must continue discussions on predictable
and lasting funding of African Union peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with resolution 2320 (2016),
adopted in November 2016 during the Senegal's
presidency of the Council. Senegal reiterates that it has
been committed since 1960 to maintaining international
peace and security.

In conclusion, I would say that we must continue
the much needed process of reforming peacekeeping
operations. I would even say that we must accelerate the
process, in order to make it more suitable for meeting
present and future needs and challenges. In that regard,
the recommendations put forward by eminent persons
in the various reports, as well as those adopted by
the General Assembly, contain ambitious measures
in key areas, such as the modernization of troop
equipment, the training of personnel and increased
financial support for peace operations. The effective
implementation of such recommendations would
enable peacekeeping operations to enter a new phase
in successfully carrying out their missions, thanks to
ongoing dialogue, including on mandate design and
continuity, among the various stakeholders, such as the
troop-contributing countries, the Security Council, the
Secretariat and host countries.

