The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/1300, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its resolutions
1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999 and 1296
(2000) of 19 April 2000 on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, as well as the
statements by its President of 12 February 1999
(S/PRST/1999/6) and of 15 March 2002
(S/PRST/2002/6); welcomes the third report by
the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2002/1300); and
reaffirms the need to keep the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as an important item
on the Council's agenda.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
all attacks and acts of violence directed against
civilians or other protected persons under
international law, including international
humanitarian law, in situations of armed conflict;
and reaffirms its concern at the hardships borne
by civilians in conflict situations, and the need
for parties to ensure the safety, security and
freedom of movement of United Nations and
associated personnel, as well as personnel of
international humanitarian organizations. The
Council recognizes that secure humanitarian

access, a clear separation of civilians and
combatants and the swift re-establishment of the
rule of law, justice and reconciliation are essential
for an effective transition from conflict to peace.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
to armed conflict to comply fully with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and with the rules and principles of international
law, in particular international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law, and to implement
fully the relevant decisions of the Security
Council. The Security Council recalls the
obligations of States to respect and to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law,
including the four Geneva Conventions, and
emphasizes their responsibility to end impunity
and to prosecute those responsible for genocide,
crimes against humanity and serious violations of
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of the aide-memoire adopted by the
Council on 15 March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/6), as a
practical tool that provides a basis for improved
analysis and diagnosis of key protection issues
during deliberations on peacekeeping mandates,
and stresses the need to implement the
approaches set out therein on a more regular and
consistent basis, taking into account the particular
circumstances of each conflict situation. The
Council agrees to continue to review current
mandates and resolutions, as appropriate, taking
into consideration the aide-memoire, and
expresses its willingness to update it annually to
reflect emerging trends in the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

"The Security Council notes that a number
of obstacles undermine efforts to secure access of
humanitarian and United Nations agencies to
persons in need, including attacks on
humanitarian personnel, denial of access by
authorities and a lack of structured engagement
with non-State actors. In that respect, the Security
Council recognizes the importance of the
comprehensive framework agreements based on
agreed standards and mechanisms to improve
access, and encourages the ongoing work by
United Nations agencies to prepare a manual of
field practices of negotiations with armed groups

to better assist coordination and to facilitate more
effective negotiations.

"The Security Council is mindful of the
particular vulnerability of refugees and internally
displaced persons, and reaffirms the primary
responsibility of States to ensure their protection,
in particular by maintaining the security and
civilian character of camps of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The Council
underscores the rights of all refugees under
international law, including international
humanitarian law and refugee law. The Security
Council notes that United Nations
multidisciplinary assessment teams, with the
consent of the host States, could assist and
support States in the separation of combatants
and civilians. The Council, moreover, recognizes
the needs of civilians under foreign occupation
and stresses further, in this regard, the
responsibilities of the occupying Power.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
emerging issues raised in the Secretary-General's
report that could seriously affect the capacity of
Member States to protect civilians. Regarding
gender-based violence, including sexual
exploitation, abuse and trafficking of women and
girls, the Council encourages States, in particular
troop-contributing countries, to use the six core
principles developed by the United Nations and
other humanitarian partners to prevent and
remedy situations of sexual abuse and
exploitation when their nationals are involved in
such cases. The Security Council, further,
condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, however and by whomever
committed.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of a comprehensive, coherent and
action-oriented approach to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. It encourages further
cooperation among Member States, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the United Nations Development
Programme and other relevant United Nations
agencies and offices, bearing also in mind the
contents of resolution 1325 (2000), on women,
peace and security, and resolution 1379 (2001),
on children in armed conflict; welcomes the
regional workshops; and encourages Member
the

States to give them their operational and financial
support. The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit by June 2004 his
next report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including information on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
previously adopted on this subject and any other
matter he wishes to bring to the attention of the
Council. It also welcomes the oral briefings to be
given to the Council every six months, including
progress made to further develop the roadmap
concept, as set out in the most recent report by
the Secretary-General (S/2002/1300)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/41.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.
