Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): We fully endorse the
comments of the Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of
the non-aligned countries, and we do not intend to repeat
all that he has ably contributed. We will simply amplify
some of the points he has made and place emphasis where
we think it is necessary, particularly on those issues that
affect my own country and Africa.

The report of the Secretary-General, "Supplement to
an Agenda for Peace", could not have been more timely.
The euphoria that led to the convocation of the first
Security Council meeting at the level of Heads of State and
Government, following the collapse of the Berlin Wall and
all that it represented, has long evaporated. There was great
optimism in the air at the time about the onset of the "new
world order", characterized by the perceived central role the
United Nations was to play in post-cold-war international
affairs, as had been envisaged by its founding fathers.

The hopes and aspirations of the leaders who met in
New York on 31 January 1992 have mostly been dashed -
or, rather, the vision they had for the future of mankind
after the fall of communism remains an elusive dream. It is
in the context of this background of dashed hopes that we
find the "Supplement to an Agenda for Peace" most timely.
It affords us an opportunity to reflect on the experiences of
the past years, to analyse what could have gone wrong with
our vision of the post-cold-war era and to look to the future
with new foresight, wisdom and renewed hopes of a world
free of war. The report of the Secretary-General is rich in
its analysis of the current situation and the prospects for the
future, and it should form the basis for an informed debate
here today and in the General Assembly later this year.

We have witnessed a democratization process that has
extended from the northern hemisphere to the southern
hemisphere since the end of the cold war. In some cases,
the democratization process has been smooth, while in
others it has been accompanied by bloodshed and mayhem,
creating serious challenges for the system of collective
security under the auspices of the United Nations. The
blue helmets, in greater numbers than ever before, have
been dispatched to help keep the peace. Yes, there have
been successes, and there have been failures. In some
cases, serious mistakes have been made, and it is
important to learn from them.

The Secretary-General has gone to great lengths to
emphasize the importance of greater international
cooperation to overcome these great challenges facing
humanity. I shall give examples of some serious mistakes
that have been made. One issue of deep concern to my
Government is the current creeping tendency to reduce or
withdraw United Nations forces from seemingly
intractable conflicts, particularly in Africa, before peace
can be attained. We are certainly not unmindful of the
enormous cost involved in the maintenance of peace-
keeping operations all over the world, nor are we
oblivious to the impatience and frustrations which are
often engendered by long, drawn-out peace-keeping
operations. Nevertheless, I wish to pose the following
questions for consideration by the Council: is it not such
impatience and frustration with slow-moving peace trains
that send wrong signals to those intransigent parties that
wish to see the United Nations fail, and to those who are
quick to condemn the United Nations for its
shortcomings? Are we not discouraging troop-contributing
countries, like my own, from participating in future
peace-keeping operations by the premature withdrawal of
troops before they accomplish their mandates?

Let me illustrate what I mean by this. We believe
the reduction of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UN AVEM. II), when more personnel would have
been needed to deal with the resumption of hostilities that
followed the election in Angola, was ill advised. The
same applies with equal validity to the reduction of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL).
In the tragic case of Rwanda, as we all know, when all
hell broke loose every contingent except Ghana's
withdrew, and this was followed by the worst bloodshed
in Africa's recent memory. The United Nations is now
winding down its operation in Somalia. I am afraid that
not very long after 31 March there may come a time
when the conscience of the Security Council is so
troubled that the Council might be forced to send troops
back to Somalia, but too late to save the situation.

Peace is indivisible, and so should be our efforts for
its attainment. Every peace-keeping operation should be
given an equal opportunity to succeed. We need
persistence and perseverance. More importantly, we need

 

to approach issues in an even-handed manner. There is a
long list of positive results in places where the international
community has persisted and persevered, such as in the
Cambodias of this world, and even in Yugoslavia, where
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has
done much to bring under control a war which could have
inflamed the whole of the Balkans.

Regionally, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
is trying its best, given the paucity of its resources, to
respond to the many and varied crises that bedevil the
African continent. A permanent Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution has been
established, but it will remain a dead letter if the
international community does not play its part to ensure its
efficacy. There is a need for full implementation of Chapter
VIII of the Charter, and this is why we think the Secretary-
General's proposals on regional arrangements for conflict
resolution deserve close examination in order to give this
Chapter full effect.

Moreover, in his report the Secretary-General notes
that

"The United Nations system is also better equipped
than regional organizations or individual Member
States to develop and apply the comprehensive,
long-term approach needed to ensure the lasting
resolution of conflicts." (5/1995/1, para. 24)

This is particularly true of Africa. In most cases Africa has
the combination of political will and political commitment
to resolve its own conflicts. However, its ability to deliver
is hampered by a lack of the necessary financial and
logistical wherewithal to transform such political
commitment and will into realizable, durable political
solutions. African countries have demonstrated a
willingness to provide troops for peace-keeping operations
both in Africa and abroad, and we appeal to the
international community at large to play a role within the
context of Chapter VIII of the Charter to help manage
peace in Africa.

Preventive diplomacy and peacemaking are two of the
most inexpensive tools in the whole arena of conflict
prevention and resolution. We therefore support the
Secretary-General's efforts to bolster this aspect of United
Nations diplomacy. We are fully aware that sometimes
parties are reluctant to seek help from the United Nations
by way of the good offices of the Secretary-General, either
because they doubt the impartiality of the United Nations
or because one or both of the parties are not ready for
mediation. Obviously, this can make peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy more difficult. Therefore, the
United Nations should endeavour to create or cultivate the
ethos that would make it possible for it to be readily
called upon without misgivings to use its good offices.

One other important issue referred to in the
"Supplement to an Agenda for Peace" is the post-conflict
resolution stage. It is right for the Secretary-General to
bring up this point. Once a conflict has been resolved,
there is a need to cooperate with authorities in the
countries concerned to deal with problems of security,
while duly respecting their sovereignty. In this respect,
one important issue is the process of reintegrating former
combatants into civilian life. In a majority of cases these
former fighters, some of whom have been in the bush for
most of their lives, do not have any technical skills.
Hence, besides the unavailability of alternative
employment, they are not employable. They have to be
trained for conversion to civilian life.

With regard to disarmament, my delegation fully
agrees with the Secretary-General's submission on
"micro-disarmament". The destructive nature of small
arms and their destabilizing effect cannot be ignored.
Most of the conflicts afflicting the world today are fuelled
by the use of small arms because of the ease with which
such weapons proliferate, particularly in countries
bordering conflict areas. Even more alarming is the
monumental scourge of mines, tens of millions of which
are planted all over the world, resulting in senseless death
and the exploding population of amputees in those
countries where there has been endemic conflict.

We agree with the Secretary-General's report that, in
terms of Article 41 of the Charter, sanctions are meant as
instruments to change behaviour, not as punishment or
retribution. We also agree with the report that sanctions
have negative side effects, but we must also point out that
sanctions have so far been a peaceful and viable
alternative where peace enforcement, or any other means
to secure international peace and security, has been
untenable. We do not agree with those who say sanctions
do not work. History has now registered cases where
sanctions applied in conjunction with other means of
persuasion have helped resolve seemingly intractable
problems. We welcome the Secretary-General's
suggestion for the establishment of a mechanism that
would, inter alia, assess and monitor the application of
sanctions.

 

We fully concur with the views expressed in the report
on the question of command and control of United Nations
forces. More often than not, the authority of force
commanders is challenged by contingents that receive
orders from their national authorities, sometimes at very
critical stages of operations on the ground. Indeed, some
fatalities have resulted from this lack of coordinated
authority within the command structure. Botswana has
participated in a few United Nations peace-keeping
operations so far, and as a matter of practical experience we
have come to appreciate the seriousness of this problem.
What Governments have to understand is that by deciding
to contribute troops to United Nations missions they cede
the powers of command and control to the Secretary-
General. This is not to say that contingents should
completely sever all links with their capitals. Newly
established procedures of consultation between troop
contributors, the Security Council and the Office of the
Secretary-General have greatly enhanced the process of
communication, and it is only proper that Governments
present their suggestions in New York, and not in Somalia,
Rwanda, Bosnia or any other place.

I wish to conclude by paying homage to the Secretary-
General for his tireless reaffirmation of the crucial
interrelationship between peace and development.
Continuous support has to be given to social and economic
development because there can never be development if
there is no peace and there can be no sustainable peace
without development. In particular, in those countries where
the United Nations has intervened to bring about peace the
international community must spare no effort to ensure that
desperate post-conflict conditions in these countries do not
subject them to more war.

