Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time I take the floor before the
Security Council since the sudden passing away of our
compatriot and friend and Council members' colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire to the United Nations,
I would like to convey to members the gratitude of the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, and that of the people and the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire for the sincere solidarity extended to
our country by the Security Council, as well as for the
Council's tribute to the deceased and for all the tokens
of friendship that they continue to extend to his family
and to our country.

Allow me to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, the Republic of Peru, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April, and to thank you, Sir, forjoining me in this debate
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I would like to
thank those who spoke before me - the Secretary-
General, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union - for their contributions to the matter
at hand.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace is of great
concern to my country. We have embarked upon an
innovative and ambitious sustaining peace process,
namely, since the closure of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

The end ofthe post-election crisis, in 2011, heralded
a period of fragile peace in Cote d'Ivoire, and it was
urgent to bolster that peace in order to preclude any
relapse into violence and to definitively turn the page
on instability. The work and support of our development
partners, as well as the direct support of the United
Nations to the Government, have been decisive. Indeed,
the pooling of national and international efforts led to
the implementation of a Peacebuilding Priority Action
Plan for 2011-2014 and 2015-2017, which benefited
from financing totalling $30 million. The Plan is
focused on several axes, including: the restoration
of State authority and community safety, support for
national reconciliation, social cohesion and conflict
risk mitigation, and support for the identification of
vulnerable people.

The Plan has revealed greater needs, which
have required an unprecedented commitment by our
Government in order to sustainably strengthen peace
and to reassure Ivorians about the new direction in
which their country is moving. The support of our
partners has allowed us to keep sight of the fact that only
a peacebuilding process based on national ownership
and State leadership is sustainable, owing to consensus
and national ownership that it inspires.

For my country, the State is the cornerstone to
peacebuilding and sustainability. In that connection,
President Alassane Ouattara, during the post-election
crisis, under the circumstances that all Council members
observed, set out to preserve the State apparatus in
order, once the conflict had ended, to rebuild and
strengthen peace, as we are seeing today.

My country has chosen its own path towards
sustainably establishing peace. We emphasize economic
development and the building of an efficient economy
capable of offering opportunities to ex-combatants so
they will lay down their weapons and in order to reduce
poverty and inequalities, create jobs for young people
and provide the State with the resources needed to
finance crisis exit strategies.

The dramatic recovery of Cote d'Ivoire's economy,
in the aftermath of the post-election crisis, has
fostered the emergence of a robust State, which has
fully taken part in post-conflict normalization efforts
and peacebuilding. Thanks to the clear political will
of President Ouattara, the State of C6te d'Ivoire has
been engaged financially and on a scale rarely seen
on the continent in the implementation and success
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, the strengthening of social
cohesion and national reconciliation and post-conflict
rebuilding efforts,

As I mentioned before the Council in June 2017
(see S/PV.7957), UNOCI left behind a stable and
peaceful country with a resilient economy and credible
and reliable institutions, which has made it possible to
resolve the major problems related to nationality and
rural property, which were causes of the crisis, and
enabled us to definitively establish democracy and
good governance in public life. Drawing on lessons
from our recent history, under the Constitution of
the Third Republic President Alassane Ouattara has
successfully undertaken an in-depth reorganization of
political life and the political space so that the elections
do not inevitably lead to conflict.

The debate that brings us together today two years
after the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016) reflects the
importance that we collectively attach to the outcome
of the reform on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
in order to better support countries in post-conflict
situations and to prevent them from returning to a
state of belligerency. It is important to mention that
sustaining peace should be a concern shared by all
countries, including those at peace.

Countries emerging from crisis have significant
expectations of the Organization. We must continue to
act as a guarantor for the deployment of development
partners in the early stages of post-conflict
reconstruction. In that regard, the example of my
country can set out some principles.

Since peacebuilding and sustaining peace depend
on the post-conflict state of the institutions of a
country, the action of our Organization and other
partners should be either to strengthen the State when it
exists or to rebuild it when it has collapsed. Any action
taken by the international community as a substitute
for the State will remain superficial and lead to a peace
that is disastrously dependent and reliant. In order to
be effective on the ground, our Organization must
demonstrate great consistency and intervene as a single
entity. To that end, it must stop the fragmentation of
its resources and its actions observed in several post-
conflict scenarios. It must therefore make decisive
progress on its vision of delivering as one United
Nations. In addition, Member States and development
partners must mobilize the necessary resources for the
United Nations as part of financing the peacebuilding
and sustaining peace activity ofthe Peacebuilding Fund.

Based on the lessons from its own experience,
my country supports the reform of the peace and
security pillar proposed by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, which outlines a more effective peacebuilding
architecture. cote d'Ivoire calls on developed countries,
multilateral partners and the private sector to mobilize
the resources necessary to finance development and the
Peacebuilding Fund so that the United Nations can assist
countries in post-crisis situations more effectively. It
is also important to emphasize the role of preventive
diplomacy and, in particular, the importance of early
warning mechanisms to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace and to encourage our Organization to pay them
greater attention.

I hope that the next review of the peacebuilding
architecture, in 2020, will allow us to revitalize all the
structures involved in that task and to strengthen the
synergy of our actions in that area.

