The President: I thank the representative of
Mauritius for his kind words addressed to me and to
Mr. Chowdhury.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh.

The report submitted by the Secretary-General on
the prevention of armed conflict has received my
Government's very high appreciation. We agree with
the Deputy Secretary-General that this first-ever report
should provide the basis for an in-depth discussion here
at the Council and throughout the United Nations
system.

The deliberations at our meeting today will
provide necessary political direction and inputs for
Council action. In the General Assembly, we shall, of
course, give further consideration to the observations
and recommendations of the report for a United
Nations system-wide approach to conflict prevention.
The role of the Bretton Woods institutions would be
crucial. Our debate here should also aim at encouraging
the support of the regional organizations and
arrangements, the non-governmental organizations and
the private sector. I wish to underline three points.

First, as to the question of responsibility, the
Security Council must assume its primary
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security. This will mean resolute action to prevent
threats to peace, breaches of peace and acts of
aggression. This will also mean timely and effective
intervention to prevent genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We must not witness another
preventable genocide, such as that in Rwanda, or
another preventable massacre, such as that in
Srebrenica.

During our debate on humanitarian aspects of
issues before the Council, in March 2000, we put
emphasis on human security. The United Nations was
established in the name of the people. Their security
should be prime in our consideration when we deal
with war and peace.

At the Council summit last year, the Prime
Minister of Bangladesh, Sheikh Hisaka, said that
conflict prevention is a political, economic,
humanitarian, and moral imperative. It is political,
because conflicts disrupt inter-State relations,
adversely, affecting the climate of cooperation at
regional and international levels. It is economic,
because the cost of war is so enormous for the
international community. The Carnegie Commission
report estimated the cost of the seven major conflicts of
the 1990s at $200 billion. It is humanitarian and moral,
because conflicts result in humanitarian disasters in the
form of death and destruction, mass killings, gross
violation of human rights and humanitarian law, and
untold suffering for men, women, and children.

Second is the question of political will. The
effective discharge of the Council's responsibilities
will require political will on the part of Member States.
They will have to accept human and material sacrifices.
They should be prepared to support the actions of the
United Nations in the maintenance of peace and
security. Providing support for the peace and security
mission of the United Nations is a Charter obligation,
not charity. In a globalizing world, as the Secretary-
General stresses in paragraph 164 of his report,
"collective interest is the national interest". In order to
be effective, we agree that the Council must be able to
make decisions on the basis of what the situation
requires - not on the basis of what some members are
willing to support.

Thirdly, we should consider the sources of
conflict. The key to prevention lies in addressing the
sources or root causes of conflicts. The April 1998
report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict in Africa identified the major sources of
conflicts. In his analysis, the sources of many of the
conflicts on the continent include colonial and cold-
war legacies. It is hence a natural conclusion that
special responsibility has to be assumed by those
concerned. They can play a crucial role in helping them
address the political, economic, and social challenges
in these societies.

A related aspect is the absence of democratic
institutions. Autocratic regimes, the politicization of
ethnicity, denial of fundamental freedoms and human
rights, and monopolization of political power and
national resources are often at the root of conflicts.
These factors have resulted in the failure of States. At
the Council summit last year, Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina called for international protection of
democracy, because we share the conviction that
democracy, rule of law, human rights, and good
governance constitute the foundation of durable peace.

The Secretary-General underlines that conflict
prevention and sustainable development are mutually
reinforcing. Our common understanding of this
complementarity will be crucial for a United Nations
system-wide comprehensive approach to conflict
prevention.
The various plans and programmes of action
adopted in the 1990s cycle of international conferences
elaborate the agenda for our common humanity.
Unfortunately, the review conferences reveal a serious
gap between commitment and action. The desired
progress in their implementation would have covered a
lot of ground towards the prevention of armed
conflicts. Translating words into deeds would have
made the difference. In many cases, it will make the
difference between war and peace.

