Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the holding of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, under the Swedish
presidency. I thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
briefing to the Council. The Palestinian question is at
the crux of the Middle East issue. It is a fundamental
question for the region. Safeguarding the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people is the
common responsibility of the international community.

Presently, the conflagration between Palestine and
Israel is become increasingly intense, with frequent
outbreaks of violence and peace talks are at an impasse.
The humanitarian situation is dire. The international
community should take effective actions to push for a
solution to the question in order to realize the two-State
solution, as soon as possible.

First of all, we must stay committed to the correct
path of the independent statehood of Palestine,
with Palestine and Israel coexisting in peace. The
establishment of a fully sovereign State of Palestine,
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, is the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people and it is also the key to the Palestinian question.
The parties should be firm in advancing the peace
process on the basis of the land for peace principle, the
two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, both Israel and Palestine should take
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) as an
opportunity to resume the peace talks as soon as possible.
A few weeks ago, the Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016) on Israeli settlements. Both Israel and Palestine
should effectively implement that resolution, remain
calm, practice restraint and gradually rebuild mutual
trust in order to return to the right path of peace
negotiations. Israel should cease the construction of
settlements and the demolition of Palestinian homes, in
order to create adequate conditions for the resumption
of peace talks. The legitimate security concerns of
countries of the region must be respected. Both Israel
and Palestine have the responsibility to ensure that
United Nations agencies can continue regularly with
their mandates, without any interference.

Thirdly, there must be broader engagement on the
part of the international community. China welcomes
the successful convening in Paris of the international
conference on the question of Palestine. We hope it
marks a new start to intensified diplomatic efforts.
China supports all efforts that are conducive to easing
the situation between Israel and Palestine and to
achieving the two-State solution. We support relevant
actors in making contributions from different angles to
build new momentum for peace talks, in order to set
up a more effective mechanism for peace in the Middle
East, positively address the legitimate concerns of
Palestine and Arab States and play a more positive role
in pushing for an end to the conflict and the resumption
of peace talks.

Fourthly, we should continue to promote economic
reconstruction in Palestine. China urges Israel to
cooperate with international assistance efforts and
completely lift the blockade against the Gaza Strip. The
parties should respond actively to the United Nations
Programme of Assistance to the Palestinian People and
engage in economic cooperation in order to improve
Palestine's humanitarian situation and living conditions.
China will continue to provide assistance to Palestine
and stands ready to work within the framework of the
One Belt, One Road initiative to help Palestine achieve
socioeconomic development as soon as possible.

China is a firm supporter of the just cause of the
Palestinian people. China is also an active mediator
for peace between Palestine and Israel. We stand ready
along with the international community to further our
efforts to push for an early solution to the Palestinian
question, a solution that is complete andjust, in order to
realize peace and stability in the Middle East.

