Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic ofKorea): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized today's meeting on the
important subject of post-conflict peacebuilding.
I would also like to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Vladimir Drobnjak and Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota for their contributions and
leadership.

The first annual session of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) held last month was a meaningful
step forward with a View to achieving a qualitative
upgrade through a comprehensive review of the
achievements and challenges of peacebuilding
activities.

Catering to the particularities of each post-conflict
situation is a very complicated task. Empirical evidence
illustrates the fact that the same input does not guarantee
the same output. The key variables may include the
degree of clarity of the national vision and the strength
of the national leadership's commitment to its people.
However, international support and the consolidation
of national ownership are not mutually exclusive. We
believe that the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and the Security Council can contribute positively
to fostering the unity of post-conflict societies and
assisting national stakeholders in the process of
nation-building.

It is necessary for the Security Council to
vigilantly monitor the nature of cooperation among
key partners for post-conflict peacebuilding, including
the Peacebuilding Commission. Today I would like to
stress three points related to the partnership between
the PBC and the Security Council.

First, enhanced cooperation between the two
bodies can contribute to detecting any potential
relapse into conflict and thereby preventing it. While
peacekeeping missions and special political missions
do not always succeed in issuing early warnings, the
various components of the PBC have the potential to
effectively and closely examine the situation on the
ground and bring it to the attention of the international
community. The Council and the PBC must therefore
further solidify their joint efforts for periodic
situation-specific stock-taking reviews. In that vein,
we express our appreciation to Rwanda for its role as
the coordinator for interaction between the two bodies.
The Chairs of the country-specific configurations also
play critical roles in enhancing the exchange of views
with the Council.

Secondly, maintaining coherence is crucial for
effective peacebuilding, as also emphasized in the two
presentations by the PBC Chairs this morning. Even
though the Peacebuilding Commission itself does not
coordinate field operations, it can inform and remind
the key stakeholders of where the strategic gaps lie and
suggest which specific areas need to be prioritized. In
order to do so, the PBC should broaden the scope of its
work and deepen its expertise using lessons learned and
strategic reviews.

The PBC and the Security Council can also pursue
a division of labour so as to maximize their respective
comparative advantages. The PBC deals with a
politically less sensitive agenda and can take advantage
of its capability for resource mobilization. We believe
that the Security Council can efficiently empower the
country-specific configurations by supporting the
activities of the PBC in the Council's resolutions.

Thirdly, the PBC should be able to play a
value-added advisory role. Regular meetings and
informal interaction between PBC leaders and the senior
leadership of the United Nations are encouraged in
order to sharpen the perspective of the PBC. The PBC's
wide scope can be a tool to enhance a comprehensive
understanding of post-conflict situations.

The root causes of conflict often lie in
underdevelopment, inequality or a winner-takes-all
political culture. All of these problems require long-
term remedies beyond peacekeeping and political
presence. With its advocacy role, the PBC should work
to keep the world's attention on its work, with a long-
term vision, in cooperation with key partners, including
international financial institutions.

In conclusion, creating a synergy between the PBC
and the Security Council is a long-term task. During the
decade since the launch of the Commission, the Security
Council and the PBC have worked hard to develop a solid
partnership based on their complementary relationship.
The Republic of Korea hopes that the 2015 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture will be
another significant step forward in that direction.

