Mr. Lee Ho-jin (Republic of Korea): I would like
to express my delegation's appreciation to you, Sir, for
chairing this open debate in the Security Council. Let
me also thank the Singapore presidency for taking up
the issue of the ad-hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa as a follow-up to
last January's discussion under the Mauritius
presidency.

Africa has been the focus of discussions within
the United Nations system over past decades, as the
frequent outbreaks of armed conflicts and persistent
underdevelopment in that part of the world have called
for the involvement of the United Nations. The
Security Council, with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
under the United Nations Charter, has played a leading
part in securing peace and in preventing conflicts in
Africa. We have witnessed remarkable, if not complete,
progress towards peace in such countries as Sierra
Leone, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and
Ethiopia and Eritrea, to name a few, which was
possible only with the extensive engagement of the
Security Council.

Other principal organs of the United Nations have
also been active in addressing a number of issues in
Africa. The General Assembly has made valuable
contributions in this regard by taking various measures,
including the relevant recommendations of its Open-
ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of
Conflict and the Promotion of Durable Peace and
Sustainable Development in Africa, and its facilitating
role in addressing the "conflict diamonds" question.
The Economic and Social Council, in particular, has a
critical role to play in Africa. The adoption of
comprehensive proposals for sustainable development
in Africa at the high-level segment of the Economic
and Social Council substantive session last July is just
one of many recent examples. The Republic of Korea,
by and large, supports the work programme of the ad
hoc Working Group on conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa, as presented by its Chairman,
Ambassador Koonjul.

My delegation would like to focus on the
Council's relations with the Economic and Social
Council and its cooperation with African regional
organizations.

First, with regard to the relations between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
in the context of preventing and resolving conflicts in
Africa, the consensus is that an inextricable linkage
exists between durable peace and sustainable
development, particularly in the African region. The
need to tackle the root causes of conflict has been
confirmed, inter alia, by Security Council resolution
1366 (2001) of August 2001 and the ECOSOC
Ministerial Declaration of July 2001. We believe that
without reversing the adverse economic and social
conditions in African countries, such as the high
proportion of people living in extreme poverty and the
prevalence of HIV/AIDS, efforts aimed at conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building in Africa
will be neither effective nor sustainable.

In this context, we welcome the inclusion of
relations between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council as one of the most
important issues before the ad hoc Working Group. My
delegation also commends the President of the
Economic and Social Council, Ambassador Ivan
Simonovie of Croatia, for having made a priority the
strengthening of the relationship between these two
bodies during his presidency this year. My delegation
believes that it might be useful for the Security Council
Working Group and the Economic and Social Council's
ad-hoc Advisory Group to regularize inter-group
consultations and report their findings to both the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
for further deliberation.

Secondly, I would like to share some observations
on relations between the Security Council and African
regional organizations, in particular the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). It should be noted in this context
that the responsibility for creating domestic conditions
for peace and development rests primarily with the
countries themselves. But at the same time we
recognize that the inflow of broader international
assistance, such as the placement of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and various forms of
economic aid, including official development
assistance, remains indispensable.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes locally
tailored initiatives on Africa such as the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). We
greatly admire the guiding role of the OAU in
launching that truly fitting programme. My delegation
also recognizes the importance of the high-level
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on NEPAD
to be held this coming September, which will highlight
the role of the United Nations in assisting the
implementation of NEPAD.

We understand that both the Security Council and
the General Assembly support closer ties between the
United Nations and the OAU, and a stronger role for
the OAU in the field of regional peace and security. My
delegation believes that strengthened participation by
OAU representatives in the Security Council
discussions on African issues, where practicable, could
lead to a better understanding of regional situations.
Building on the achievement of initiating NEPAD in
the social and economic field, African countries could,
in the longer term, consider devising a sort of regional
conflict-prevention mechanism to monitor the regional
security situation, issue early warnings and act as a
liaison with United Nations peacekeeping operations.

In closing, my delegation hopes that the Security
Council ad hoc Working Group will produce
meaningful results and thus contribute to the work of
the Council on many African issues.

