Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank our briefer,
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Nakamitsu.

Last year, 560,000 people died at the hands of small
arms and light weapons. That is more than one death
every minute of every day for an entire year. That is the
tragic reality that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1025) brings to life. Illicit small arms are tools
of daily destruction. There is never a shortage. They are
easy to acquire and they have an unparalleled impact
on lives and communities. The Saferworld organization
estimates that the majority of deaths from direct
conflicts in the developing world are the result of the
use of small arms.

The hundred and thousands of deaths are just the
tip of the iceberg. Illicit small arms add fuel to the fire
of armed conflicts around the world. They facilitate the
most heinous human rights violations and abuses. They
are the preferred instruments of war for those who carry
out mass killings and rape. They equip terrorists and
violent extremists. And where we find transnational
criminals dealing in human lives, illicit drugs or illegal
wildlife products, there is little doubt that we will also
find small arms.

Nowhere is that more apparent than in South Sudan.
It is no longer soldiers who carry weapons. Small arms
have become the norm. When they become violent,
local-level disputes are resolved not with homemade,
traditional weapons, but with guns. Even children
herding cattle must carry arms to protect themselves
and their livelihood. In that culture of weapons, local
disputes now escalate faster and increasingly result
in large-scale casualties. For a country torn apart by
a national level conflict, this is a price that South
Sudanese communities cannot afford to pay. Armed
fighting widens rifts between groups and entrenches
issues, and community conflict-resolution is far less
effective because of heavily armed groups.

And the problem does not stop at the borders of
conflict zones. Transfers of weapons and trained
fighters spread the threat to neighbouring countries.
We have seen that in Somalia, Syria and elsewhere. If
we are to make any progress in tackling that challenge,
we need to work collectively to strengthen arms control,
destroy excessive stockpiles and tackle the drivers of
instability and conflict that fuel the demand for illicit
weapons. It is for those reasons that we were proud to
adopt resolution 2220 (2015) and continue the Council's
focus on that important issue.

Outside of the Council, the Arms Trade Treaty is
one of our most powerful tools in the ongoing fight to
stop irresponsible arms transfers. The Treaty's vision of
a globally well-regulated, legal trade in arms is one that
the United Kingdom fully supports. Universalization,
especially getting the right States around the table, must
remain a priority. Greater participation would increase
the treaty's influence, strength and reputation, and we
encourage all States that have not yet done so to make
ratification or accession a national priority.

Universalization must go hand in hand with
implementation. That means doing all we can to stop
diversion, tackle corruption, dismantle trafficking
networks and strengthen information-sharing. Since the
United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms
and Light Weapons was adopted in 2001, we have seen
more and more States take action to improve stockpile
management. That is a recognition of the impact on
their communities of weapons diverted from national
stockpiles to criminal activity, and of the devastating
consequences of explosions of ammunition depots.

As we look ahead to the third United Nations
Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and

Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and its International
Tracing Instrument next year, it is important that we
continue to encourage States to prioritize resources for
stockpile security and surplus destruction.

The United Kingdom is proud to provide technical
and financial support both bilaterally and through
regional and multilateral organizations, such as the
African Union, the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe and the Commonwealth.
Through such support, we help countries to strengthen
arms control frameworks, implement better stockpile
management procedures and tackle the drivers of
terrorism, crime, poverty and exclusion, which fuel the
demand for illicit weapons.

I would like to conclude by looking forward to 2030.
A report recently published by Small Arms Survey
shows us how the world could look if we all implement
violence reduction initiatives. If we embrace action,
quell the conflicts and realize the peacful societies
envisaged in Sustainable Development Goal 16, we
could save 1.2 million lives. That outcome would befit
the body charged with upholding international peace
and security.

