Mr. Ladsous: The lunch hour is getting close, so I
will be brief, but I would like to make a few comments
on some of the issues discussed at length today.
First, on the protection of civilians, it is very
much at the core of all our contemporary mandates,
and we need to continue to do a better job of it. Of
course, we cannot have a peacekeeper behind every
citizen of the country concerned. We therefore have to
manage expectations. At least, within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, we have put together an
action plan for the next two years that places a very
strong emphasis on training - a much more intensive
effort - training that trains peacekeepers both prior to
and immediately after deployment, so as to ensure that
they are fully aware of what is expected of them.

In the light of that, it is important to recall that
the protection of civilians is in the first instance the
responsibility of the host State. If they cannot do it
themselves, for any number of reasons, that should
not impede the work that we are trying to do. In that
connection, I ask the Council to consider South Sudan,
a country where we felt that we needed to do a better
job to protect civilians. We needed attack helicopters.
That request was denied. We needed unarmed aerial
vehicles. My request was denied personally three times
by the President last year. We also required the ability
to move around, the freedom of movement. That was
denied. Not only did the Government deny us freedom
of movement, but the Sudan did the same numerous
times. If we factor into that the fact that Juba, for
instance, declared members of our senior personnel
personae non grata and that yesterday it was announced
that from now on any United Nations personnel who
took pictures would be considered spies, that raises a
number of concerns. I wanted to highlight that problem.

On caveats, one has to be realistic. No one is
questioning the legitimacy of a troop-contributng
country having good reasons, which have to do with its
sovereign rights, for imposing restrictions on the use of
its personnel. I would nevertheless say thata we have
to be made aware of those restrictions in advance. We
cannot first find out about them at the moment when
things take a turn for the worse. When the situation on
the Syrian side of the Golan Heights became dangerous,
some countries refused to remain there. That is ofcourse
their right and privilege. We cannot, however, tolerate
what has happened in other theatres - including
South Sudan - where we discovered suddenly that a
particular contingent was taking orders from its capital,
circumventing the Force Commander and the entire
chain of command. We cannot accept that, and if such a
problem arises, we need, at the very least, to be aware.
If the Force Commander can manage those caveats,
that is fine, but we should try to avoid being put in a
situation of fait accompli, ex post facto. If that does
occur, my policy is clearly to send the contingent in
question back home to its troop-contributing country,
because we simply cannot rely on it.

I think that we must continue to do all we can to
enhance the protection of the force. The safety and
security of our peacekeepers is an absolute priority.
General Lollesgaard enumerated a number of points
that are being considered, including intelligence. The
purpose of intelligence is to better protect our people,
in addition to helping them do a betterjob. It all fits into
the wider picture.

The representative of the United States raised the
issue of medical evacuation. This is an area in which
change is very rapid: for a long time we could rely on
the concept of the "golden hour" in smaller theatres
where facilities were available reasonably quickly and
the force was relatively compact. Nowadays, we need
much more mobility and there is more fractioning
of contingents. When one battalion is spread across
five, six or seven positions, as happens in the Central
African Republic, for instance, we need to factor
in the medical element at the level of the basic unit,
which means level-1 facilities in every deployment, if
possible. The more contemporary 10-1-2 guideline is
the way forward, but it requires not only medical means
but also helicopters with night-flying capabilities and,
once again, the consent of the host Government. Not
so long ago, in the Sudan, a peacekeeper died of his
wounds because the request for a helicopter flight to
pick him up was refused.

In terms of more generic messages, General
Maqsood Ahmed, the Military Adviser for Peacekeeping
Operations, and I have decided to emphasize
performance at this year's conference of chiefs of
military components, even more than in previous years,
because that is the expectation of the Security Council
and the membership of the United Nations, and we must
continue to do better.

With regard to the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse, I completely agree that any act of sexual
misconduct is unacceptable and that one act is too
many. A zero-tolerance approach is required from all
concerned, not only the Secretariat but also the Member
States. It was, after all, the Member States that decided
to retain the capacity to prosecute and ultimately pass
judgment on those responsible for such terrible acts.
We must all do our duty in that regard and must not
forget the problem of the victims, who must be helped.
We are working on the matter.

As the generals present today know, military
capability is about leadership, and all of them are
displaying that quality. I want to thank them for that
and tell them that we and the Security Council stand by
their side, as reflected in today's debate.

