Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): First of all, we would like to reaffirm our
consistent commitment to the need for Iraq to comply fully
with the obligations following from the relevant Security
Council resolutions, as well as our support for the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM).

Just recently, the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) produced
voluminous comprehensive reports on the significant work
done in filling in blank spaces in the Iraqi disarmament
dossier, reports that have been carefully studied by the
Security Council members.

The Special Commission's report notes "significant"
and "important" progress, particularly in the missile and
chemical areas. An almost complete accounting of
proscribed missiles has been given. All facilities and
components for chemical-weapons manufacturing have
been eliminated. In doing so, Iraq has displayed the
necessary degree of cooperation and willingness.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
report has a positive tone. Numerous IAEA inspection
teams have confirmed the absence in Iraq of proscribed
activity relating to nuclear weapons, while dual-purpose
facilities and equipment are being reliably monitored.

It cannot yet be stated, however, that Iraq has
accounted for all the weapons, components and
capabilities proscribed by section C of resolution 687
(1991). In particular, a number of questions remain to be
clarified in the biological sphere. There are certain
deficiencies in Iraq's compliance with its obligations as
regards cooperation with the Special Commission in the
conduct of inspections. Still, isolated incidents concerning
inspections that have occurred in the last few months
cannot, we are convinced, justify the immediate adoption
of additional sanctions against Iraq, as provided for in
resolution 1115 (1997). But the Russian delegation does
believe that the problems remaining in relations between
UNSCOM. and Baghdad deserve serious attention on the
part of the Security Council and must be rapidly resolved,
inter alia within the framework of the consultations
between the Executive Chairman of the Special
Commission and Baghdad scheduled for this purpose.

Bearing all this in mind, we took a very active part
in the preparation of the Security Council draft resolution,
suggesting an objective and comprehensive response to
the reports by the Special Committee and the IAEA.

As prepared by a group of sponsor States, the draft
resolution before us for consideration today takes into
account a number of observations made by my delegation,
as well as by other Security Council members. In
particular, it notes the Special Committee's progress
towards eliminating the Iraqi programme for the
production of weapons of mass destruction, and the
question of introducing sanctions is deferred.

However, there is an obvious lack of balance in this
draft. Ignored in it are various substantial elements of the

 

fulfilment by Iraq of relevant provisions of resolution 687
(1991). For example, we cannot understand why the draft
resolution contains no mention of the IAEA report, which
notes significant progress in the nuclear sphere, an area in
which the Iraqi dossier can be viewed as closed. The
sponsors' categorical refusal to refer to the IAEA report in
the draft resolution raises most serious questions and is
unacceptable to us.

There is an attempt in the draft resolution to revise the
provision in resolution 1115 (1997) on the need for
"substantial compliance" by Iraq with UN SCOM's
requirements for access for inspection purposes. Since
resolution 1115 (1997) continues in effect, the use of new
wording in the form proposed by the sponsors of the draft
resolution will confuse the criteria for Iraqi compliance
with the Council resolutions.

A substantive problem arises in regard to operative
paragraph 7, which was added by the sponsors just
yesterday. The proposed new concept of a black list is
faulty from both logical and legal standpoints, and therefore
cannot be acceptable. Lists of persons subject to sanctions
should not be drawn up when the Council has not yet
decided whether sanctions will be imposed or not. Though
there are people who believe that the Security Council is its
own master, and has the right power to set whatever legal
standards it wishes, we are convinced that when drafting
documents the Council must be governed by the universally
recognized norms of international law.
In order to seek mutually acceptable solutions, the
Russian delegation cooperated in a constructive manner
with the sponsors throughout the course of the drafting of
this resolution. We were prepared to continue working on
the draft in order to make it more balanced and acceptable
to all members of the Security Council, since we also
believe it important for the Council to speak with one
voice. As it turned out, unfortunately, the sponsors, of the
draft resolution were not ready to do further work on it.

Taking all the afore-mentioned factors into account,
the Russian delegation will be forced to abstain during the
vote.

