Mr. Lopes Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): The recent history of Burundi has
unfortunately accustomed us to troubles and ethnic and
political upheavals of all kinds. The domination and
pre-eminence of an ethnic group that is a one numerical
minority, the rebellion of the majority, the fierce struggle
for political power, conflicts, confrontations, massacres,
vendettas and what have you, have, unfortunately, for more
than 30 years, set the stage for one of the most lethal
tragedies ever known by Africa. The most recent report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi attests to
this disastrous state of affairs and, unfortunately, supports
this overall view.

Today, according to the prevailing moods and
preferences of the time, Burundi may either claim our
attention, baffle our wits, question our conscience or quite
simply be shunted aside along with other matters, because
some find it banal.

The people of Burundi deserve to have the Security
Council turn its attention to their future, because indeed no
predetermined fate should prevent them from fully and
freely enjoying their future, let alone stand in the way of
their progress towards national unity and peace.

 
The military coup d 'etat of 25 July last in Burundi
was a violent act that flew in the face of established
constitutional order, accelerated the spiral of violence and
arbitrarily usurped political power to the detriment of
democracy, national reconciliation and peace in that
country. There can be no doubt that this is an illegal act
that tends to confirm the primacy of arms over ballots. It
must be rejected and, above all, unambiguously
condemned.

The people of Burundi, at the same time incredulous
witnesses and innocent victims of the extremism practised
by both camps, find themselves trapped in a hellish cycle
of violence. The balance that was so difficult to establish
has been disturbed, and violence fuelled by a hatred
repressed for generations, is now breaking out,
unrestrained and unappeased.

The conflict in Burundi is exacerbated by the deeply
held conviction of both communities that their survival is
compromised if they do not hold the reins of power.
Quite clearly, this conflict does not lend itself to a ready-
made solution or, even less so, to one that is imposed
from outside. We have to find the sort of political
machinery that can promote a sharing of power between
the two ethnic groups, the Hutu and the Tutsi. We have
to appease the anxieties of one and promote the trust of
the other.

The abrupt breach of the Convention on Governance
of 1994, which was the only legal framework that most
of the actors on the Burundian political scene could trust
enough to associate themselves with, could once again
trigger a resurgence of violence and could increase and
prolong the suffering of the people of Burundi.

The Security Council cannot condone the use of
force in resolving the situation in Burundi. The Burundian
Army and its leaders must respect constitutional legality
and the institutions that derive from it. The guns must fall
silent and give way to dialogue.

Indeed, we believe that national reconciliation is the
only way of establishing and consolidating a lasting peace
in Burundi. Guinea-Bissau appeals urgently to our
brothers and sisters in Burundi to finally set aside their
political affiliations, their ethnicity and their ideological
leanings and honestly, courageously and promptly enter
into an open and constructive dialogue in order to create
a climate of trust, recognition and mutual respect
conducive to peace and security for all throughout the
national territory.
 

What do the people of Burundi expect of us? What
can we undertake together, here and now, which might help
return Burundian troops to their barracks and usher in
pluralistic democracy in Burundi? How can we promote the
restoration of constitutional legality in the wake of the coup
d 'etat of 25 July last? What means do we have available to
us to induce, by which I mean oblige, the current military
junta to respect the rules of the democratic game? What,
finally, is the purpose and the scope of the sanctions that
have been imposed on Burundi by its neighbours?

The resumption of dialogue and negotiations, in the
framework of the Mwanza talks held under the auspices of
former President Julius Nyerere, should be encouraged. It
also seems to us that the sanctions imposed by Burundi's
neighbours in a selective, targeted and time-limited way
against those responsible for the coup d'etat and their
supporters may speed up this process. This will happen
provided that these sanctions are supported in principle by
the rest of the international community, and provided that
they are accompanied by measures that are capable of
limiting their cost to society. Any individual or collective
action on the part of our States must follow that logic and
should be conducive to restoring genuine legality and peace
in Burundi.

In the opinion of my delegation, humanitarian action
should continue. Likewise, it is essential to study, starting
now, all the necessary modalities for resuming development
aid once peace, national reconciliation, democracy and strict
respect for human rights have become established and have
finally triumphed, both in the thinking and in the conduct
of all the citizens of Burundi, who will finally be brought
together and will coalesce into a single, unified nation.

