The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Bolivia.

We would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing.

My delegation reiterates its position that it will be
possible to reduce the violence throughout the Syrian
territory within the framework of resolution 2401
(2018). In that context, we want to emphasize the local
agreements and initiatives promoted by the Astana
guarantors, as well as the agreement between Russia
and Turkey that has enabled the establishment of a
demilitarized zone within Idlib province, helping to
reduce violence, evacuate those in need and facilitate
access for humanitarian assistance. We encourage
the agreements to continue with the aim of enabling
people to return to normal life and to their places of
origin. We want to remind all concerned that their
return must be voluntary and unhindered, ensuring
people's full dignity and safe conditions. In that regard,
we urge that the clearing of unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines in residential
areas continue.

We reiterate that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Syria. On the contrary, we emphasize
that the parties must respect international law and
especially international humanitarian law, in regard to
which we want to highlight the agreements reached at
the meeting held on 27 October between the top-level
authorities of Turkey, France, Russia and Germany. The
meeting should help to reinforce the dialogue ensuring
the ceasefire in Idlib province, in order to protect the
lives ofmillions ofcivilians and prevent violence against
civil infrastructure such as hospitals and schools. We
urge the forthcoming high-level meetings to be held
in the next few weeks to strengthen those agreements
and enable lives to be saved and the humanitarian
situation to be improved. In that regard, we consider
that any effort made or action taken in the framework
of resolution 2401 (2018) that provides for combating
armed groups or groups designated as terrorist by
the Security Council should also take into account
the protection of civilians within the framework of
international law. We call on the Council's permanent
members who have influence on the ground to exercise
it in that regard so that the fight against these terrorists
and armed groups does not involve the loss of more
innocent lives.

Lastly, we want to emphasize that the only way out
ofthis conflict is to find a sustainable, peaceful solution
through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
in full respect for their sovereignty and territorial
integrity, within a framework of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva process, under the auspices of the
United Nations, as agreed in the Sochi declaration,
for which it is vital to continue the efforts aimed
at forming a credible, balanced and representative
constitutional committee.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

