Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his detailed and useful briefing on the
most recent developments in the situation in Kosovo.
My delegation believes that, despite the relative
stability of the situation in Kosovo, the security
situation must be further strengthened if we are to
prevent a repetition of the events of last month that led
to the killing of a number of Serbs in Kosovo. Such
events could, in turn, lead to ethnically motivated acts
of violence, which would undermine all the progress
made thus far.

My delegation reiterates the importance of the
rule of law and the protection of the rights of ethnic
minorities in Kosovo, as well as the need to combat
organized crime and smuggling and to prevent illicit
trafficking in arms and drugs.

My delegation also reiterates the importance of
the safe return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their homes and property in Kosovo so that
they can contribute to the economic reconstruction of
the province. The concerted efforts of all of the people
of Kosovo will be required if they are to leave their
problems behind.

My delegation encourages continued dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina with a view to dealing
with the practical matters pertaining to the stabilization
of the situation in Kosovo and the facilitation of the
political process. We welcome the efforts of Mr.
Holkeri in this regard.

We support the principle of "standards before
status". We welcome Mr. Holkeri's reaffirmation that
he will pursue his work in accordance with that
principle with a view to building in Kosovo a multi-
ethnic society that is capable of coping with future
challenges.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its support for Mr. Harri Holkeri, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo.
We express our readiness to cooperate with him and
with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in order to achieve security and
stability in the province.

