Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to welcome Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia. We wish him success
in his new role and thank him for today's important
briefing. We also thank Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Ms. Pramila Patten and the Executive Director of the
Somali Women Development Center for their briefings.

Today I will focus on three key issues. The first
pertains to political developments. We welcome the
efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia and
federal states to achieve reconciliation in spite of
the challenges facing them. We call on all parties to
overcome the obstacles that are impeding political,
economic and security integration in Somalia and to
put the interests of the State first, especially as the
upcoming phase will be decisive for the future of
Somalia, as we are closing in on the general elections,
to be held in 2020-2021.

The achievement of reconciliation will undoubtedly
have a positive impact. It will enable Somali leaders to
build on previous important achievements, including
continuing the implementation of the technical
aspect of the comprehensive approach to security;
enabling the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission to complete its first
review of the Provisional Federal Constitution; the
adoption of the draft electoral bill; the completion of
the identification of voter registration centres; and the
adoption of many important laws.

We look forward to the efforts of the Federal
Government to implement the transition plan and its
comprehensive political reform agenda. We trust that
it will implement economic and development goals as
well as increase its financial capacity and revenues.

With regard to the security situation, unfortunately
the latest incidents in Somalia continue to remind us
of the threat posed by Al-Shabaab and other armed
groups. We reject and condemn in the strongest terms
their targeting of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel in Somalia. The Security Council must
address that issue with the utmost seriousness and
wisdom to ensure that such acts do not reoccur. We are
concerned about the growing ability of those groups
to manufacture improvised explosive devices, hence
the importance of implementing the comprehensive
approach to security in order to enable the national
security forces to protect the State against the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism, in line with the
transition plan and the national security structure.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, the ongoing
food insecurity and the growing number of internally
displaced persons - which is reaching dangerous
proportions at 2.6 million people - are a source of
grave concern. Unfortunately, weather forecasts are not
encouraging, as they are predicting a new dry season
owing to the low level of precipitation. We fear that this
could impede Somalia's harvests this year.

Despite all this, we are still optimistic regarding
the developmental steps taken by the Somali Federal
Government, which led the International Monetary
Fund to confirm that Somalia has thereby met
the conditionality standard for a credit tranche
arrangement. That is an important step in terms of debt
relief for the State, in line with the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries initiative.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call for the need to
respect the sovereignty, political independence and unity
of Somalia. We call on the international community to
continue to provide political and financial support to
the Somali Federal Government in order to enable it to
rebuild the State and establish stability.

