Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union and its member States. The
candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; and Ukraine, align themselves with
this statement.

I thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2014/420) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis and United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime Executive Director Yury Fedotov
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Tanin for
his remarks.

I would like to reiterate our full support for the
important role played by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people and in
coordinating the international community's assistance.
The role of the United Nations will be even more
important after 2014 in ensuring that the international
community's assistance continues to reach people on
the ground. It is vital that UNAMA's continued field
presence be preserved.
Democracy and the rule of law are among the core
values of the European Union. We are committed to
supporting people's legitimate aspirations to freely and
fairly elect the people that govern and represent them.
In the past few months, we have seen the Afghan people
repeatedly and bravely express their determination
to have their say as to who the next President of the
country will be. We pay tribute to the courage ofpeople
who ignored the threat of violence from groups who see
the people's will as an anathema and women who defied
the social conventions that continue to be conservative
in many areas to assert their rights.

In all elections, every vote matters. Every vote
counts. However, when people have shown this kind
courage and determination to have their say, it is all
the more vital that their votes and their will be fully
reflected. It is therefore critical that the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission ensure that their workings are
transparent. Candidates and voters need to be reassured
that the processes are objective. In particular, the online
publication of results from individual polling stations
must be timely, and the guidelines for the recounting
and auditing of votes should be consistently applied.
Equally, it is essential that the candidates and their
supporters allow the time and space for the institutions
to perform their duties and exercise self-restraint in
this delicate phase. It is important that both candidates
act responsibly and direct any complaints through the
appropriate mechanisms. Statements that prematurely
claim victory or risk inflaming tensions should be
avoided.

We look forward to working with the new President
and his Government to address the critical challenges
that remain in Afghanistan. I am pleased to announce
that, on Monday, the European Union's Foreign Affairs
Council endorsed a new comprehensive strategy
for Afghanistan, which reiterates our continuing
commitment to assist in addressing those remaining
challenges.

Our aim is to support the development of
Afghanistan's institutions to provide the resilience
needed to safeguard the progress achieved to date and
provide the platform for a more effective and ultimately
sustainable Afghan State. The European Union and its
member States provide more than $1 billion a year in aid
to Afghanistan, making it the largest beneficiary of our
assistance in the world. That shows that we are living
up to the international aid pledges made at the Tokyo
conference. However, to benefit from the full extent
of those pledges, the new Government of Afghanistan
also needs to show evidence of their reciprocal and
lasting commitment. The new Afghan authorities must
enact the political and economic reforms set out in the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework - reforms
that are so Vital to the long-term political and economic
sustainability of Afghanistan. Urgent action to restore
economic confidence, establish a platform for growth
andjobs and maximize revenue collection is imperative.

Security remains a pressing challenge in
Afghanistan. The European Union asks the new
President to reach out to all Afghans and neighbouring
countries to invite them to contribute to the development
of a stable, prosperous and fully sovereign Afghanistan,
including through intensifying engagement in the
Istanbul Process. We support an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process as
a foundation for peace and stability in Afghanistan
and the region. Such peace and stability in the region
would be supported by collective action to address the
continuing threat from drugs and organized crime. That
should include urgent action to root out the corrupt
networks that continue to grow rich as a result of the
misery of others.

In conclusion, Afghanistan faces a new opportunity
to address the fundamental issues that continue to
threaten its stability and undermine its progress. I can
assure the Council that the European Union will remain
a steadfast ally in supporting champions of reform in
order to ensure a better future for all Afghans - the
sort of future they want and deserve.

