Mr. Park (Republic of Korea) (interpretation from French): I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July.
I pledge the full support and close cooperation of my
delegation as you carry out your important responsibilities.
I also pay warm tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Elaraby of Egypt, for the effective way in which he guided
the work of the Council last month.

(spoke in English)

Since the last extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) two
months ago, there have been encouraging developments in
the Angolan peace process. We welcome in particular the
impressive progress in the quartering of troops of the Uniao
Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA),
with more than 20,000 additional UNITA soldiers registered
in the quartering areas. We are also gratified to note the
completion of the quartering of the rapid reaction police;
the adoption of the framework agreement on military
matters, which made possible the beginning of the long-
awaited process of incorporating UNITA military personnel
into the Angolan Armed Forces; the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law; and the start of talks between the Angolan
Government and UNITA on constitutional amendments
necessary for the formation of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation.

Although overall progress to date has been positive
enough to warrant cautious optimism for the future, my
delegation shares disappointment at the slow pace at
which the peace process has been moving forward. The
unsatisfactory quantity and quality of UNITA weapons
handed over to UNAVEM. III also remains a matter of
concern. It must be recalled that the quartering process
will not be complete until all UNITA troops are quartered
in a credible and verifiable manner and all UNITA
weapons, in particular heavy weapons, are handed over to
UNAVEM. III.

The Angolan peace process is now moving into its
most critical stage. The three key tasks of the Lusaka
Protocol - the quartering of UNITA troops, the
formation of the unified armed forces, and the
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation - should be completed in the coming
days or weeks. The peace process will remain incomplete
unless these crucial tasks are successfully achieved in
good time. The draft resolution on which the Council is
about to vote correctly outlines, in paragraphs 6, 8, 12
and 13, the nature of these tasks and specific steps to be
taken by the Angolan parties. We urge the Angolan
parties to implement their commitments without further
delay.

In overcoming the remaining obstacles to the peace
process, there is no substitute for the political will of the
parties themselves. Mutual trust between President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi is central to the commitment and
political will of the parties. In this respect, we attach great
importance to arriving at a clear understanding between
the two leaders regarding their respective roles and the
nature of the posts to be allocated to UNITA leaders in
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation.
Problems of this nature can best be resolved in a meeting
between the two leaders. We view the relevance of
paragraph 14 of the draft resolution in this context.

One daunting challenge that comes with the progress
of the peace process is the demobilization and social
reintegration of ex-combatants. Much has been said about
the inseparable linkage between peace and development.
The presence of a large number of demobilized
ex-combatants in an economically precarious country such
as Angola will most likely generate additional social
tension, hindering the consolidation of hard-won peace.
Hence the urgent need for professional training and the
creation of employment opportunities, which go hand in
hand with economic reconstruction and development.
While the Angolan Government is to play a central role,
we emphasize the support of international financial
institutions as well as the generosity of major donor

 

countries. It is in this light that we view the merit of
paragraphs 11 and 22 of the draft resolution.

Finally, we support the extension of the UNAVEM. III
mandate for three months, as recommended by the
Secretary-General.

In that light, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council.

