I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his briefing and welcome the presence of both Ministers for Foreign A ffairs. Let me first turn to the recent political developments in Kosovo. In the interests of its people, we call on political leaders to show unity and cooperation. Political stability is key to keeping the country on the reform track and for Kosovo to pursue its European aspirations. We particularly underline the progress required with regard to the rule of law. The urgency imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) should inspire the political leadership to put its political differences aside and to provide Kosovo's citizens the protection and assistance needed under the current circumstances. At the end of March, the European Union (EU) reallocated €37 million for emergency support to its partners in the Western Balkans, and €5 million in COVID-19 emergency support has been awarded to Kosovo. A further €61 million for economic recovery measures and loans are awaiting approval. The efficient allocation of these and other resources is a considerable undertaking. It necessitates a stable political environment that fosters bold and inclusive policymaking, with special attention paid to vulnerable groups. We call on the relevant actors to prioritize services for the prevention of and response to gender- based violence, given the worldwide reported increase in domestic violence, affecting in particular women and girls. We reiterate the call of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on all Kosovo institutions and stakeholders to uphold human rights and to leave no one behind in the fight against COVID-19. The struggle against the virus and its impact benefits from tangible regional cooperation without ulterior motives. We welcome the pragmatic approach taken by the Serbian and Kosovo authorities on health issues during the current crisis, facilitated by prior agreements under the EU dialogue. We encourage the parties to continue and further expand these efforts for the benefit of their populations. Also, the recent decision of the Kosovo Government to lift the customs tariffs on goods imported from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina has produced tangible results on the ground as the flow of goods has resumed. We hope that this first positive gesture is the prelude to further confidence-building initiatives and the resumption of the EU-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. We call for the implementation of the existing agreements concluded in the framework of the EU-facilitated dialogue and welcome the recent appointment of Miroslav Lajeak as EU Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue and other Western Balkans regional issues. The EU remains resolved to end the current status quo between Pristina and Belgrade. We invite both parties to engage with the EU Special Representative with a view to reaching a comprehensive normalization of relations in the form of a legally binding agreement. To conclude, I would like to reiterate our engagement in favour of transitional justice. Contradictory narratives about Kosovo's past continue to create division. Only by truthfully facing its past will Kosovo be able to consolidate lasting peace and reconciliation. In their efforts to achieve truth, justice and reparations for past human rights violations, it is important that the authorities consult and engage with civil society and grass-roots organizations. Victims' needs must be placed at the centre of the process, with special attention to the plight of missing persons and their families.
