Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for your presence in presiding over this open debate at
such a critical time. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his briefing and welcome Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk of Ukraine at this very difficult and decisive
time for him and his country. It is important that
the Council has heard directly from him today. We
should commend him and the Ukrainian authorities
for their restraint and courage in the face of continued
provocation and for their efforts to design a new and
inclusive future for Ukraine.

We welcome all international efforts to find
solutions to the crisis. We commend the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) for their efforts. We support yesterday's
statement by the Group of Seven, which spoke with one
voice in urging Russia to join them and work together
through diplomatic processes to resolve the crisis. We
also commend the efforts of the United States to find
a solution through engagement with both Russia and
Ukraine. Russia must similarly show itself ready to
engage seriously and constructively with the Ukrainian
leaders to resolve the crisis.

In our numerous meetings over the past two weeks,
the messages from Council members have been stark.
Ukraine's territorial integrity must be respected.
Russia must take immediate, deliberate and definitive
steps to de-escalate the situation, including, critically,
ordering Russian troops to return to their bases, and
must allow independent monitors access to Crimea to
verify the situation on the ground. Russia and Ukraine
must engage with each other in direct dialogue at senior
levels.

However, we have seen no sign of change in
Russian actions. Instead, we have seen further Russian
efforts to consolidate its control of Ukrainian territory
in Crimea. It has extended its control of air, sea and
land access to the peninsula. The closure of Crimea's
airspace to non-Russian commercial air traffic has now
further severed connections between Crimea and the
rest of Ukraine. Russian forces have seized Ukrainian
military and Government facilities and laid seige to
others, including the naval headquarters. They have
reportedly laid mines in a number of locations. Such
actions cannot be justified by a perceived threat to
Russian assets or nationals. OSCE High Commissioner
on National Minorities Ms. Thors found no evidence of
violations or threats to the rights of Russian speakers in
Crimea during her visit.

Media freedom has also been severely suppressed
in a clear attempt to prevent coverage of what is
occurring. Attacks on journalists have intensified.
Despite the repeated calls for independent verification
of the situation on the ground, unarmed OSCE
monitors have also been denied access to Crimea three
times now. United Nations representatives have been
similarly unable to conduct visits. The Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for Ukraine, Robert Serry,
was threatened by armed men and Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights Simonovic' has been denied
entry to Crimea. Reports of intimidation of Crimean
Tatars make it all the more crucial that human rights
assessment missions proceed as planned.

The Crimean Parliament's announcement of a
referendum, to be held on Sunday to decide whether
Crimea should secede from Ukraine, was a dangerous
further escalation of tensions and deeply destabilizing;
so, too, were statements by Russian parliamentarians
that Russia would formally accept the results of that
referendum. Any such referendum would contravene
article 73 of the Ukrainian Constitution, which provides
that any alteration of the sovereign territorial boundaries
of Ukraine can be decided only through an all-Ukraine
national referendum. It would be inconsistent with
chapter X of the Constitution, which sets out the
constitutional role of Crimea within Ukraine. That has
been underlined by both Ukraine's Acting President
Turchynov and Prime Minister Yatsenyuk.

The Ukrainian Parliament also demanded on
11 March that the referendum be cancelled. The
Crimean Parliament itself has no standing on that issue.
We also note that the referendum will be conducted at
a time when Russian forces are in control of Crimea.

For all those reasons, the results of the proposed
referendum will be inherently illegitimate and will
not be accepted by the international community. We
welcome the United States proposal that the Council
adopt a draft resolution that would make this clear. We
would support adopting such a draft resolution before
the Sunday referendum.

However, it is not too late to resolve the crisis
peacefully, but the window for that is rapidly closing.
The international community has shown its willingness
to support efforts to resolve the crisis, the continuation
of which will not only have terrible consequences for
the people of Ukraine but will also reverberate far
beyond that. The Ukrainian Parliament has asked the
United Nations for its support and we should remain
ready to assist. International principles that are at the
core of international relations not only in Europe but
globally, and that matter fundamentally to each and
every sovereign State, are at stake.

For diplomacy to have a chance, Russia needs to
actively de-escalate the situation. It must pull back
its forces to their bases and decrease their numbers to
agreed levels. It must also allow international observers
access to Crimea to verify the situation on the ground
and accept the proposed OSCE monitoring mission. It
must also demonstrate its respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, including by
desisting from any support for the referendum proposed
this Sunday. And it must engage in direct dialogue
with Ukraine, as Ukraine has repeatedly requested,
either bilaterally or through diplomatic mechanisms,
such as the contact group that has been proposed. The
international community has offered its assistance
and dialogue. It is now imperative that Russia work
with international partners to ensure that the crisis is
resolved peacefully.

