Mr. Kamau: Let me begin by thanking the French
presidency of the Security Council for inviting the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to this briefing.
The PBC takes these opportunities seriously. I also
commend you, Sir, for the manner in which you have
conducted the affairs of the Council.

At the outset, I wish to thank my Vice-Chairs - the
Permanent Representative of Sweden, Ambassador
Skoog, who is also the former Chair, and Ambassador
Hahn Choonghee of the Republic of Korea - for their
continued support as Vice-Chairs of the PBC. I would
also like to recognize the continuing sterling work and
commitment of all the configuration Chairs and the
support that the PBC gets from its membership and the
Peacebuilding Support Office.

Two months ago, on 27 April the General Assembly
and the Security Council adopted two substantially
identical resolutions - resolutions 70/262 and 2282
(2016), respectively - which, building on the excellent
work done in 2015 by Ambassador Rosenthal and the
Advisory Group of Experts on the peacebuilding review,
recognize that sustaining peace is a shared task to be
fulfilled by Governments and national stakeholders,
but that it also needs sustained international attention
and assistance to countries affected by or at risk of
conflict. Those resolutions emphasize, inter alia, that
sustaining peace requires more coherence among
the security, development, humanitarian and human
rights actors of the United Nations system, as well as
more coordination among General Assembly, Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. The
resolutions also emphasize that sustaining peace
requires a comprehensive approach that looks at all
stages of conflict, with a particular focus on prevention
and the need to address the root causes of conflict.
They call upon the Peacebuilding Commission to
fulfil a number of important functions in the areas of
advocacy, coordination and partnership.

During the recently completed PBC West Africa
tour of Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea and Senegal, the
value of the important messages contained in these
resolutions was reinforced by everything that we heard
from all the stakeholders in all the countries that we
visited. In my capacity as Chair, I would also like to
echo Ambassador Skoog's statement that the support of
the Security Council was mentioned and its contribution
and commitment were recognized everywhere we went.
I just want to commend the Council for that.

In view of the reaffirmed support of the General
Assembly and the Security Council for the PBC,
we have a unique opportunity to move forward the
peacebuilding agenda. Allow me to outline key
initiatives that the Commission has undertaken and our
plans for the remainder of the current session.

First, with regard to the regional approach to
address peacebuilding challenges and opportunities,
the Commission convened two important meetings,
in January and in April this year, to discuss trends
and challenges to peacebuilding at the regional and
subregional levels. Commission members, as well
as additional countries from West Africa, heard
presentations by the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
Peacebuilding Support Office on the most recent
developments affecting peacebuilding in that region,
and discussed thematic and cross-border initiatives.
Both meetings were welcomed by Member States, as
they represented important opportunities to make use
of the convening role of the Commission as an inclusive
platform for policy discussions on matters of peace.

It is my intention to use the mandate of the
Commission, updated recently with new functions, to
expand this approach to other regions, starting with
Central Africa and East Africa in the second half of
the year. Furthermore, on the margins of the meetings
of the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council (PSC) of the African Union earlier this year, I
had informal conversations with members of the Peace
and Security Council, and agreed that we should pursue
deeper conversations with the African Union with a
possibility of undertaking a visit to Addis Ababa and,
even possibly, a retreat between the PBC and the PSC.

Secondly, with regard to the role of peacebuilding
in post-Ebola recovery, humanitarian crises around the
world have shown themselves to be great disruptors
of peace and security. They disrupt and destroy
communities, sometimes causing great loss of life and
at other times uprooting entire communities, resulting
in the displacement of people, with the consequence of
triggering migration and refugees outflows.

As a follow-up, therefore, to the important work done
by the Commission during the Ebola crisis, I recently
undertook a visit to West Africa, where, together with
a delegation composed of Chairs and Ambassadors
of countries that are on the agenda, I assessed and
witnessed first hand the road to recovery from the Ebola
emergency in three ofthe most affected countries. What
we witnessed was resolute determination and success in
beating back a plague that was billed to be, at the onset,
one of biblical proportions. Besides the tragic loss of
life of thousands of people and the horrible suffering
of many more, what Ebola has done is to expose the
fragility of the affected countries and compounded and
set back what were already difficulty economic and
peacebuilding challenges.

But I also came away from West Africa with
another impression - one of Governments and
people determined to not only completely eradicate
Ebola from their midst, but to also turn around their
countries by building their economies, integrating
their societies and nurturing sustainable peace. The
gratitude expressed for the support received from the
international community was everywhere we visited,
and in that regard, as I said earlier, I must commend the
Security Council for its swift and determined response,
which drew the attention of the world to the onset of
the crisis two years ago and the resultant and extensive
support extended to the affected regions. We came
away from the mission to West Africa convinced that
the countries were on a strong path to recovery, but that
the sustained support of the international community
was needed. We think that this should be kept in place
for the next 12 to 24 months in order to totally complete
Ebola recovery efforts.

Thirdly, on the issue of partnerships, a key value
of the Commission rests in its ability to engage
not only with such key partners as regional and
subregional organizations, but also with international
financial institutions and civil society organizations.
We have witnessed the important value to transition
that partnerships can give to all our peacebuilding
efforts. Tomorrow, the Commission will convene its
third annual session to discuss the topic of transition.
That meeting represents an important opportunity
for the Commission to strengthen its relations with
key partners.

I wish to invite all Council members to actively
participate in the discussion, particularly in view of the
relevance of the topic for the Council's deliberations
during the formation, review and drawdown of
peacekeeping operations and special political operation
mandates. In that connection, I wish to thank the
President of the Security Council for his decision to
attend the closing session.

As stated earlier, it is my intention to further
strengthen the relations between the Commission and
the African Union, as the Union is one of the PBC's
key strategic partners, and I plan to visit, as I said, its
headquarters in the second part of the year.

Partnerships also include cooperation between
the PBC, General Assembly, Security Council and
the Economic and Social Commission. I therefore
look forward to the informal interactive dialogue that
the President of the Security Council has organized
for this morning, as well as to the joint event of the
Economic and Social Council and the PBC scheduled
for this coming Friday. This is truly a Peacebuilding
Week for what we hope, in fact, will be a historic
peacebuilding year.

Fourthly, and finally, with regard to working
methods, 10 years after the creation ofthe PBC, Member
States are calling for a more effective and efficient
Commission. If it is to be able to fulfil its advisory
role to the General Assembly and Security Council,
and ultimately assist countries affected by conflict,
the PBC needs to consider diversifying its working
methods to enhance its efficiency and flexibility. It is
my intention to dedicate the second half of the tenth
session to convening discussions in the Organizational
Committee on revising the provisional rules of the
procedure of the PBC and exploring options to diversify
its working methods.
We need to consider going beyond the rigid
mechanisms of country configurations and be ready to
respond in a flexible way to any request of interested
countries, in accordance with the relevant provisions,
while maintaining national ownership and leadership
in peacebuilding. We also need to be able to consider
cross-cutting and thematic issues. Most importantly, we
need to work towards a peacebuilding whose members
are engaged and ready to bring forward the work of
the Commission. We therefore hope that the Security
Council will give its concurrence and support on all the
foregoing matters that I have mentioned.

