The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
humanitarian aspects of issues before the Council.

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and
security, and reaffirms the purposes and principles of
the Charter. The Council also reaffirms its
commitment to the principles of the political
independence, sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of all States.

"The Security Council recognizes the importance
of the humanitarian dimension to the maintenance of
international peace and security and to its
consideration of humanitarian issues relating to the
protection of all civilians and other non-combatants in
situations of armed conflict. The Council recognizes
that humanitarian crises can be both causes and
consequences of conflicts and that they can affect the
Council's efforts to prevent and end conflicts, and deal
with other threats to international peace and security.

"The Security Council affirms that timely
consideration of the following humanitarian issues
contributes to the prevention of escalation of conflicts
and to the maintenance of international peace and
security: access for United Nations and associated
personnel, other humanitarian personnel and
humanitarian supplies to the war-affected civilians;
humanitarian components in peace agreements and
peacekeeping operations; coordination between the
Council and the relevant United Nations organs and
agencies and regional bodies; and resource constraints.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
concern for the well-being and rights of
war-affected civilians, and reiterates its call to
all parties to a conflict to ensure safe and
unimpeded access in accordance with
international law by humanitarian personnel to
such civilians. The Council recognizes that
cooperation of all parties concerned is vital for
effectiveness and safety in providing
humanitarian assistance. In this regard, the
Council reiterates its call for combatants to
ensure the safety, security and freedom of
movement of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel. The
Council stresses the importance of providing
assistance to all those in need, with particular
emphasis on women and children and other
vulnerable groups affected by armed conflict,
in accordance with the principle of impartiality.

"The Security Council notes that full and
timely support for humanitarian components
can be critical in ensuring and enhancing the
sustainability of any peace agreement and
post-conflict peace-building. It emphasizes the
importance of inclusion of humanitarian
elements in peace negotiations and agreements,
including the issue of prisoners of war,
detainees and missing persons and others
protected by international humanitarian law.
The Council invites the Secretary-General to
encourage the early consideration of such
humanitarian elements in peace negotiations
sponsored or supported by the United Nations,
as appropriate. In cases of peace negotiations
sponsored or supported directly by Member
States, the Council calls on Member States to
draw, as appropriate, upon the capacity of
United Nations funds, programmes and
specialized agencies as well as other relevant
international humanitarian organizations and
regional bodies.

"The Security Council also notes that in
some instances the integration of humanitarian
components into peacekeeping operations
would contribute effectively to their carrying
out their mandate. In this regard, the Council
notes the importance of adequate training for
peacekeeping personnel in international
humanitarian law and human rights and with
regard to the special situations of women and

 

children as well as vulnerable population groups.
The Council notes with appreciation the inclusion
of personnel to handle child protection issues in
some recent peacekeeping operations and
encourages the inclusion of such personnel in
future operations, particularly in the context of
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers
and where there are large numbers of displaced
and other war-affected children. The Council
welcomes and encourages efforts by the United
Nations to sensitize peacekeeping personnel in
the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS and
other communicable diseases.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of effective coordination among
relevant United Nations organs and agencies,
regional bodies, other intergovernmental and
international organizations and other
humanitarian actors in the field in situations of
ongoing conflict and peace-building through,
inter alia, the development of strategic
frameworks, and expresses its willingness to
consider ways to improve such coordination. In
this regard, the Council notes the need for further
improvement of communication, information
flows and coordination between the
peacekeeping, humanitarian and development
aspects of United Nations action.

"The Security Council recognizes the role
played by international humanitarian
organizations and non-governmental
organizations in providing humanitarian
assistance and alleviating the impact of
humanitarian crises, and further recognizes the
specific mandate of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in this regard. It emphasizes the
importance for these organizations to uphold the
principles of neutrality, impartiality and humanity
in their humanitarian activities.

"The Security Council notes with concern

that inadequate financial support can undermine
efforts to address human suffering in certain
contexts. The Council recognizes the need for
appropriate financial support for humanitarian
activities, and calls for adequate funding of
humanitarian activities, bilateral or otherwise,
in particular in support of multilateral efforts.
The Council notes the importance of early
engagement and disbursal of funds from the
international financial institutions. The Council
also notes with satisfaction that its previous
statements calling for full support to the United
Nations Consolidated Appeals have had a
positive impact, and expresses its willingness to
continue to encourage a generous response to
such appeals.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to include the
humanitarian situation in his regular briefing to
the Council on countries under review,
including on the funding status of the United
Nations Consolidated Appeals, where
appropriate. It further requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that his regular
country reports continue to include a
substantive, analytical section on humanitarian
issues and their impact on international efforts
to implement United Nations mandated
activities.

"The Security Council will remain seized
of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6 pm.
