Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Ten years ago, Spain was a member of the Security
Council, and I myself represented Spain at the time. So
I had occasion to follow closely the debates that were
held, and I also shared the frustration in the Council
over the tragic developments in Somalia. After ups and
downs, all kinds of difficulties, the Security Council
finally gave up, as we all know.

Somalia has since been abandoned to fate. The
Somalis have spent a decade in truly difficult
conditions - to put it mildly. They have been
marginalized by the international community, and have
been in an appalling humanitarian, economic and social
situation. Accordingly, we feel that the international
community owes a debt to Somalia. That is why we
wish to hail all the statements we have heard this
afternoon from leading players in the Somali national
reconciliation in process. As we have heard, that
process is being conducted by the Somalis themselves,
at different levels of social organization. With
difficulty, they have been struggling to re-establish
transitional institutions, with assistance first and
foremost from subregional and regional organizations
and with a United Nations presence. I would like to
note the presence of the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Winston Tubman. There has
also been assistance from donors; I would like
specifically to highlight the support provided by the
European Union.

This process has led to the establishment of
transitional federal institutions which, we hope, will
soon be followed by the establishment of a broadly
representative Government which will have the
technical capacity to restore the basic mechanisms of
an administration and of public services. Clearly,
international assistance and cooperation will be
required in that respect.

All of these efforts by the Somalis themselves, by
countries in the region and by subregional and regional
organizations, should be welcomed, acknowledged and
supported by the international community. The
Security Council already did this in its presidential
statement dated 26 October 2004 (S/PRST/2004/38).
We must remain ready to provide all possible
cooperation to the efforts under way on the ground.

Specifically, we welcome the African Union's
announced readiness to undertake a monitoring task
and to deploy observers on the ground. But, as has
been said here, much remains to be done. The road is
not an easy one. And still to come is the crucial stage:
the establishment of the new institutions on Somali
soil. In our View, this must be achieved through
continuous dialogue and understanding among the
various sectors of Somali society. This is something
that cannot be imposed, and the Security Council must
stand ever ready to be politically and otherwise
supportive of the entire transitional process; it is
essential to re-establish the Somali State, so that
Somalia can resume its rightful place in Africa and in
the international community.
For those reasons, we wish to express our support
for the draft presidential statement that has been
prepared on the initiative of the Chinese delegation; it
has been worked out and is the subject of consensus
among Council members.

