Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I would first like to
wish your country and nation, Mr. President, a happy,
peaceful and prosperous new year. Romania joins others
in thanking China for preparing and organizing today's
thought-provoking debate on the eve of the seventieth
anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations. This
is indeed an excellent opportunity for United Nations
Members to reaffirm, individually and collectively,
their commitment to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations founding treaty. Romania, of course, is
honoured to firmly re-state its original pledge.

I align myself with the statements delivered earlier
on behalf of the European Union and by the Ambassador
of Austria on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Rule
of Law, and would like to add a few thoughts in my
national capacity.

Reflecting on history, let us go back for a few
seconds to the moment 70 years ago when United
States President Harry Truman addressed the national
delegates gathered in San Francisco. He recalled the
brave women and men who gave their lives so that future
generations could live in a secure world ruled byjustice.
"Let us labour", he said, "to achieve a peace which is
really worthy of their great sacrifice." Achieving a
peace worthy of their sacrifice is a commandment
we are still bound to and challenged by today. After
70 years of working together, and 70 years since the end
of the Second World War, mistrust between States has
not completely disappeared, to put it mildly.
The myriad conflicts we are witnessing
today - from Ukraine to the frozen one in the
Transnistrian region, from Nagorno-Karabakh to
Abkhazia and Ossetia, to name just a few, in addition to
heinous phenomena such as the spread of radicalization
and terrorism - require that the United Nations and
the international community remain vigilant and strive
tirelessly to provide relief through common action.
While the security landscape has fundamentally
changed, the core of our collective security system is
the same. The ban on the use of force in international
relations is as valid today as it was in 1945. The
necessity of common action is as valid today as it was
70 years ago, while of course exponentially enhanced
by the speed of interaction in a globalized world. In
that context, my country reaffirms the importance of
the resolution of all conflicts, without differentiation,
on the same basis - respect for the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the norms and principles
of international law, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States within their internationally
recognized borders, and in a framework of negotiations
conducted in good faith and in inclusive formats.

Promoting the rule of law in international relations
has been a constant aim of Romanian foreign policy.
One example is that on, 5 February, the Romanian
Senate unanimously enacted a law accepting the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. It will soon enter into force, enabling a
declaration of acceptance to be deposited with the
Secretariat as a token of Romania's full commitment
to international law and its recognition of the Court's
prominent contribution to international peace.

The international community has repeatedly called
in question the strategies and instruments used by the
United Nations in fulfilling its mandate, including
with regard to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That does not mean that the principles of
the Charter are being questioned, but that the capacity
to provide prompt and efficient responses to threats
and challenges needs constant improvement and
enhancement. Romania considers the role of regional
actors to be an essential element of a well-functioning,
efficient and legitimate collective-security system.
While the Council retains the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, regional
organizations are increasingly recognized as being
instrumental in the prevention, resolution and
management of conflicts. In our view, mutually
beneficial cooperation could be ensured by even more
active and continuous engagement on the part of the
Security Council, capable of acting in a united and
cooperative manner.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
spells out the principles that guide partnerships with
regional arrangements and agencies. The Charter
provides no precise definition of regional organizations,
thus allowing for a variety of cooperative efforts. It is
clear by now that such cooperative efforts should be
undertaken with willing and capable partners, in order
to ensure success.

In 2005, Romania put forward what later became
the Council's first resolution to address cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security.
We are still convinced today - this year, when my
country will celebrate 60 years of United Nations
membership - that developing strong, flexible
partnerships with regional actors will assist the Council
in discharging its increasingly diversified duties, both
efficiently and legitimately.

The huge loss and suffering that led to the
establishment of the Organization was a tribute to the
fundamental values of justice and human dignity. We
must continue working together to achieve a peace
worthy of that sacrifice. I leave participants with
the thoughts of the outstanding Romanian diplomat
Nicolae Titulescu, the only twice-elected President
of the League of Nations, who said, "Each of us has a
mission. Together, how can we fail to succeed?"

