Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your presence throughout our
deliberations today. Bangladesh also thanks the
presidency of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for
organizing this high-level open debate. We thank the
briefers for sharing their insights.

We recall the implementation of the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) under the leadership
of the delegation of Spain last year. We reiterate our
conviction that the action-oriented and balanced
approach of resolution 2325 (2016) will help
Member States further consolidate their respective
1540-compliance regimes.

The growing use of illicit financing, new
technologies and the dark web by non-State actors,
including terrorists, continues to pose new challenges to
Member States. Those trends require us to devise more
innovative, well-coordinated and fool-proof national
mechanisms, especially for securing the production, use,
storage and transport of materials related to chemical
and biological weapons. It also remains of paramount
importance to ensure cross-border controls against the
illicit transfer of arms, ammunition, weapons of mass
destruction and their means of production and delivery.
In order to build on the progress in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and address the emerging
gaps, we would reiterate the following four points.

First, the concept note for this debate aptly
recognizes that the task ofimplementing resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term undertaking. It would therefore be
crucial to support its implementation in a coordinated
and consistent, yet context-specific manner. The regular
sharing of best practices, including through the national
points of contact network, would be particularly useful.
In that regard, we recall Bangladesh's participation in
the training course for points of contact held in Qingdao,
China, in September 2015, and we look forward to
participating in the upcoming one in August this year.

Secondly, the wide divergences in implementation
among Member States will continue to persist unless
meaningful financial and technical assistance is
provided to overcome the structural constraints faced
by many States. We would expect Member States and
the relevant entities in a position to do so to redouble
their efforts to provide concrete, needs-based assistance
to interested States upon their request. The 1540
Committee's Group of Experts can continue to help
Member States to better identify and articulate their
needs and match them with a relevant offer of support
and expertise by States and other stakeholders.

Thirdly, resolution 2325 (2016) makes a strong case
for further enhancing the 1540 Committee's cooperation
and interface with the relevant international, regional
and subregional entities. We reaffirm the need to avoid

duplication and to facilitate assistance and the sharing
of expertise on a regional basis.

Fourthly, we take note of the rapid advances in
science and technology that are susceptible to abuse
or risks of proliferation by non-State actors, including
terrorists. We call upon the 1540 Committee to help
enhance our information and knowledge base about
the evolving risks, especially those requiring our
pre-emptive action.

The threat of WMDs falling into the hands of
unauthorized non- State actors has rightly been identified
as a looming catastrophe. As a responsible member
of the international community, Bangladesh remains
committed to further strengthening its efforts to help
prevent any such situation and its grave consequences.
We continue to work to make our voluntary reports to the
1540 Committee more informative and comprehensive.

In conclusion, we affirm that we associate ourselves
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

