Mr. Morris: I thank you very much, Sir, for the
distinct privilege, pleasure and honour of being with
you today on behalf of the World Food Programme.

The purpose of my Visit is to talk about Africa,
probably with a focus on Southern Africa, but, like all
members of the Council, the World Food Programme is
very focused on issues in Iraq. We have had a presence
in Iraq since 1991 and have been a major implementer
of the oil for food programme since late 1995. I would
be pleased to entertain members' questions or
comments about the work of the World Food
Programme in Iraq after I conclude my opening
statement.
Our work in Iraq focuses on the potential of
having to feed 27 million people in that country at a
cost of $1.3 billion for a period of six months. It is
interesting that my assignment today is to talk about
Africa, where nearly 200 million people are
malnourished and 50 million are severely at risk,
especially women and children. People in Iraq have
had a generous Government food supply. I can tell the
Council today that most people in Iraq have food in
their households for the next month. It is ironic that, if
people in parts of Africa had a month's worth of food
in supply in their homes, they would be overwhelmed.
In fact, we have a bit of a double standard in the world.
How is it that we routinely accept a level of suffering
and hopelessness in Africa that we would never accept
in any other part of the world? My View is that we
simply cannot let this stand.

The causes of Africa's food crises remain much
as I described them in December - a lethal
combination of recurring droughts; difficult, failed
economic policies; hostility and conflict; and the
extraordinary, almost unquantifiable impact of
HIV/AIDS. The World Food Programme will have a
budget in Africa this year of $1.8 billion. May I tell
you that this equals the entire budget of the World
Food Programme worldwide in 2002.

Worldwide, global food-aid commitments have
dropped precipitously over the last 10 years, from 15
million metric tons in 1999 to less than 10 million last
year. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) would tell us that chronic
hunger is actually rising in the developing world
outside China and the World Health Organization
would tell us that hunger is still the greatest factor in
poor health in the world.

There is good news. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan has placed the issue of African hunger at the top
of his agenda. Secondly, France and the United States
are working together, within the framework of the G8,
to focus the world on the African food crises. President
Chirac will put this issue at the top of the agenda at the
G8 meeting in Evian in June and President Bush has
announced the creation of a new $200 million fund to
prevent famine in Africa.

In Southern Africa, and to a lesser degree in the
Horn of Africa, the impact of AIDS on the political and
economic structure grows daily. In January, I returned
to the region along with Stephen Lewis, who is the

Secretary-General's Special Envoy for HIV/AIDS in
Africa. We were struck by the impact the disease was
having on both governance and the food sector, and on
how the two were intertwined. Much of Africa's
political and technical talent is dying or emigrating -
a huge depletion of African human resources. More
than 7 million African farmers have lost their lives to
HIV/AIDS. The peak impact of HIV/AIDS in Africa
will not be felt until 2005-2007.

How do you turn around food production in
countries that no longer have a Viable agricultural
extension service? How do rural children learn to farm
when their parents are too sick to teach them? How do
you maintain a basic educational system for children
when their teachers are dying faster than new ones can
be trained?

In a conversation with the President of Zambia
that I will never forget, he said, "Jim, the most
important thing you can do for the people of Zambia is
to help us train teachers. Last year we lost 2,000
teachers to death by HIV/AIDS in Zambia, and we
were only able to replace half of them".

The good news is that because of the generosity
of many countries and the work of the World Food
Programme (WFP), our non-governmental organization
partners and other important United Nations agencies,
we were able to deliver more than 620,000 tons of food
in the region to more than 10 million people, and
serious death and starvation were avoided.

The issue of genetically modified (GM) food has
faded and is no longer delaying or disrupting
deliveries. Five of the six countries needing aid in
Southern Africa are accepting processed and milled
GM. food. We simply could not have reached the level
of food deliveries we have now attained without the
constructive problem-solving undertaken as it relates to
the GM. issue.

The WFP remains especially concerned about
Zimbabwe, where there have been numerous media
reports that food assistance is being politicized. We are
confident that this is not the case with our food. In the
few instances where we have received credible reports
of abuse, we suspended those operations. I have met
with President Mugabe six times, and we have offered
the services of the United Nations to monitor and
verify the food being distributed by the Government
there, but we have not yet received a positive response.
Inflation, Government monopolization of the food
sector and the impact of the land redistribution scheme
are likely to mean that the food situation will not
stabilize any time soon in Zimbabwe.

Our goal is not to politicize but to depoliticize
food aid in Zimbabwe. Food should be available to all,
based on humanitarian principles, with any other
consideration being absolutely inappropriate. That is
the case everywhere we work. Hungry people cannot
afford to be caught in political crossfire. There are
those who would have us pull out in crisis situations to
punish Governments and to take a stand on political or
human rights issues. But WFP believes that emergency
aid simply cannot be politicized, for good or for ill.
When people in power, be they Government or rebels,
deny food aid to certain vulnerable groups of the
population, we will speak out. While we see our role as
neutral and much like that of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies, our member States have also asked
us to be advocates for the hungry. That has put us on a
tightrope and in a perpetual balancing act. When
Governments take economic actions, such as banning
private trade or monopolizing food imports, which
undermine the food sector and exacerbate hunger, our
member States expect us to speak out, and we will.

With respect to the situation in Ethiopia, Eritrea
and the Sudan - the Horn of Africa - the numbers of
people at risk are comparable to those in Southern
Africa. In Southern Africa, a little more than 15 million
people are at risk, with half of them in Zimbabwe.
More than 11 million people are absolutely at risk of
hunger in Ethiopia, with another 3 million on the edge:
20 to 25 per cent of the population.

In Eritrea, the situation is much more difficult. It
is a smaller country with a smaller population, but with
2.2 of the 3.3 million people absolutely at risk. The
situation is further complicated by the conflict, with a
good many members of the military yet to be resituated
to their home towns.

Clearly, drought is the major culprit in the Horn
of Africa. We have had good response to our needs for
Ethiopia but a mediocre response to our work in
Eritrea. The interesting thing about Ethiopia is that of
all the countries in the world it has the highest per
capita emergency support and the lowest per capita
development support. I had the good fortune to be there
recently, and I visited communities where a few
hundred dollars' worth of food properly used in food-
for-work programmes helped communities plan for
their future, think about soil and soil erosion and think
about the impoundment of water. They planned and
prepared, and they will get through this crisis. In the
experience, they developed a cadre of community
leadership that will serve those communities superbly
for a long period of time.

Meanwhile, a few miles away, that kind of
preparation - investments in prevention and
development - was not made, and they are in a
catastrophe. There are probably 10,000 communities in
Ethiopia that need this kind of help. We are working in
800 right now.

Food security has also deteriorated in the western
Sahel - Mauritania, Cape Verde, the Gambia, Senegal
and Mali - with approximately a million people at
risk. We are grateful to many member countries for the
investments that they have made in our early warning
food response systems. We were not prepared for the
problem in Ethiopia of 15 years ago. With the new
early response systems, assessment systems and
surveillance systems, we are now much better prepared
to respond.

The issues in Angola, also in Southern Africa, are
a bit different, coming out of 30 to 40 years of conflict
and armed Violence. The good news is that there is
peace on the ground. Food is critical to the recovery of
the Angolan economy and to maintaining the peace. It
was our initial intent to feed about a million people in
Angola. Today, we are feeding 1.8 million people. By
June, the number will be 2.2 million people. Angola is
a wealthy country that needs, over time, to develop a
substantial agricultural system.

With respect to the issue of refugees and
internally displaced people, the World Food
Programme cooperates with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It is our
responsibility to provide the food. Today, in Africa, we
are feeding 1.8 million refugees and 5.7 million
internally displaced people. It is hugely expensive. The
turmoil that this can cause if it is not done properly
will have enormous effects on the countries where we
work. This is a particularly difficult issue in western
coastal Africa. Members have all followed the issues in
Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, where there are between 4
million and 5 million refugees - people moving about.
The conflict is producing enormous chaos in the
region.

There are things that we need to do and things
that we can do. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and WFP have
warned that the fate of more than 1.2 million refugees
in Africa is uncertain due to the lack of funding for
much needed food aid. There are places where we have
had to cut rations in half or by 25 per cent. Major
interruptions in the food pipeline are feared in
Tanzania, Uganda, Kenya, Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Algeria and the Sudan: the major nations in Africa that
host refugees.

A few weeks ago here at the United Nations, we
had a very positive session with the Group of Eight,
which the Secretary-General kicked off, in which we
talked about what the world needs to do to get the
issues in Africa on a firmer foundation. We talked
about the fact that Africans themselves will ultimately
have to provide the leadership. They will be
responsible for their own domestic policies. Global
trade issues will have to be resolved in such a way that
they do not become such a huge disincentive for
agricultural production and export in places in Africa.

The specific points that we left with the group on
that occasion are as follows.

First, we need a far stronger donor commitment
to emergency food aid based on better targeting and
more sophisticated early-warning systems. The World
Food Programme is funded entirely with voluntary
contributions from countries. We receive no core
funding from the United Nations. We are the largest
humanitarian agency in the world, and our annual
budget is larger than the United Nations budget for its
New York City operation. We receive 90 per cent of
our support from nine countries plus the European
Community. There are two dozen more countries that
now have the capability to help us, and there are many
countries that now have agricultural surpluses that can
help us by providing commodity but that do not have
the cash to pay for transportation.

We have looked for ways to twin countries that
have cash with countries that have commodities, and
we will see how we can make that work. The leverage
is enormous. India has committed a million metric tons
of wheat for Afghanistan in part for us to produce high-
energy biscuits for a million school children in
Afghanistan. We need help from countries that can help
with the transportation of the wheat biscuits that are
produced in India. We have had good support for the
first time ever from the Russian Federation. We are
working hard to bring new partners into our
programme.

Secondly, there is a need for a substantial
increase in support for investment in basic agricultural
infrastructure, both micro and macro, especially
irrigation infrastructure, but also roads and markets.
There is a need to make agricultural work easier on
women. Women do 80 per cent of the agricultural work
in Africa. Women now are 58 per cent of those infected
with HIV/AIDS in Africa. They are expected to
produce the food and to serve the food. They are
expected to give care to so many people who are
critically ill in their homes or regions. The world needs
to focus on making agricultural production easier for
women in Africa.

I had a good visit with the Minister of Agriculture
of Malawi. He said, "Jim, the most important thing the
world could do for us would be to invest about $77
million in an irrigation system that would serve Malawi
countrywide." Malawi is a country with huge lakes and
huge water resources, and a properly constructed
irrigation system would address its agricultural issues
in a very substantial way. The Secretary-General's call
for a green revolution in Africa is one of the most
important statements to be made recently.

Thirdly, we propose funding of a $300 million
African food emergency fund that would be an
immediate response account that can be used at the
very outset of a food crisis. Our emergency response
account now has $35 million, and our experience
suggests that those dollars that are available to invest
immediately when there is a crisis on the horizon are
those that allow families to keep their farms together
and to not sell their coping mechanisms; a little help at
the beginning is worth a lot of help later on in the
process.

I should also say that in the crisis in Southern
Africa, we were very successful in raising cash and
commodities to meet the food requirements. We were
not very successful in raising the resources for non-
food items. Water and sanitation, health, medicine,
vaccination and educational issues are every bit
as important as food, and somehow the donor
community - and as head of WFP I am grateful for
this - finds it easier to focus on food and more
difficult to focus on other issues. Investments made in
farm implements, seed and fertilizer have enormous
leverage and help to put people back on their feet. I
would encourage members to take a look at those kinds
of issues.

I mentioned the issue of non-traditional donors.

Finally, let me say that the piece of our work that
I consider to be maybe the most important is our work
with school feeding. There are 300 million hungry
children in the world. If we take the Millennium
Development Goal of cutting hunger and poverty in
half by 2015 seriously - there are 800 million hungry
people in the world, nearly 40 per cent of them
children; half of the children do not go to school, and
most of those are girls - the single most important
investment we can make is in educating children.
Educated children become better citizens, better
teachers, better parents and better farmers. Whatever
one chooses to do with one's life, a person's education
directly affects the quality of life and the quality of the
community.

We know how to feed a child in school for about
$35 per year. For less than $1 per year, we can have
extraordinary health interventions led by the World
Health Organization (WHO) that reduce worms and all
sorts of other serious health issues. We fed 16 million
children last year; we need to feed 100 million
worldwide and we need to feed another 50 million in
Africa. This will be the single best investment, with
great leverage, that we can make worldwide in
beginning to turn the future of Africa around.

I am more grateful than I could ever express to
the many countries that have helped us. Last week I
had the most remarkable phone call from Canada.
Canada committed $75 million over the next three
years to feed school children. I just had a terrific Visit
in Switzerland, and Switzerland committed to feed an
additional 10,000 school children. We are working hard
to engage the private sector with our work. A
magnificent Dutch company - TPG - with 150,000
employees committed each one of its employees to
feed a school child. If we are thoughtful and
resourceful about this and cover a wide range of
territory, we will have the opportunity to change the
world by feeding school children.

I want to underline the critical importance of
peacekeeping and diplomacy. War and conflict, in
Africa as elsewhere, quickly lead to hunger. People
who are hungry and without food have risky
behaviours and tend to be more aggressive. War and
conflict cut productivity, increase HIV/AIDS, increase
populations of refugees and internally displaced
persons and dramatically affect children. War changes
the focus of the way countries do their business. There
is no doubt that in much of Africa hunger and poverty
are fuelling conflict and robbing Africans of the bright
future they deserve. Their suffering cannot be any less
to us than the suffering we see elsewhere in the world
today. We all must do more to help.

