Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting. At
the outset, we congratulate Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde on
assuming her new post as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union and Head of
the United Nations Office to the AU. We also would
like to thank Mr. Sma'il Chergui for his thorough
briefing on cooperation between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council.

Cooperation between international and regional
organizations is indispensable, given the international
necessities, circumstances and enormous challenges,
on the one hand, and the unprecedented expansion of
the role of regional organizations in the areas of peace,
security and stability, especially in the light of the
growing number of national and regional conflicts,
on the other. Emphasizing the importance of such
cooperation in addressing security challenges and
settling African conflicts, the African Union (AU)
sought to cooperate with the United Nations pursuant
to Chapter VIII of the Charter.

Kuwait's relationship with the African continent
is historical and deep-rooted and precedes the
establishment of official diplomatic relations with its
States. That relationship was significantly bolstered
after Kuwait's accession to the AU as an observer in
December 2011. This is an unequivocal evidence of
Kuwait's recognition of the political and economic
importance of Africa.

The report of former Secretary-General Kofi Annan
on the causes of conflict in Africa and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/3l8) clearly noted that there can be no peace
without development and no development without
peace. That is consistent with one ofthe basic principles
and pillars of Kuwait's foreign policy, particularly the
policy of the Kuwaiti Fund for Economic Development
since 1961, as reflected in its contributions of over
$10 billion to African countries. The State of Kuwait,
as an observer in the AU and together with its member
States, will continue to implement the AU Vision for
peace, progress and prosperity, as well as the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of
regional peace, security and stability.

The momentum of this cooperation must be
maintained in the light of our understanding that
the tools and mechanisms of the United Nations and
the AU in the area of preventive diplomacy can be
enhanced only by working closely at all levels, be it
in the framework of cooperation between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council or of
the United Nations Office to the African Union, not to
mention the close synergy among the Special Envoys
and representatives of the United Nations and the AU,
in addition to scaling up joint field Visits.

It is incumbent on us to advance all the early warning
mechanisms in order to avert future conflicts. We count
on the role of the African members of the AU and their
unified positions to increase cooperation between both
organizations and particularly between both Councils.
Greater harmony and alignment between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union will enhance their existing partnership
and have a positive effect on their joint peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace operations in
conflict-affected countries, not to mention improving
the transparency of information exchanges between
both organs, which will facilitate consistent and
appropriate responses to issues of conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping, peace-support operations
and post-conflict development.

We agree with the Secretary-General that it
is essential to build African countries' capacities,
especially in the area of peacekeeping. We hope that
progress canbemade in ensuring predictable, sustainable
and flexible financing for AU-led peace-support
operations that are mandated by the Security Council.
We commend the fact that the AU continues to cover
25 per cent of the costs of peace-support operation.

We also support the activation of the Peace Fund
and partnership between the AU and the United Nations
in ensuring sustainable and predictable funding. We
emphasize the importance of starting early to develop
a joint understanding of conflicts, coordinate efforts,
ensure responses and ensure effective partnership
between the two organizations and regional economic
groups, which will enable them to achieve their roles
as desired.

We are pleased to see the cooperation between the
two Councils, and we commend the joint communique
to be issued at their twelfthjoint consultative meeting, to
be held tomorrow. We look forward to maintaining that
approach and pace until the desired goals are achieved.

Given the ongoing conflicts in the Arab region, the
State of Kuwait looks forward to enhanced cooperation
between the Security Council and the League of
Arab States in the areas of conflict prevention, early
warning,and conflict resolution through peaceful ways
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

(spoke in English)

On the hundredth anniversary of the birth of the late
great leader Nelson Mandela, I would like to conclude
with a quote attributed to him, which says that "Peace
is the greatest weapon for development that anyone can
have". Indeed, no one can deny the existence today of
the peace-and-development nexus. Development, along
with peace and human rights, is one of the core pillars
of the United Nations. Let us continue to work with
the African Union, through the various bilateral and
multilateral partnerships that we have with it, towards
achieving peace and development in Africa.

