Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China thanks the briefers, Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission to Somalia, and Mr. Dan Smith, Director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, for their briefings. Over the past three months, we have seen positive progress in Somalia's national reconstruction and the preparations for the late 2020 or early 2021 elections. The new electoral code was passed and signed into law, the ninth national development plan was unveiled and the tripartite summit with Eritrea and Ethiopia was held during, which the joint plan of action for 2020 and beyond was adopted. China commends Somalia's efforts to promote international peace, stability and development and welcomes improved relations and cooperation among the countries of the Horn of Africa. In parallel to those developments, Somalia faces some persistent challenges in areas such as the political process, election preparations and socioeconomic development. Terrorism remains a threat to security, while natural phenomena, including floods and the plague of locusts, imperil the country's humanitarian situation. The international community should continue to closely follow the evolving situation in Somalia and provide constructive assistance on the basis of respect for Somali sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. First, we need to help Somalia improve its national governance capacity. The Security Council and the international community at large should uphold the principled position that the country's political process should be Somali-led and -owned, and, based on respect for the Somali Government's leadership, help the country move its political process forward, improve the development of the federal institutions, improve the relationship between the Federal Government and federal member state Governments and create enabling conditions for smooth and peaceful elections in late 2020 or early 2021. Secondly, we need to strengthen Somalia's security capacity-building. The international community should continue to support the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia so that it can function better, as mandated, and provide it with stable, predictable and sustainable funding, help Somalia strengthen its security capacity-building and enable the Somali security forces to take over the responsibility for maintaining national security in phases. Thirdly, we need to deepen cooperation among the United Nations, the African Union and countries of the region on the Somali issue. The international community should support African countries in resolving African issues the African way, and support regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, in playing a leading role in the political settlement of the Somali issue. Fourthly, we need to focus efforts on tackling the root causes of conflict. Somalia has been ravaged by a protracted war, with devastating effects on its socioeconomic development. That is compounded by its significant lack of capacity to cope with climate change and natural disasters. It is necessary to take a sustainable development approach if we are to overcome food and security issues, as well as the humanitarian crisis in the context of climate change. The international community should step up its assistance in such areas as education, health, food security and infrastructure development to help Somalia achieve self-reliant sustainable development as soon as possible. China has long been actively engaged in Somalia's peace process and has provided humanitarian assistance and socioeconomic development support to Somalia. In order to help Somaliarespondto flooding, Chinarecently provided tents, mosquito nets, emergency medical supplies and other in-kind assistance to Somalia. Along with the rest of the international community, China is ready to continue its constructive role in helping Somalia achieve peace, stability and development.
