Mr. Corman (Turkey): I thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive statement. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes and High
Commissioner Pillay for their extensive briefings.

The majority of casualties in armed conflicts
continue to be civilians. We strongly condemn all
deliberate attacks on civilians and the deaths resulting
from the indiscriminate and excessive use of force. As
the Secretary-General outlined in his statement, we are
still witnessing challenges in different parts of the
world in this field. However, the recent debates in the
Council on the protection of civilians have been held
under the shadow of the tragic developments in Gaza.
Today's debate is no exception. Needless to say, recent
incidents there have reminded us all once again of the
importance of full compliance with international law
and the principle of proportionality, and of ensuring
safe humanitarian access to civilian populations,
particularly to vulnerable groups such as women,
children and disabled persons.

The protection of civilians - all civilians - is a
moral imperative. International law has developed a
plethora of rules to protect civilians and, as the High
Commissioner for Human Rights also indicated, all
parties to armed conflict must be held accountable to
those rules. Still, even when parties fully comply with
applicable law, many civilians become victims
nonetheless. Turkey calls on parties to armed conflict
to make amends to the civilians they harm in the same
spirit and in view of their inherent human dignity. In
this context, we would like once again to bring to the
Council's attention our expectations regarding the
investigation on the humanitarian convoy destined for
Gaza.

The primary obligation for protecting civilians
lies with States. The international community also has
a responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States fail to do so. We must address the actual
problems on the ground, including in our decisions on
peacekeeping mandates.

Turkey considers the adoption of resolution 1894
(2009) last November to be a turning point. We
welcome the increased attention paid by the Council to
26

protection issues. We recognize the importance of the
Security Council's resolutions on women, peace and
security, as well as on children and armed conflict, to
further promote the protection agenda. We welcome the
recently adopted resolutions on these areas. As we have
long stressed, a stronger interaction among the
Council, troop and police contributors, special
representatives of the Secretary-General and missions
contributes to greater coherence.

The protection of civilians during peacekeeping
operations is another challenge. The commemoration
of the Srebrenica tragedy this week should be a
reminder to all of us.

We note the fruitful discussions on the protection
agenda. We fully support them. However, we have
three general observations.

First, there is the inclination to stress the
importance of dialogue with non-State armed groups.
While understanding its rationale, we believe that this
new trend requires further careful elaboration of both
its political and its legal aspects.

Secondly, calling counter-terrorist efforts armed
conflict cannot be accepted. We strongly condemn acts
of terrorism and the use of civilians as human shields,
and acknowledge the legitimate right of Governments
to combat terrorism.

Thirdly, the concepts of the protection of civilians
and the responsibility to protect should not be mixed
up with each other. In our view, they are two different
concepts that must not be confused.

We should strengthen the rule of law, human
rights, democracy and good governance for the long-
term, lasting protection of civilians. We should ensure
that the perpetrators of violence against civilians are
held fully accountable for their actions. They should
know that they will eventually face justice.

I would like to conclude by thanking Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes for his excellent and
tireless work for the United Nations humanitarian
cause, and I wish him all the best in his future
endeavours.

