Mr. Estevez-Lepez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish, first of all, to thank you, on behalf of my
delegation, for having convened this open meeting of the
Council, thereby affording us an opportunity to give a brief
account of the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants into society in
Guatemala.

As is known, on 29 December 1996, the
Government of Guatemala concluded with the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) the
Agreement on a Firm and Lasting Peace, which brought
36 years of armed conflict in Guatemala to an end. This
development created the strategic elements required to
carry out the fundamental transformations enabling
Guatemala to consolidate its political democracy and
comprehensive development within the framework of a
multi-ethnic and multicultural society.

The Agreements on the Definitive Ceasefire, on the
Basis for the Reincorporation of the URNG into Legality
and on the Strengthening of Civilian Power and the Role
of the Army in a Democratic Society laid down valuable
guidelines. All matters pertaining to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the ex-combatants into
civil society.

With the entry into force of the peace agreements, a
total of eight camps were set up in five of the
departments of the country. Each of those was provided
with a container into which long-range weapons were to
be deposited as and when the various groups of
combatants arrived. These operations were carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the agreement. Small
arms were not handed over until the process was
completed.

For this purpose the Security Council, by its
resolution 1094 (1997), adopted on 20 January 1997,
approved the dispatch of 155 military observers to
participate in the disarmament process. It was to them
that the ex-combatants handed over their arms. After
being counted and registered, these arms were formally
delivered to the Minister of the Interior of Guatemala on
17 May 1997.

The programme, carried out by the special
Commission for Reintegration, included 5,200 URNG
members, together with their families, totalling some
30,000 persons. The Commission, which officially wound
up its work on 8 December 1998, consisted of
representatives of the Government, the URNG, the United
Nations, the United States Agency for International
Development, the European Union and Spain. All these
bodies participated in an advisory capacity, while the

 

United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala did so as
an observer.

The Commission succeeded in establishing the best
possible conditions for incorporating the URNG members
into the political, economic, social and cultural life of the
country, within a framework of dignity, security, legal
guarantees and the full exercise of their legal rights and
duties as citizens, by the dates specified in the agreement
on the chronology of the process. Matters such as training
and access to land and housing have been part of the socio-
economic integration of the ex-combatants.

To complete the picture, I must mention the official
registration of the URNG as a political party, which, in
alliance with three other political parties, will participate in
the general elections to be held on 7 November 1999.

The incorporation of the URNG into the legal process
and hence the every day life of the country has been a
process that epitomizes the spirit of reconciliation prevailing
among Guatemalans. In rural areas, ex-combatants have, in
many instances, returned to their places of origin and, as a
rule, have been well received, even though other inhabitants
of the particular locality may have fought on the opposite
side during the conflict.

In the political and social life of urban areas, the
presence of the URNG has from the outset been looked
upon as something entirely normal, and this, no doubt, has
been a factor that has extended and heightened the spirit of
pluralism. This is particularly important in a country which,
like Guatemala, has for so long suffered from the barriers
and prejudices arising from discrimination and intolerance.
At the same time, the armed forces has been reduced by
about one third and, as with URNG ex-combatants, support
has been provided for the integration of these former
soldiers into civilian life. The success of the process as a
whole is recognized by all the participants and has been
achieved without serious criminal acts, threats, obstructive
actions or any other type of aggression or violence.

Finally, Guatemalans wish, once again, to thank all
those, including of course the members of the Council, who
have offered us their support. Guatemalans continue to
believe in the possibility of a true process of peace that,
despite the problems it has had to face, continues to move
forward, transforming our country into a democratic and
pluralistic society.

