The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
February, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, Permanent
Representative of Singapore to the United Nations, for
his service as President of the Security Council during
the month of January 2001. I am sure that I speak for
all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mahbubani for the great
diplomatic skill with which he presided over the
Council last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Briefing by His Excellency Major General Joseph
Kabila, President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I request the Chief of Protocol to escort
His Excellency, Major General Joseph Kabila,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
a seat at the Council table.

Major General Joseph Kabila, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, was escorted
to a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): The members
of the Security Council highly appreciate the initiative
of President Joseph Kabila to meet with them at this
stage of his first visit outside the Democratic Republic
of the Congo since he assumed its presidency. The
members of the Council attach great importance to this
meeting and pin high hopes on its conclusions. We
wish President Kabila every success in his noble
mission to lead his people towards peace, security,
stability and progress.

One year ago, on 24 January 2000, under the
presidency of the United States, the Security Council
convened an important meeting at which leaders of the
States signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
participated. On that occasion, the leaders reiterated
their commitment to the Agreement. The meeting
enjoyed the strong and broad support of the
international community in general and of the Security
Council in particular. The Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, which upholds the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, gave high hopes that the conflict in that country
might be ended and the peace and security of the
neighbouring States restored.

Since then, the Lusaka Agreement has gone
through critical phases and faced many challenges.
Foreign troops have not withdrawn from the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
national dialogue has come to a standstill. The full
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) has been delayed. Throughout this time, the
suffering of the people of the Congo has been
perpetuated by the war.

The Council has followed with grave concern the
developments in the situation and dispatched a mission
of its members. The Council has adopted a number of
resolutions and presidential statements. In this context,
I would cite in particular resolution 1304 (2000),
adopted on 16 June 2000 under the presidency of
France in the wake of a meeting of the Security
Council with the Political Committee of the Ceasefire
Agreement.

The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement remains the
most appropriate framework for reaching a negotiated
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Security Council expects all parties
to the Agreement to demonstrate their commitment to
the relevant Security Council resolutions and to the
Agreement and to take concrete steps to move the
peace process forward. In this regard, I pay a special
tribute to the role played by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU).

Last Friday's address by President Kabila to the
Congolese people reiterated his support for the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and his resolve to pursue national
dialogue and reconciliation. He underscored his
commitment to cooperating with the OAU and the
United Nations and to the deployment of MONUC; his
demand that foreign troops withdraw from his
country's territory; and his desire to establish good-
neighbourly relations with neighbouring countries.

The Security Council has consistently stressed the
need for respect for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's sovereignty, territorial integrity and control
over its natural resources. It is also concerned that the
sovereignty of all States be equally respected. President
Kabila will find the Council in full support of his
contributions to moving the peace process forward. The
Council's interest in the situation concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is reflected in the
series of meetings which it intends to convene this
month on that issue, in particular its meeting with the
Political Committee of the Ceasefire Agreement. The
members of the Council look forward to the
achievement of concrete results at these meetings that
will help to revive the peace process and assist the
brotherly people of the Congo in fulfilling their
aspirations.

I now invite the Secretary-General to address the
Council.


