Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I too have heard nothing
new in the statement by my Russian colleague, barring
a very few things. First, I am very glad that the issue
of Crimea is once again part of the Security Council's
discussions. It is the first time that I have not heard my
colleague say that Crimea is not an issue. It is a good
thing that we are discussing it. Another exception that
I forgot to mention in my initial statement is that there
certainly is one new element in the Russian delegation's
rhetoric, and no doubt its new favourite topic, which
is the upcoming holding of presidential elections in
Ukraine. Sometimes I think that the results of Ukraine's
presidential elections are even more important to
Russians than their own are. With regard to the millions
of Ukrainians living in Russia who will be deprived of
the right to vote and whom the Russian representative
mentioned in his statement, I would like to remind my
colleague that when I was Ambassador to Moscow in
2012 during the last Ukrainian elections that were held
during my time there, 12,000 Ukrainian citizens voted
all over Russia. In 2014, the number dropped to 1,200.
I therefore wonder about the millions he mentioned.
With regard to the 4 million people in the Donbas
region who will be unable to vote in the presidential
elections, if he would like them to vote as the people did
in Crimea, under the barrels of Russian guns, perhaps
they could vote. So how about allowing the 2.2 million
Ukrainian citizens in Crimea to participate and vote in
the elections? Then we would see what the equilibrium
of support really is.

Finally, to sum up, I would like to quote from
the latest opus published yesterday in the Russian
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, an article by Mr. Vladislav
Surkov, whose name, I believe, is well known, at least
around this table. He writes,

"Having fallen from the level of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to that of the Russian Federation,
Russia has ceased to fall, has begun to recover and has
returned to its natural and only possible status as a
great, expanding and community of nations gathering
lands unto itself". I believe that Ukraine is probably not
the last country on that list.

