Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): May I
begin by thanking you; Sir, and your delegation for
proposing this debate, welcoming in particular the
presence and contribution of the Foreign Minister of
Peru. May I also thank Ms. Hoppe for her briefing. The
United Kingdom fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by the Austrian Ambassador on
behalf of the European Union.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
Secretary-General's recent report on small arms and
light weapons. Coming in the run up to the 2006
review conference of the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms and light weapons, the report is a
timely reminder of the scale of the menace posed by
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, which
particularly affect regions of conflict and the
developing world.

The menace of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is an issue of particular concern to us all.
The widespread availability of those weapons in many
regions of the world is a major source of insecurity and
poverty. Nowhere is that more evident than across
large parts of Africa. By fuelling conflict, crime and
terrorism, the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons undermines peace and greatly hinders
development. The British Government is committed to
reducing the proliferation of those weapons, the threat
they pose and the damage they cause. We focus our
efforts on three critical and related areas: first,
strengthening controls on the supply of small arms and
light weapons; secondly, reducing the availability of
weapons; and thirdly, addressing the demand for
weapons.

We recognize that those problems are complex
and inter-related; they require concerted action
between States, intergovernmental organizations and
civil society at all levels, from the local to the global.
That is why the United Kingdom is a firm supporter of
the 2001 United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The
United Kingdom calls on all States to fully implement
that Programme of Action.

This year's United Nations Programme of Action
review conference presents a vital opportunity to
improve efforts to tackle the negative impact of small
arms and light weapons proliferation. At January's
preparatory committee of the review conference, there
was consensus among participating States that the
United Nations Programme of Action, although not yet
fully implemented, is the key starting point for further
action on small arms and light weapons.

We believe that United Nations efforts to control
those weapons have to be intensified if we want to
alleviate the serious impact of their proliferation on
conflict, development and human rights. In doing so,
we should make best use of the review conference. The
conference should focus on crucial areas where
significant obstacles to full implementation persist. We
believe that those areas include marking and tracing,
brokering regulations, transfer controls, and the
integration of small arms measures into development
assistance.

The United Kingdom would also like to draw
attention to the initiative for a treaty on the trade in
conventional arms, or the arms trade treaty. That is a
separate initiative from current small arms and light
weapons work, but would reinforce its objectives. Such
a treaty would include legally binding standards for
transfers of all conventional arms, including heavy
weapons and small arms and light weapons. We believe
that there is a strong security, development,
humanitarian and moral case for such a treaty, and call
on all States to support the early agreement to the start
of a United Nations-based process to take that work
forward.

The threat of small arms and light weapons is real
and relevant to the mandate of the Security Council.
We welcome the initiative to propose a draft resolution
on that issue at this time. We believe that a resolution
would serve several purposes: to complement the
report of the Secretary-General; to demonstrate our
commitment to tackling all the threats posed by the
illicit trade; and, ultimately, to advance our shared goal
of improving the international effort through the
United Nations Programme of Action in order to save
lives and to prevent and resolve conflict. We hope that
the negotiations, which are well advanced, can soon be
brought to a conclusion.

