Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for the initiative of
bringing this timely subject to the attention of the
Council. The issue of justice and the rule of law
becomes even more relevant at a time when the
Secretary-General and an overwhelming number of
leaders are underlining the need for a thorough
reassessment of the overall work of the United Nations
system - specifically that of its main bodies.

I should like to begin by recalling that the
General Assembly has made a fundamental
contribution to this issue, as in recent years it has
discussed and adopted a number of resolutions that
serve to establish parameters for efforts in the
promotion of justice and the rule of law. In the General
Assembly, Brazil traditionally sponsors a resolution
called "Strengthening of the rule of law", aimed at
reaffirming the importance of this subject in the work
of the United Nations.

General working guidelines are certainly
important and helpful. Nevertheless, transforming
theory into daily practice is a real challenge before the
Organization and the Council as we face diverse
situations and realities. There is no affordable one-size-
fits-all approach, as the Secretary-General has already
emphasized.

United Nations actions must always be based on
the United Nations Charter and on international
humanitarian law and human rights standards. The
more disrupted and unstable a situation is, the more
important it becomes to provide adequate responses
and to make available a framework of legal guidelines
and principles to confront lawlessness and to promote
stability.

Among the conclusions of last year's report of the
Executive Committee on Peace and Security task force
on the development of comprehensive rule-of-law
strategies for peace operations, I would highlight the
priority assigned to the engagement of local actors -
Government officials, local non-governmental
organizations and community organizations - in
undertaking rule-of-law operations. The United Nations
should continue to consult with such actors as early as
possible in the mission-planning process, as well as in
all subsequent phases. Models are to be developed, not
imposed. Our efforts should be aimed at paving the
way for a smooth transition when the time for a
mission's exit has arrived.

In order to ensure such an outcome, strong local
institutions must be set up. Promoting the rule of law
goes beyond defending a principle or even establishing
a mechanism; it also involves creating material
conditions for justice - namely, training law
enforcement agencies, building correctional facilities,
renovating local courts and assisting judges and
lawyers.

I should like to stress three aspects of a
successful role for an international presence on the
ground. First, that presence must be neutral and willing
to provide for inclusive participation by all sectors in
the process of rebuilding institutions that may lead to a
true and credible democratic society. Secondly,
international actors must behave as facilitators, leaving
no doubt that sovereignty belongs to the people
themselves and that its restoration is the goal to be
achieved. Thirdly, we must take a stern attitude when
dealing with the legal fate of perpetrators of crimes
against humanity. Omissions may send a wrong
message in the shaping of a new reality on the ground.

The International Criminal Court is an
achievement of paramount importance in the history of
law. It clearly states that impunity is not acceptable,
regardless of one's position or prestige. We call on all
Member States to adhere to the Rome Statute so as to
make that message even clearer.

Truth and reconciliation committees have proved
to be effective instruments in facilitating the transition
to a new reality. As demonstrated by the experiences
of, among other countries, Timor-Leste and South
Africa, finding ways to deal with the legacy of the past
in a constructive and objective manner is an important
aspect of the process of reconstructing societies.
Finally, I believe that justice and the rule of law are
indispensable to nation-building processes. The setting
up of the Economic and Social Council ad hoc advisory
groups dedicated to post-conflict situations in specific
countries such as Guinea-Bissau and Burundi is a very
useful step. It is highly advisable that coordination
between the Security Council, the Economic and Social
Council and other United Nations organs be reinforced
in order to facilitate the reintegration of war-torn
countries into the international community. Brazil will
continue to contribute to this cause.

