Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing.

Once again, we note that the situation is
deteriorating, and tensions are mounting. The
settlement-building policy and related measures of
eviction and demolition are continuing unabated
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. This
policy undermines respect for the basic rights of
Palestinians, as well as fundamentally - and soon,
irremediably - undermining the two-State solution,
which we support.

Belgium strongly condemns the policy of settlement
building, as well as any initiative aimed at consolidating
it. We will not recognize any unilateral annexation of
the occupied territories. We recall that Israel, as the
occupying Power, is obliged to ensure the protection of
the rights of the Palestinian population. Moreover, we
condemn the attacks against the Israeli population. We
are also concerned about the recent clashes at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif/Temple Mount. It is imperative to preserve
the status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem.

For 12 years, life in Gaza has been dominated by
the blockade, which is seriously affecting the health
and education sectors, among others. Women and
young people are especially impacted. We welcome the
efforts of humanitarian actors. In particular, I would
like to stress the importance of the mandate of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

Beyond humanitarian support, there will be
lasting stability in Gaza only through a negotiated
settlement, which involves lifting the blockade and
opening up crossing points, while taking into account
Israel's legitimate concerns about its security. In the
meantime, we call on the Israeli authorities to ensure
unhindered access to humanitarian and development
actors and goods.

A political solution to the crisis also requires
the full return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza.
We reiterate our call to the parties to relaunch the
intra-Palestinian reconciliation process.

Children continue to be severely affected by this
conflict, as also shown in the report of the Secretary-
General on Children and Armed Conflict of 20 June
2019 (S/2019/509). We call on all parties to refrain
from the excessive use of force. We urge Israel, as
the occupying Power, to put in place preventive and
protective measures. We call on Palestinian movements
to refrain from encouraging children to participate
in violence.

We are also concerned about the detention of
children and the circumstances in which it takes place.
We call on the Israeli authorities to respect international
norms governing juvenile justice, to stop submitting
children to administrative detention, to end all forms of
ill-treatment in detention and to refrain from enlisting
child detainees as informants.

Belgium remains convinced that there is no
other option than a negotiated solution, based on the
coexistence of two States, with the city of Jerusalem
as the future capital of the two States, in accordance
with the internationally agreed parameters. Those
parameters were defined and endorsed by the Council.
It is therefore necessary for the Council to guarantee
their implementation. Belgium will continue to work to
that end in order to meet the legitimate aspirations of
Palestinians and Israelis.

