Mr. Quiroga (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to welcome your presence at
this meeting and that of the ministers of Brazil, Chile,
Guyana, Haiti and the Dominican Republic, as well as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti and the Acting Secretary General of the
Organization of American States.

I should like to congratulate the Argentine
Republic and you personally, Sir, for having taken the
initiative of convening this open debate of the Security
Council, which, as has been the case on other
occasions, will without a doubt contribute to a greater
understanding of the situation in Haiti and increase the
international community's awareness of the priority
importance that the Latin American and Caribbean
region attaches to the consolidation of the process of
strengthening Haiti's institutions and the rule of law
there.
We are concerned that this sister Caribbean
republic has not yet been able to overcome the
recurrent crises afflicting it, which are characterized by
complex political, social, humanitarian, economic,
financial and security problems which have kept the
greater part of its population outside the development
process.

Despite the efforts made since 1988 by the OAS
and the United Nations, it has not been possible to
uphold the principle of democratic legitimacy in Haiti
for more than short periods of time.

Given the lessons learned from the United
Nations stabilization Mission in Haiti in 1994, and in
view of the gravity and urgency of the situation, the
Bolivian delegation last year supported resolution 1529
(2004), which, at the request of the Interim
Government of Haiti, authorized the deployment on the
territory of that country of a Multinational Force and
requested the Secretary-General to begin preparations
for a stabilization force - MINUSTAH - which was
concretized by resolution 1542 (2004) under Chapter
VII.

We note with regret the deterioration of the
security situation and the increasingly tense political
climate referred to in last November's report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/908), and we encourage the
Transitional Government to continue to pursue
measures aimed at restoring the democratic process,
full respect for human rights and the rule of law in the
Republic of Haiti.

The report of the Secretary-General describes the
progress achieved in the deployment of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the activities
of its various contingents, including those of the nine
Latin American countries that contributed officials,
military troops, civil police and formed police units.

We note with satisfaction that the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations have
been implemented in a positive manner, through the
signing of a memorandum of understanding between
the United Nations and the Organization of American
States (OAS) on electoral assistance in Haiti and
through the contacts established with the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) to assess the electoral
assistance that its members would contribute to support
the reconciliation and recovery efforts of the people of
Haiti.

I wish to express our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr.
Juan Gabriel Valdes, for his briefing and to Mr. Luigi
Einaudi, Acting Secretary General of the OAS, for his
valuable information and views. I also underline the
highly illuminating information the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund has shared with
the Council.

With respect to humanitarian action, we agree
with the report that is important that MINUSTAH
demonstrate its effectiveness through actions having
tangible benefits for the population. That is a
particularly sensitive matter for the small island
developing States most vulnerable to natural disasters,
as has been tragically demonstrated.

Moreover, security - the indispensable
requirement for safeguarding the political transition
process leading to a participatory democracy inclusive
of all segments of society - is undoubtedly one of the
most important challenges for MINUSTAH in its work
to support the Transitional Government: it involves not
only restoring the population's confidence but also
implementing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
testifies to the commitment of the international
community, in particular of our entire region, to the
people of Haiti. Ensuring MINUSTAH's success is a
challenge and inescapable responsibility for the Latin
American and Caribbean countries in the task of
maintaining a genuine zone of peace and development
in our region.

We reaffirm Bolivia's support for Haiti in its
efforts, and we call upon the entire international
community to continue to extend its decisive and long-
term cooperation, which will enable MINUSTAH to
fully carry out its mandate.

