Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
briefing on the developments on the ground, and
Minister Lavrov for his initiative of bringing us
together.
09-33303

Four and a half months ago, with the tragic
violent confrontation in and around the Gaza Strip
ongoing, we met here facing an unprecedented
challenge to the Middle East peace process. The
Security Council adopted a resolution calling for an
immediate and durable ceasefire and the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Gaza. Even though a fragile
ceasefire is in place today, we have seen no further
progress at the political, security and economic levels.
The parties and the international community are thus
confronted with the urgent need to create the conditions
for relaunching a credible and comprehensive peace
process.

Our discussion is taking place at an important
moment for the future of the region. The new
Government of Israel is engaged in a strategic review
of its approach towards it neighbours and the peace
process. Palestinians have to face the challenge of
bridging their deep internal rift, agree on unification
and prepare for new elections in order to give new
democratic legitimacy to their leadership.

In this period of uncertainty and transition, the
international community must shoulder its
responsibility and engage with the parties in order to
move towards substantive negotiations for a lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict. Therefore, the
Security Council must reconfirm its steadfast support
for the peace process and its basic parameters: durable
peace and freedom from Violence and terrorism based
on a two-State solution, as required by the Road Map,
with two democratic States - Israel and Palestine -
living side by side in peace within secure and
recognized borders. I would like to thank the Russian
presidency for preparing a statement that will, we
hope, serve as a guideline to the parties for re-engaging
in comprehensive negotiations on all tracks.

Three months ago, at the Gaza reconstruction
conference, the international community pledged its
full support for humanitarian relief to the civilian
population and to early reconstruction of the Gaza
Strip. The Secretary-General's report leaves no doubt
that there is an unacceptable lack of progress in
alleviating the dire living conditions in the Gaza Strip.
While Austria supports coordinated action by all
parties concerned to prevent the illegal flow of arms
and ammunition into the Gaza Strip, we urgently call
on Israel to allow for the immediate and
comprehensive supply to the civilian population of the
Gaza Strip of goods to satisfy everyday needs and the

requirements of reconstruction. The Gaza Strip needs
fuel, cash and materials to repair schools, clinics,
sanitation networks and shelters.

With its European Union partners, Austria has
contributed funds to be disbursed by the European
Commission to socially vulnerable Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip. Under the current circumstances, that
money simply cannot be disbursed to those whom we
want to support. Innocent citizens must not be held
hostage by Israel because of the irresponsible policies
of an illegitimate political leadership in the Gaza Strip.
Let me say this very clearly: the current policies
imposed on the Gaza Strip deprive its people of their
human dignity. That is not acceptable.

Rebuilding Gaza and moving forward on the path
to peace also require rebuilding trust, including by
strengthening respect for the rule of law, human rights
and international humanitarian law. In that context, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for having
provided us with a summary of the findings of the
Board of Inquiry on a number of deeply disturbing
incidents during the Gaza crisis. As a matter of
principle, allegations of Violations of international
humanitarian law must be investigated, wherever they
occur and whoever may have committed them. Austria
believes that this report also merits follow-up by the
Council.

We are concerned about the lack of political
progress in the West Bank, where Israeli roadblocks
and closure policies continue to render normal social
life and economic activities impossible. Settlement
construction and the destruction of Palestinian homes
in East Jerusalem and in the West Bank undermine any
meaningful peace talks and, in consequence, weaken
the credibility of the political process and play into the
hands of radical forces.

At the same time, we urgently call on Palestinian
political representatives to assume their responsibility
and to seriously engage in efforts to work towards
unified political leadership. In view of upcoming round
of talks in Cairo, we strongly encourage intra-
Palestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas, which is key not only for the future of the
peace process but also for the implementation of
reconstruction efforts in Gaza. Palestinians need a
Government that enjoys legitimacy among their own
population and is acceptable as a partner to Israel and
to the international community. Such a Government
needs to be fully committed to the two-State solution
and the other principles of the peace process.

In their efforts towards lasting peace in the
region, the parties have the firm support of the
international community, with the Security Council and
the Middle East Quartet as its main actors. The
international conference on the Middle East peace
process that the Russian Federation plans to convene in
Moscow in the course of this year in consultation with
the Quartet and the parties will provide the
international community with another important
occasion to demonstrate that support.

