Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (Spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting in order to consider
the draft annual report of the Security Council. I
would also like to express our gratitude to all Council
members for their valuable collaboration in the process
of drawing up the draft report. Their suggestions,
proposals and commitment were essential to achieving
this result.

We have approached our participation in the
Council in full adherence to the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter aimed at preserving
international peace and security. During the reporting
period, we faced delicate situations that led the Council
to act to promote understanding and provide solutions.
Many lives were saved. Fundamental rights were
respected and defended. We helped to build institutions
and protect civilians at risk in nations where peace,
stability and constitutional order were threatened.

Following procedure, the report covers the
Security Council's activities from August 2011 to July
2012. During that period, the Council held 222 formal
meetings, of which 205 were public. The Council
achieved a significant level of participation on the part
of members and non-member States in its briefings
and in all its debates, in conformity with its policy of
transparency. During the period, the Council adopted
60 resolutions and 25 presidential statements, and
issued 83 statements to the press.

The Council considered events occurring in
many regions of the world. Its dialogue with their
representatives was fluid and active, thanks to the
presence of the United Nations in those areas and to the
participation in high-level Council meetings of Heads
of State and Foreign Ministers from Africa, Europe,
Asia and the Americas.

The Council continued to monitor the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. The
Council followed up on the activities of the Secretary-
General and the Quartet. Unfortunately, the efforts
aimed at achieving peace between Israel and Palestine
and coexistence between them were unsuccessful. The
democratic aspirations of the Arab peoples gave rise to
profound changes, in some cases not without violence.
The transition period also saw processes leading to
institutional reform that holds promise for a democratic
future of peace and stability.

In the case of Syria, where internal violence
reached extreme levels, the Council issued various
press statements and adopted resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012). But its calls went unheard, and in its
efforts to take decisions covered by Chapter VII of the
Charter the Council were divided. On three occasions,
most recently in July (see S/PV.6810), we failed in our
attempts to adopt resolutions.

Many of the Council's activities, discussions and
efforts were focused on the situations in various African
countries: cote d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, the Central
African region, Liberia, Libya, Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan, and Mali. After many years of tyranny
and arbitrariness, Libya is on the road to democracy,
but internal security is still precarious. The situation
in C6te d'Ivoire since last year's electoral crisis has
improved with the strengthening of its institutions, but
issues relating to security and effective reconciliation
persist.

Regarding South Sudan, the Council closely
followed its internal evolution since its admission to
membership of the United Nations in July 2011, as well
as its relations and disputes with the Sudan. In May,
the Council adopted resolution 2046 (2012), endorsing
the African Union road map and exhorting the parties
to achieve a negotiated solution to all unresolved post-
secession issues. Significant progress was made, but
major issues remain outstanding, such as, among others,
the status of Abyei, delimitation and the border regime.

On 5 July, following the deterioration of the
security situation in Mali as a result of the 20 March
military coup and the occupation of the northern part
of the country by terrorist groups and armed rebels, the
Council adopted resolution 2056 (2012), expressing its
full support for the efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States and the African Union in
Mali, with the backing of the United Nations, and
encouraging them to continue their close coordination
with Mali's Transitional authorities in order to restore
constitutional order.

On 12 October, through resolution 2071 (2012)
and in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter,
the Council welcomed a Government of national unity
in Mali and reiterated its demand that no member of
the armed forces should interfere in the work of the
transitional authorities, while calling on Malian rebel
groups to sever all ties to terrorist organizations,
notably Al-Qaida and its affiliated groups. The Council
also expressed its readiness to adopt targeted sanctions
against any rebel groups that failed to cut ties to terrorist
organizations.

Reiterating its condemnation of the military coup
that took place in Guinea-Bissau on 12 April, on 18 May
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2048 (2012),
seeking restoration of and respect for constitutional
order there. Based on Article 41 of Chapter VII, the
Council demanded that the military leadership restore
and respect constitutional order, including a democratic
electoral process, by ensuring that all soldiers return
to barracks, and that its members relinquish their
positions of authority.

The Council also continued to monitor and to adopt
decisions on the developments in Afghanistan, as well
as in other countries of Asia, including the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea, Myanmar and Timor-Leste.

In Europe, the Council pursued its long-standing
interest in exploring means and ways to support Bosnia
and Herzegovina in its institutionalization process and
in encouraging the progress of negotiations in Cyprus.
These responsibilities also included monitoring the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and the peaceful settlement of differences
through the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue.

The Security Council reaffirmed its commitment
to ensuring stability and security in Haiti, as well as in
assisting Haiti in its reconstruction process, extending
the mandate of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti in resolution 2012 (2011). The Council
visited Haiti in February in order to demonstrate
its involvement and determination to contribute to
implementing the institutional and physical restoration
of the country.

Topics related to peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
the rule of law, and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations were also central to the
Council's activities. The Council commended and
promoted cooperation with subregional organizations,
and in particular the African Union, with its adoption
of resolution 2033 (2012), promoting the strengthening
of that relationship. In that spirit, debates and
consultations were held on peace and security in Africa,
as well as ways to support the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa.

Other thematic issues included a high-level meeting
on the "Maintenance of international peace and
security: conflict prevention" (S/PV.6621), as well as
consideration of the subject of "Maintenance of peace
and security: new challenges to international peace
and security and conflict prevention" (S/PV.6668).
As a complement to the open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding (S/PV.6805), an interactive dialogue
on that topic discussed proposals to realize the
Peacebuilding Commission's full potential and to bring
together all partners around common strategies.

The Council received briefings by the Presidents
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia on
the progress of their work and the adoption of various
procedural measures. In a simultaneous vote with the
General Assembly, the Council elected new members
of the International Court of Justice.

The issues of children and armed conflict, women
and peace and security, and the protection of civilians
also figured on the Council's agenda, demonstrating its
involvement in topics that increasingly provoke debate
on the best way for all members to promote them in an
effort to condense the agenda for countries with such
thematic issues.

The length of the report that I have had the honour
to submit is due to the intensity and proliferation of
events, situations, conflicts and activities demanding
intense work from the Council.

In that context, in such a chaotic period the
enormous importance and responsibility of the Security
Council in exercising its functions and powers, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
has become ever more paramount.

