Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of New Zealand, Mr. McCully, and
thank him for presiding over this important debate.
We would also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his
briefing and wish him success in his difficult task.

Our delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The conditions of political instability in the Middle
East are alarming due to the high level of violence
that has ravaged the region. The actions of terrorist
organizations are taking on an ever-more relevant
role. Foreign interventions, military invasions and
interference in the internal affairs of States have
triggered conflicts and wars that have undermined
political stability in the region and led to the collapse
of the State and its institutions in many countries in
conflict. This institutional collapse and political
instability have created the conditions that have allowed
for the incursion of terrorist groups, which have spread
their extremist and intolerant ideology and subjected
the peoples of the region to unacceptable violence and
brutality in their zeal to impose their world view on
others.
One of the fundamental problems conflict is that
political instability in the Middle East has been fomented
by opposing geopolitical interests and visions, which
in order to fulfil political or military objectives, have
funded and supported the military actions of non-State
armed groups which eventually become terrorist
groups. The peoples of the Middle East continue to pay
a high cost in human lives and suffering, which has
been the result of the opposing interests of major power
brokers that deal militarily in the Middle East as if it
were great chessboard.

In this climate of political instability and ongoing
tension, the situation of the Palestinian people and
the prolonged conflict becomes fundamentally
relevant. This conflict must be resolved in order for
a comprehensive political process - one that will
ultimately lead to a lasting peace in the region 4 to be
started.

More than half a century ago, with support from
the colonial Powers of the time, the pillaging of lands
that for centuries had been occupied the Palestinian
people began. Since then the occupying Power, Israel,
has been moving forward in an ongoing process of
colonizing the territory, and it has done so against the
backdrop of the international community's inaction, in
flagrant violation of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and the right of self-determination
that empowers the Palestinians to enjoy an independent
State within internationally recognized 1967 borders.

A year ago, the Gaza Strip and its population were
the victims of the brutal and disproportionate Israeli
military attack known as Operation Protective Edge.
During the 52-day campaign Israel indiscriminately
bombed the population of Gaza and destroyed its
civilian installations and facilities, including schools
and hospitals. As a result of that military aggression,
2,220 people were killed, including 551 children, more
than 11,000 were wounded and 12,600 homes were
destroyed.

Venezuela calls for those responsible for those war
crimes to be brought to justice so that they are held
accountable for their criminal actions. The occupying
Power, in addition to proceeding with the ongoing
destruction of civilian infrastructure and Palestinian
homes, has devoted its efforts to attacking the future
of the new Palestinian generation. The children and
young people in the occupied territories are the focus of
constant violence. They are detained and imprisoned on
an ongoing basis by the Israeli military forces merely
because they are Palestinian. Once again, Israel's
actions show its contempt for human rights and how
it uses violence as a policy to maintain its colonial
presence.

Time is of the essence for the occupying Power.
Time allows it to continue to implement its strategy of
disregard for the human rights of the Palestinian people.
The ultimate goal is to take over all the Palestinian land
and to expel those who still still survive there. It will
do so through its systematic settlements policy. That
situation has persisted since the Nakba of 1948 until
today.

The central problem is that Israel, because it has
the political and military support of the great centres of
power, feels that it has sufficient force to undermine all
attempts to reach a negotiated solution to the conflict. It
feels, all the while, that it can disregard the resolutions,
appeals and urgent calls of the Security Council, and
even of the General Assembly. The occupying Power
boycotts every peace initiative that comes along,
protected by that support. That plunges the Palestinian
people into a situation of tension and desperation,
which may at any moment unleash a military escalation
in this conflict. Israel appears to be constantly trying
to engender military conflicts in order to continue to
acquire more territory through the use of force.

Our country advocates the immediate cessation of
the settlements policy, of which the Palestinian people
is the victim. The policy of demolishing Palestinian
homes and constructing Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories, in violation of all international
legal texts, must cease. On that count, we call on the
international community to exhort Israel to cease that
ongoing practice. We also call for end to the process of
expelling Palestinians and colonizing Palestinian land.

The Security Council has been deliberating the
issue of Palestine for more than 50 years, yet to date we
have been unable to put a stop to the illegal situation
prevailing there. We wonder how long the Security
Council will continue to fail to agree on decisive action
to uphold the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
to their territory. It is time for the Council to take a firm
stance in favour of peace, justice and hope for a people
who are appealing for a lasting and comprehensive
solution, a solution that would recognize two States: the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine.

That topic cannot be avoided or evaded. The
Security Council is the natural forum in which to debate
and find a solution to those issues. We support the action
of the Palestinian authorities to assert their sovereignty.
Palestine's support for various legal instruments in
the field of human rights and criminal law, such as
the Rome Statute, are a concrete manifestation of its
commitment to respect international law.

We are committed to the cause of peace in the
Middle East. In that regard, we support all initiatives
that assist the Palestinian people in exercising their
right to self-determination. Venezuela reiterates that
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and
the announcement made by France to promote a draft
resolution that paves the way for peace negotiations
and ending the occupation - all have a common
denominator, namely, to achieve a definitive solution
to the conflict.

The current reality is entirely untenable. Israel
continues to use force indiscriminately against a
population that has been entirely ignored and abandoned
in terms ofits struggle to enjoy its rights. The resolution
of the Palestinian issue is of vital importance in these
times in order to ensure that violent extremism, for
example the activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra Front, among
others, do not become entrenched in the Palestinian
territories. That would only exacerbate the already
conflict-ridden situation in the Middle East.

The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
imposes a moral and political obligation upon us to
redouble our efforts to end the colonialism and foreign
occupation that the Palestinian population has been
a victim of. They have been illegally expelled from
their lands. We call for the incorporation of Palestine
as a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
A recommendation by the Security Council to the
General Assembly to incorporate Palestine as a full-
fledged member of the United Nations would send a
positive signal. It would represent the Organization's
commitment to resolving the Israeli-Palestine crisis on
the basis of a two-State solution.

The intransigent attitude of Israel and its actions
behind the backs of the international community have
had a negative impact on the region, as can be seen
in Palestine, Lebanon and the Golan Heights. In that
regard, Venezuela condemns actions that violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and are
in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We
call on Israel to end those illegal practices. Moreover,
we condemn the measures that Israel has applied in the
Syrian Golan Heights. The intention of those measures
has been to change the legal, demographic and physical
status of that territory. Once again, we call on Israel
to withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan, in
accordance with international law.

To conclude, a few days ago the Security Council
unanimously adopted a resolution in support of the
agreement reached among the P5+l and Iran on Iran's
nuclear programme. We sincerely commend the
countries involved in that agreement, as it represents
a victory for diplomacy and peace over war and
intolerance. We call on members of the Council to
ensure that the same political judgment and that same
sensible approach prevail in the resolution of conflicts
in the Middle East. Those conflicts have shattered
hundreds of thousands of lives. We must work more
intensively to promote peace and to ensure that less
hate and war exist in the world. We must work for the
peace of the Syrian people, the Iraqi people, the people
of Lebanon and the people of Yemen. We must work
for peace and a just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

