Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking the three Force Commanders for their valuable
perspectives, Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing, and you, Madam President, for providing a
platform for today's discussion.

We welcome the renewed efforts spearheaded by
the Secretary-General to strengthen peacekeeping and
move from words to action in making peace operations
fit for the twenty-first century. We, the members
of the Security Council, must play our part in that
process. That entails providing missions with realistic
mandates and adequate resources, but also putting
political pressure on all key actors and supporting
the broader United Nations system's efforts. United
Nations cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations must also be enhanced. From listening
to our three Force Commanders, it becomes clear that
immense challenges remain, and we know that the
peacekeeping environment today is more complex and
entails higher risks than ever before.

In our own experience from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), peacekeeping intelligence is vital
for making informed decisions and for operational
planning. It is crucial to ensure that missions are able
and ready to act on information received, and it is
also important to have thorough selection processes
for senior mission leadership and military and police
commanders The evaluation of leaders must improve,
and special attention should be given to a willingness
to act, take initiative and assume responsibility. In
addition, uniformed units must have the right training,
skills and equipment to be able to protect civilians and
themselves and to deliver on mandates. That requires
support for capacity-building and better reporting
on underperformance.

We firmly support efforts to prevent and combat
sexual exploitation and abuse within the United
Nations system. Proper gender mainstreaming and the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda also requires adequate funding.
Let me conclude by focusing on the questions that
I have for our briefers. My first question is for all of
them. What do they think the Secretariat, the missions
and the troop-contributing countries should do to
increase the percentage of both uniformed and civilian
female personnel?

My second question is for Lieutenant General
Ngondi of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. Given that the task of protecting
civilians is the biggest challenge that he faces as a
Commander in delivering on his mandate, how does
he address that? How are conditions affected by the
ongoing reconfiguration of the mission?

My third question is for Major General Deconinck.
I would like to ask him to elaborate on the current
challenges that MINUSMA is facing in terms of
protecting hospitals, health-care facilities and
personnel from attacks, and documenting and reporting
such attacks. Are the Mission's mandate and resources
sufficient for those tasks?

My fourth question is for Lieutenant General
Kamanzi. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan,
like the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
has a more flexible and effective brigade unit. In
some regions, we have also seen regional reserves
that can be moved between missions on short notice.
What would he say are the pros and cons with regard
to those more flexible and robust units as brigades or
regional reserves?

