Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia)(spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the President of the Council for
having taken the excellent initiative of convening this
open debate to address an item of concern to all
Members of the United Nations. This provides us with
an opportunity to highlight the growing importance of
multidimensional approaches to the solution and
prevention of conflict.

The Security Council has major challenges before
it in the complex management of current conflicts. We
hope that today's debate will benefit this organ and
other relevant organs in the United Nations system as
we give critical consideration to the experiences of the
past, to lessons learned and to ways that we can
improve processes for preventing conflict, as well as
for building peace.

The responsibility for maintaining peace cannot
be considered alone but rather as a part of the wider
process ranging from preventive diplomacy to post-
conflict peace-building. In order to understand this
complex situation, we must consider the fact that the
Security Council is only one of the actors, and
sometimes the least relevant one, among those
participating in the peace-building process. Also, the
preponderance of intra-State conflicts in the midst of
complex claims of a religious type, of ethnic
supremacy and of xenophobia means that the peace-
building process has become more complex, longer-
term and more painstaking, and sometimes its leads to
dissatisfaction among those who are expecting
immediate or short-term tangible results.

In such internal wars and conflicts, peace-
building frequently occurs after the parties concerned
have taken actions that constitute serious violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law
with grave consequences for the civilian population.
Patient effort is therefore required to restore the social
fabric and the minimal conditions for coexistence.

Peace-building has enemies, which can include
individuals, businesses, organizations and
Governments that do not desire tranquility and
stability. Most blameworthy are those involved in the
illicit trafficking of small arms, for whom peace-
building is bad business.

Because of the strong link between conflict
prevention on the one hand and the maintenance of
peace and peace-building on the other, these things
must be considered together and addressed
comprehensively. There have been many studies and
assessments of the causes of conflict; thanks in part to
these, national Governments and the international
community have made considerable progress on
various approaches to preventing conflict. But despite
the identification of the causes of conflict, and despite
the broad formulas and comprehensive approaches to
conflict prevention, there are factors that stymie these
good intentions. Neither conflict prevention nor peace-
building can be successful without genuine political
will by all actors, including those responsible for the
maintenance of peace, international mediators and the
parties to the conflict.

There is no doubt that peace-building is a far
more complex and difficult challenge than it appears to
be, as experience has shown. Rebuilding societies that
have suffered the strife of war and that are bearing the

consequences of conflict - social trauma, lack of
resources, fragile institutions and political
uncertainty - takes long-term sustained effort. But

unfortunately, we constantly see erratic, short-term,
poorly coordinated commitments by governmental,
non-governmental and international organizations and
other relevant actors. Sustainability and political will
are the two elements that are key to the success of
peace-building.

Past Security Council efforts with a broad,
comprehensive reconstruction mandate have included
those for Namibia, El Salvador, Cambodia,
Mozambique and, more recently, East Timor and
Kosovo. The only thing they have in common are their
comprehensive mandates, which have included tasks
such as: the reorganization and retraining of police
forces; judicial reform; formulation or assistance in the
formulation of local laws and regulations in the
economic and social sphere; help in carrying out
agrarian reform; election monitoring; supervision of
transitional government departments; the supply of
food, drinking water and sanitary and health services;
and monitoring human rights. If the Security Council
has correctly devised these overall comprehensive
mandates, we wonder why the results have been so
uneven, with a degree of success in some cases and
with huge failure in others.

To respond to that concern, my delegation wishes
to put forward some fundamental elements that we
would like to see reflected in the presidential statement
to be adopted on today's agenda item.

First, peace-building is inherently a long-term
process in which short-term positive results do not
necessarily lead to ultimate success.

Second, these missions need not be carried out
principally by the United Nations; rather, depending on
specific conditions, the lead organization can be a
regional one.

Third, donor commitment to peace-building
processes must be sustained and long-term.

Fourth, the Secretary-General could coordinate
the preparation of a compendium of lessons learned
over the past two decades, drawing on contributions
from national Governments, regional organizations,
United Nations agencies and specialized non-
governmental organizations.

Fifth, in each case there must be a strategy that
will ensure the resources and personnel needed to
complete the peace-building process.

And sixth, in each instance the Secretary-General
could identify a set of objective benchmarks indicating
that peace has been built; this would avoid the
premature termination of mandates, which could sow
the seeds of new conflicts.

Peace is not the absence of conflict. Peace is a
culture, a way of life, a collective yearning. Attaining
peace requires - in addition to the will of the
parties - a favourable national and international
environment. This requires sustainable and lasting
long-term commitment.

