Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Allow me to start by
expressing our condolences and sympathies to the
Government and the people of Yemen following the
devastating tropical cyclone.

I also want to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his
update and for having drawn our attention to the acute
food crisis * indeed famine * in Yemen, as foreseen
in resolution 2417 (2018). Mark Lowcock and the
Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, Lise Grande,
have our wholehearted support in their efforts, as do
all United Nations personnel and humanitarians in
Yemen, who are working under what we understand are
extremely challenging and difficult circumstances.

I want to focus mainly on the economic crisis and
the military escalation in Yemen - two factors that are
aggravating the humanitarian disaster that has been the
predictable, but not inevitable, effect of the conflict
being played out in Yemen.

First, on the economy, the numbers presented
today are staggering. As we have heard, if the current
economic crisis continues, an additional 5.6 million
people could risk severe food insecurity in the coming
months. That would add to the individual catastrophe
of millions and bring the total number of people in
pre-famine conditions to 14 million. That famine is the
result of a man-made situation that occurred before our
eyes and on our watch.

To help reverse those trends, we support
Mr. Lowcock's call today for urgent measures to stabilize
the Yemeni economy. Those include expanding liquidity
to stabilize the currency, expediting applications for
lines of credit for importers of core commodities and
holding back on restrictions in that area, and ensuring
the payment of civil servants - teachers as a first
step - as well as pensioners in the northern part of the
country. We welcome today's announcement that Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates will provide
teacher allowances across the country, and we heard
Mr. Lowcock's further recommendations in that area.

However, and turning now to my second point,
on the military escalation, those economic measures
are far from enough. The economic collapse and food
security crisis is not happening in a vacuum; it is a direct
consequence of the ongoing conflict and is aggravated
by the current military escalation. That connection is
painfully apparent in Al-Hudaydah, where the fighting
is not only causing civilian casualties but is also
affecting both aid operations and commercial imports.
We remain particularly concerned about the continued
fighting on the main road to Sana'a, as it is impacting
the vital supply chain and life-line to northern Yemen,
as well as the occupation of humanitarian warehouses
and the blocked access to the vital milling facility.

The Security Council has once again today been put
on high alert, and we have a responsibility to respond.
Based on resolution 2417 (2018), which addresses
conflict-induced food insecurity, and as agreed in
our presidential statement (S/PRST/20l8/5) earlier
this year, it is now time to come together and make
equally critical and urgent demands. First, a durable
ceasefire is needed, at least for the purpose set out
by Mr. Lowcock. Secondly, we must provide safe and
unhindered humanitarian access to all those in need,
with ports and key roads kept open and functioning,
including Al-Hudaydah and Saleef. Commercial imports
should also be maintained and expanded to reach all
ports. Thirdly, there must be respect for international
humanitarian law in all circumstances, including by
protecting civilians, medical, humanitarian and United
Nations personnel across the country and meeting
the basic needs of the civilian population. Fourthly,
the Council should urgently call in good faith on the
parties to engage in a United Nations-led inclusive
political process.

As a Council, we should step up our efforts to
support Mr. Griffiths in his commendable efforts. If
we are serious about our constant call that there is no
military solution to the conflict in Yemen, then only
through a negotiated political solution will this war and
the immense suffering that it has caused the people of
Yemen come to an end.

