One can hardly overstate the magnitude of the challenges facing Iraq. The deep existing political, social, economic and security crises have now been compounded by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and a dramatic drop in oil prices. As the Iraqi health system was already near breaking point before the COVID-19 outbreak, the first priority was, and remains, to prevent a rapid spread of the virus. Within that context, I wish to reaffirm our support to the Iraqi authorities and to reiterate that no amount of Government response can succeed without the active involvement of the entire population. I recently joined my voice to those of my fellow Special Envoys in the Middle East in echoing the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in the broadest sense, not only militarily but also politically. Surely, at this time of acute crisis, partisanship and narrow interests must yield to the greater national cause and the good of the Iraqi people. Unfortunately, as Iraq's economic situation worsened daily, we witnessed continued political infighting and saw three Prime Ministers-designate in just 10 weeks. However, at long last, a new Government was formed last week. The Council of Representatives confirmed Mustafa Al-Kadhimi as the new Prime Minister and approved his Government programme, as well as 15 out of 22 ministers. That is a long overdue but very welcome development. The swift completion of the remaining vacant positions, including the appointment of more women and minority representatives, is now necessary. The new Prime Minister's stated priorities include addressing the COVID-19 health crisis, developing and reforming the security sector, limiting the control of arms to the State, strengthening the economy, fighting corruption and advancing accountability and justice. They also include holding a national dialogue, balancing external relations, safeguarding Iraqi sovereignty, promoting the return of internally displaced persons to their places of origin and working towards the conduct of early elections. These worthy aspirations must urgently be turned into action. Let me emphasize that Iraq does not have the luxury of time, nor can it afford destructive petty politics. While the new Government entered office only a few days ago, its first decisions are promising. However, one does not need a crystal ball to understand that the road ahead will be fraught with many complex challenges. As I have stated many times, Iraq's challenges did not arise overnight. Moreover, they are larger than any single Government. It is therefore most important to manage public expectations. There will be no sudden miracles. Equally important is a broad-based response that involves the entire political class and all communities, acting with a clear sense of unity and urgency, focused on building domestic strength and prioritizing the national interest. The COVID-19 pandemic forced the streets to calm down but, with public trust at an all-time low, the Iraqi people, calling for a more prosperous and inclusive Iraq, will not let go. Iraq is facing a long list of urgent unfinished domestic business and, in order to regain public trust, the Government must prove itself able to carry out such essential functions as law and order and public service delivery. On the issue of early elections, although they are a top priority for many, Parliament has not yet completed its work on the electoral framework, in particular the contentious issues of constituency delineation and seat apportionment. I also wish to reiterate the pressing need for accountability and justice for the many deaths and injuries of innocent protesters. Allow me to say that we are encouraged by the early actions taken by the new Prime Minister, which demonstrate eagerness to move these important files forward. The current economic situation has once again laid bare Iraq's vulnerability due to the grave lack of economic diversification. Iraq's monthly oil revenues dropped from $6 billion to $1.4 billion between February and April. At a time when the global financial system is being drained from all sides, it will be harder than ever to access international funds. On top of this, the necessary curfews to contain the COVID-19 pandemic have brought commercial activity to a near standstill, imperilling the already problematic livelihoods of many Iraqis who rely on daily earnings to feed themselves and their families. The need to broaden Iraq's revenue base could not be more apparent. Time and again, it has been made clear that Iraq should reduce its oil dependency, repair and upgrade critical infrastructure, tackle its ballooning, inefficient public service and build viable and responsive State institutions. It should also fight corruption, combat patronage and clientelism and incentivize the domestic private sector, while attracting foreign investment. Iraq has clearly and repeatedly been encouraged to builda healthy environment that is conducive to broad-based, fairly distributed growth and employment generation, with the assistance of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations and other partners. However, without adequate follow-up, the country will sadly remain ill-prepared to manage these acute shocks. The economy is projected to contract by 9.7 per cent in 2020, with poverty rates increasing to approximately 40 per cent. Considerable losses in labour income, as well as a decrease in economic opportunities, are foreseen. It is essential to restate that corruption is perhaps the greatest source of dysfunction in Iraq. It works against the average Iraqi woman and man and also puts off donors and potential investors, who are increasingly fed up with fighting the system for a chance to help the country. Domestic, regional and international security developments continue to take their toll on the country. Inflammatory rhetoric and a pattern of attacks and counterattacks on Iraqi soil are obviously unproductive and most regrettable. Although these appear to have tapered off in recent weeks, they remain a constant threat to the stability of Iraq. I can only emphasize that the way in which armed elements, with differing ties to the State, choose to act at this time will determine how Iraqis, and indeed many others, perceive them. Once again, Iraq cannot afford to be used as a theatre for different power competitions and/or proxy conflicts. Also critical is the prevention of any attempted resurgence of violent extremism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) must not be given room to step up its activities. The best form of counter-terrorism is for the Government to provide for its citizens, addressing the root causes that continue to allow groups such as ISIL to exist. Turning to humanitarian concerns, we cautiously welcome the ongoing efforts to improve access authorization for humanitarian workers, especially the non-governmental organizations in Iraq that provide life-saving services. Humanitarian partners need access letters to pass through the multiple security checkpoints in their areas of operation. Unfortunately, many access requests remain unapproved. Currently, access is even more constrained due to the COVID-19-related movement restrictions, adding another layer of complexity. A practical, long-term solution is urgently required, with an empowered focal point to regularly engage with humanitarian partners on access matters. I sincerely hope that the Iraqi authorities will now act without any further delay. With regard to relations between Baghdad and Erbil, we still cannot point to a final, fully agreed and implemented deal on critical issues such as the federal budget, as well as oil and revenue-sharing. On the contrary, we recently witnessed movement in the opposite direction, as the previous federal Government announced it would halt payments to the Kurdistan region, affecting the salaries of civil servants. Regardless of the merits of that decision, the timing was most inopportune. Negotiations between Baghdad and Erbil are ongoing. I can only emphasize that a long-term sustainable approach is urgently needed. Of course, for any sustainable solution, it takes both parties. With regard to Sinjar, there have been many promises but so far no signatures, let alone implementation, with the Yazidis notably paying the price. In the Kurdistan region, as elsewhere in Iraq, transparency, freedom of expression, fundamental reform and fighting corruption are of critical importance, as is political unity. Recent internal tensions do not serve the interests of the Kurdish people - far from it. I now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. Notwithstanding significant advances of late, the most recent being the discovery of human remains in a third grave at the Samawah site in January, COVID-19 has also impacted this file. The 113th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, planned for 20 April, as well as other activities, had to be postponed. The Kuwaiti authorities were nevertheless able to carry out excavations of burial sites in Kuwait, as planned during the previous Technical Subcommittee meeting in February. I would like to encourage all members of the Tripartite Committee to follow this example, working together to identify other innovative ways to overcome the current constraints and adapt to the new reality. In conclusion, I would like to return to the courageous conviction expressed by countless Iraqis in recent months. Their hopes and demands remain burning issues and should guide the new Government. I sincerely hope that no party, person or entity will be allowed to hijack the legitimate demands of the Iraqi people. With that in mind, I wish to salute Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani, whose calm wisdom serves as an example to us all. remain convinced that a more just, prosperous and resilient Iraq can emerge from the current compounded crises. However, for that to happen, political will is fundamental. As I said last time (see S/PV.8676), Iraq must move away from endless crisis management towards a more productive approach, building resilience at both the State and the societal level. Short-term political and private calculations do not serve Iraq's long-term interests - on the contrary. The challenges are many, but so are the opportunities. I would like to reaffirm the continued support of the United Nations to the people of Iraq as well as Iraq's new Government.
