Mr. Jallow: Since our last report to the Security
Council, much progress has been achieved in the
implementation of the completion strategy of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) as
outlined by President Byron in his report.

Within the past six months, judgements resulting
in convictions have been delivered in respect of two
accused, with other judgements anticipated in respect
of five other accused next week.

A significant development in the trial programme
has been the recent conclusion of all the multiple-
accused cases, with one exception. In all, this involves
some 14 accused persons. The long-running Butare
case came to a close in November after seven and a
half years of trial, as did the Government case and the
Military 11 case after five years of trial. These cases are
now pending judgement, subject to the possible recall
of some witnesses.

During the same period, two cases were
commenced and are progressing and two indictees,
Ngirabatware and Ntawukuriryayo, were transferred to
the ICTR for trial during the same period.

Currently, the Office of the Prosecutor at the
ICTR is preparing the cases of all the current detainees
awaiting trial in order to ensure that their cases proceed
in 2009 in accordance with the trial schedule submitted
by the President. This will include the retrial of
Muvunyi ordered by the Appeals Chamber. My office,
the Office of the Prosecutor, is firmly committed to the
conclusion of these remaining trials in the course of
2009. We believe that target to be achievable.
Despite the heightened activity of the Tracking
Team, no arrests of indictees have been secured in the
past six months. There is no indication of any steps
taken by the Government of Kenya - other than the
earlier seizure of one property - to implement the
recommendations of the ICTR-Kenya Police Joint Task
Force or the requests of the ICTR in respect of the
person and property of Felicien Kabuga. As the
Security Council is aware, this matter was referred to it
by the Secretary-General in June 2008.

In September 2008, I held consultations with both

the United Nations Organization Mission in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and

Government officials in Kinshasa regarding the arrest

and transfer to Arusha of some half a dozen indictees

who have taken shelter in that territory. The

discussions with the Government of the Democratic

Republic of the Congo were very positive and
encouraging.

The recent round of conflict in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the
majority of our fugitives are located, has, however, set
back the tracking and arrest programme. We therefore
continue to appeal to the Security Council to call on all
States to cooperate in the arrest and transfer of these
indictees, and for appropriate support to be provided to
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by all States, by United Nations agencies and
particularly by MONUC in order to enable that country
to discharge its obligations.

The demands of peace and justice converge very
strongly in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The continued presence and activities of the
ICTR fugitives in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo contribute greatly to the conflict and instability
in that area. As long as the demands of international
justice fail to be satisfied through the arrest and
transfer of these fugitives, the demands of peace and
stability in the region may continue to elude the
international community.

Although the programme for referral of cases of
indictees to national jurisdictions for trial continues to
be an important element of the ICTR completion
strategy, its implementation, particularly regarding
referrals to Rwanda, has suffered a number of setbacks.
The Security Council will recall that the Prosecutor
had filed requests for the referral of five cases - four
detainees and one fugitive - to Rwanda under rule
11 bis of the ICTR Rules of Procedure and Evidence.
The requests in respect of the four detainees, including
the appeals by the Prosecutor in the cases of
Munyakazi, Kanyarukiga and Hategekimana have been
rejected by the Appeals Chamber.

The Appeals Chamber, whilst acknowledging the
independence and impartiality of the Rwandan
judiciary, has, however, upheld the rejection of the
request by the Trial Chambers, essentially out of
concerns that the defence might be impeded in its work

by the possible reluctance of defence witnesses to
travel to Rwanda to testify and by the fact that defence
witnesses may face security problems in Rwanda. As a
result of these decisions, the cases of these four
detainees and all the thirteen fugitives now fall back
within the workload of the ICTR, unless alternative
arrangements for trial are made.

This setback has not, however, closed the door to
the referral strategy. My office and the Office of the
Prosecutor General in Rwanda have held a series of
consultations with a view to identifying measures that
Rwanda could take in order to meet the concerns of the
Chambers. The measures having been identified, we
have agreed that, once they are implemented by the
Rwandan Government, the ICTR Prosecutor will
consider submitting new requests to the judges early in
2009 for the referral of cases to Rwanda.

We intend to keep on trying, because a successful
referral programme to Rwanda is important for several
reasons: it will cut down on the ICTR trial workload
for 2009 and facilitate implementation of the
completion strategy; it will enable us to refer the cases
of the fugitives and thus end 2009 without any
fugitives on our list, except the three who have been
earmarked for trial in Arusha. It could also facilitate
the extradition of cases of suspected genocidaires from
other countries to Rwanda, and thus avoid the creation
of an impunity gap in the struggle to bring to justice
those who are responsible for these kinds of offences.

In my previous report to the Security Council, I
indicated that following investigations by both my
office and Rwanda into allegations against some
members of the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF), the
Rwandan Prosecutor General had decided to indict four
senior military officers for murder and other war
crimes in connection with the killings of several clergy
of the Kabgayi parish in June 1994. The trial proceeded
in open court in Kigali, under monitoring both by my
Office and by other independent observers. It
proceeded before a military tribunal. On 24 October,
the court convicted two of the officers and sentenced
them to 8 years imprisonment, while it acquitted the
other two. The Military Prosecutor has advised me that
he has appealed both the sentences and the acquittals. I
am awaiting the outcome of those appellate
proceedings.

Last month, the Office of the Prosecutor at the
ICTR hosted a conference of all the Prosecutors of the

Tribunals as well as prosecutors from countries
involved in the investigation and prosecution of
international crimes, together with representatives of a
number of NGOs interested in the subject. The meeting
was convened in the context of the increasingly
important role of national systems in combating
impunity, with a view to sharing information and
experiences and creating a forum through which such
an exchange could continue beyond the lifetime of the
ad hoc tribunals. I must stress that there is much
concern amongst the Tribunals and these national
prosecuting authorities that there should continue to be
timely and effective access for the latter to the
Tribunals' information and evidence databases in order
to facilitate national investigation and prosecution of
international crimes. This is a matter which needs to be
taken seriously into account as the Security Council
decides on residual and legacy issues for the Tribunals.

The next six months will be a period of intense
trial activity at the ICTR. We are all committed to
concluding the trials of those detainees currently in
hand and to making referral a success in order to
enable us to deal with the cases of some detainees, as
well as of the fugitives. We do not underestimate the
challenge of doing so, particularly at a time when, with
completion in sight, we continue to lose critical staff at
a difficult time. In less than a year since January 2008,
for instance, my Office has lost 20 per cent of its staff.
Many more may leave due to the uncertainty about the
future. I believe that the adoption by the United
Nations of measures to provide incentives to staff
whose services are critically required seems all the
more urgent now.

I thank you very much, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for your attention as well as
for your support for the work of the ICTR.

