Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank the United Kingdom for its
initiative in convening this debate. I also commend
Luxembourg for its work in chairing the Working Group
and guiding the negotiations that produced today's draft
presidential statement on this topic. We will be able to
adopt a draft presidential statement today thanks to the
flexibility shown by the delegations, which Argentina
values very highly in the light of the importance of this
topic and the text to be adopted.

We also thank in particular the briefings by Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-
General Herve Ladsous, the Deputy Executive Director
of UNICEF, Johanna Brandt, and the Associate
Vice-President of Save the Children, Gregory Ramm.
We reiterate Argentina's firm support for the work
carried out by the Security Council with a view to
ending grave violations of the rights of children in the
context of armed conflict. Such acts are unacceptable
acts that harm the international community as a whole
and which we therefore condemn in the strongest
possible terms.

The delegation of Argentina underscores the
important role played by the Special Rapporteur of
the Secretary-General in cooperation with UNICEF
and other agencies of the system in implementing
the scheme created by the Council in its successive
resolutions, which has recently achieved positive
results. However, as can be seen from the report before
us today (S/2013/245), a great deal remains to be done.

The Council's condemnation should not be limited
to merely taking note of the public naming by the
Secretary-General in his report of those parties that
commit violations against children; rather, it should
also translate into specific measures that reflect a
genuine and comprehensive understanding of the
issues at all levels of the Council's agenda. Indeed,
child protection should be taken into account in the
peacekeeping operation plans presented to the Security
Council, including support for the inclusion of child
protection experts in the operations mandated by the
Council and capacity-building and knowledge sharing
in the area of human rights.

We welcome the discussions held by the Working
Group on ways to step up pressure on parties that
consistently commit violations despite the repeated
calls by the Council to those parties to cease committing
such violations. In that regard, we reiterate the need
for greater coordination between the system for the
protection of children in armed conflict and the various
sanctions regimes, in order to make it possible to impose
sanctions aimed at the perpetrators of the most flagrant
violations against children in conflict situations.

Argentina believes that the fight against impunity

is fundamental in the broader context of State
responsibility for the protection of civilians. It is States
that bear the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute persons responsible for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity and other serious infringements
of international law. When States cannot or will not
exercise that primary jurisdiction which belongs to
them, the international system provides alternative
mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Thus the national and international mechanisms
for monitoring the application of international law must
be strengthened in order to ensure accountability. In
that regard, we wish to echo the position taken recently
by the International Criminal Court that any financial
difficulties that a country may be facing cannot justify
the failure to prosecute such crimes. Likewise, in
terms of measures against persistent perpetrators, the
ICC has a fundamentally important role to play. When
adopting resolution 1612 (2005) in 2005, Argentina,
as a member of the Council at the time, emphasized
the important need for the Working Group created by
that resolution to work with the International Criminal
Court and share information as available. Reality has
confirmed that need, given that a significant number
of the countries mentioned in the report have ratified
the Rome Statute. In some cases, situations have been
referred to the Court either by the affected State itself
or by the Council.

In its first ruling - the case of Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo - the Court demonstrated its crucial role in the
investigation, trial and sentencing of criminals and its
ability to deter and prevent future serious violations of
international law and its ability to work towards justice,
truth and reconciliation.

We also welcome the transfer of Bosco Ntaganda
to the Court in March. That auspicious step forward
illustrates the importance of the growing cooperation
among States and the Court.

Argentina has always stressed the need to address
the deep-rooted causes of violence and to provide and
strengthen development assistance in order to assist
States in rebuilding. It is essential that rehabilitation
efforts for victims provide genuine programmes aimed
at reintegration, while avoiding the possibility of fresh
recruitment, which, unfortunately, continues to occur
frequently.

We are concerned about the growing use of schools
for military purposes and the increase in attacks on
schools, teachers and schoolchildren. We therefore
believe that the international community should devote
particular attention to that problem, as the right to
education of thousands of children worldwide is being
dramatically affected.

The report also mentions the effects on children of
attacks by unmanned aerial vehicles used in military
operations and the growing number of children in
detention, matters that are also of concern. We therefore
reiterate that anti-terrorism efforts must be carried out
in full respect for international law.

