Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL), submitted to the
Security Council in compliance with resolution
961 (1994). That resolution had extended the mandate of
the Mission for a final period ending on 30 April 1995.

We are particularly grateful for the completeness and
frankness of the report, whose content is of great
importance to my country since Honduras and
El Salvador are neighbours and brother countries. Political
and social problems in El Salvador can affect Honduras,
as they have in the past, which is why this matter is of
such special importance to us.
Before addressing some aspects of the report of the
Secretary-General, I want to inform the Council that the
thirteenth Summit conference of Central American
Presidents was held recently in San Salvador itself; since
the beginning of the peace process in Central America,
these Presidents have worked hard to find solutions and

 

responses to the region's severe problems, as a result of
which machinery for political-economic and legal-legislative
integration was established.

Thanks to these efforts, the region now boasts a
Central American integration system, a Central American
Parliament and a Central American Court of Justice that is
blazing a trail as the first international court of its kind in
the world and is working daily to improve a common
market that for nearly three decades has been a model for
the international community.

All this has been achieved thanks to the determination
of our peoples, and with the assistance and cooperation of
the international community. The presence of the United
Nations in El Salvador, through ONUSAL, has also had its
effect on the peace process in Central America.

In his report, the Secretary-General acknowledges that

"There is much reason for satisfaction at what has
been accomplished by the Salvadorans during this
time. ONUSAL can take credit for having helped the
Salvadorans to take giant strides away from a violent
and closed society towards a democratic order where
institutions for the protection of human rights and free
discourse are being consolidated." (S/1995/220, para. 68)

But he also warns that

"a number of commitments remain still to be fulfilled
before the Salvadoran peace process can be
pronounced a success." (Ibid.)

That is why, fully aware of the validity of the
Secretary-General's observations, we support his suggestion
that serious consideration be given to the presence of a
small team to conduct the remaining verification and good-
offices responsibilities of the United Nations - that is, to
continue observing and assisting the peace process in El
Salvador once ONUSAL's mandate has come to an end.

In the same report, an appeal is made to the
Government of El Salvador to fulfil certain commitments
now held up because of a lack of action or determination
on the part of the Executive branch, which we hope will
adopt the relevant measures in areas the Secretary-General
explicitly mentions.

It should be noted that while the war continued in
El Salvador that country's Government received a great
deal of money in the form of economic assistance.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, the
Fund for the Protection of the Wounded and War-
Disabled as a Consequence of the Armed Conflict is
today unable to function because of lack of funds and
administrative incapacity; this has given rise to tension.

We therefore urge the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, not to forget Central
America just because it is now on the path of peace. Now
is just when the region needs resources for development
and for the consolidation of democracy, lest we see a
repetition of the errors of the past, which gave rise to the
situation we are now trying to remedy.

My delegation unreservedly supports the machinery
proposed in the report of the Secretary-General to retain
a United Nations presence in El Salvador, and welcomes
the cooperation that has been established there between
ONUSAL and the United Nations Development
Programme.

As Central Americans, we wish in conclusion to
thank the Secretary-General for having said that the
United Nations should remain prepared to help El
Salvador in particular and, as we understand it, Central
America in general. We trust that the United Nations
officials remaining in El Salvador will carry out their
functions with the effectiveness demanded by the
situation, so that peace, freedom, reconciliation,
democracy and development may be consolidated in our
brother country.

For these reasons, my delegation unreservedly
supports the draft resolution before the Council.

