Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

I would first like to welcome the President-elect
of East Timor, Mr. Xanana Gusmao, and the Chief
Minister, Mr. Mari Alkatiri. Their presence in this
chamber today demonstrates the democratic
commitment of the East Timorese people and their
remarkable achievements in moving towards
independence and reconciliation.

We warmly congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for an outstanding record as head of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), while trusting that his service to the
United Nations will continue. The European Union also
welcomes the Secretary-General's decision to appoint
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma as his Special Representative for
East Timor. We are confident that he will be an
excellent head of the successor mission to UNTAET.

The European Union welcomes the peaceful
elections of 14 April 2002, in which Mr. Gusmao was
elected President by an overwhelming majority after a
very good turnout. Once again, the East Timorese
people have shown great political maturity, offering a
perfect example of a country that has chosen
democracy as the only way towards progress and well-
being. We would like to thank the Independent
Electoral Commission for organizing this successful
election and to highlight the very important role played
by its East Timorese staff.

We note with satisfaction the fact that President
Xanana Gusmao has stated that his main goals will be
national reconciliation, the establishment of
international relations, political progress and economic
development.

The European Union warmly welcomes the
signing of the Constitution, which will come into force
on the day of independence. We are sure that it will
provide the basis for stability, democracy, freedom,
justice and security for the East Timorese people.

During the celebrations planned to mark East
Timor's independence, the member States of the
European Union will be represented in a manner
befitting the welcome due to a new nation that is
joining the international community of States.

The European Union is strongly in favour of the
United Nations having a role in peacekeeping and in
supporting the authorities after independence, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report.
Given that peace is the main precondition for the
development of democracy in East Timor, it is essential
that the peacekeeping force be phased out gradually,
with due consideration to the security situation on the
ground. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
new United Nations Mission should provide stability
and viability to the emerging East Timorese public
Administration, assist in the development of law
enforcement bodies operating in accordance with
international human rights standards and contribute to
the maintenance of external and internal security.

In this context, we commend the Secretary-
General for his excellent report, which builds in a
coherent manner on his earlier reports and gives a
detailed description of the proposed United Nations
successor Mission. The European Union supports the
adoption by the Security Council of a draft resolution
creating the new United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET), as proposed by the Secretary-
General.

Both the work of UNMISET and the future of
East Timor will depend on the available resources. The
European Union welcomes the proposal that the
Civilian Support Group and the Serious Crimes Unit be
included in the civilian component of UNMISET, and
thus be financed through assessed contributions.

In only two and a half years, East Timor has gone
from devastation to the establishment of the
foundations for a new country and of the basic
infrastructure for economic and social activity. Less
than a month before independence, the new institutions
are assuming a number of functions and responsibilities
in areas such as public administration, security, and
social and economic affairs. Still, they will require
sustained support from the international community.
The European Union and its member States are
prepared to continue to assist East Timor on the path to
sustainable development and urges the international
community to support it.

Without internal and external security, East Timor
will not succeed as an independent nation. The
European Union understands the need to ensure that
police and military institutions are adequately equipped
and trained. We commend the work already achieved
by the United Nations, in cooperation with certain
donors, in the establishment of such institutions, and
we take note of the Secretary-General's concern that
additional training and donor support will be required
after independence in order to guarantee that the
security forces are fully operational by January 2004.

We note the report's positive stance with respect
to the gradual diminution of militia activity, though this
is a function of various factors such as a successful
solution of the refugee problem, an agreement with
Indonesia on the demarcation of the common border,
and the success of the reconciliation and reintegration
process.
After months of slow progress, recent refugee
returns are encouraging. This reflects confidence in the
present situation and optimism for the future. We hope
that this trend will be consolidated. To this end, it is
important that a prompt and fair solution be found to
the problem of resettlement either in East Timor or
Indonesia.

The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
Government of Indonesia to resolve this question,
namely its decision to pay the pensions of former civil
servants, police officers and members of its armed
forces in East Timor until Independence Day. We hope
that those payments will commence before
independence. We encourage Indonesia and the
international community to continue to support the
Consolidated Appeal for East Timor refugees.

The European Union urges Indonesia, together
with East Timor, to resolve pending issues between the
two countries, including judicial cooperation and a new
border regime.

The European Union strongly encourages the
future East Timorese Government to respect human
rights and to continue to improve the human rights
situation, as well as to ensure that all future legislation
is consistent with international human rights standards.
In this regard, we welcome efforts to strengthen the
East Timorese judicial system, including the Serious
Crimes Unit, so that justice and the rule of law can
become a reality in East Timor.

We welcome the important steps taken by the
Government of Indonesia to bring to justice the
perpetrators of gross human rights violations in East
Timor, but we share the Secretary-General's regret that
the jurisdiction of the Ad Hoc Human Rights Tribunal
has not yet been expanded to cover all districts and the
period from January to October 1999. The international
community will continue closely to follow
developments in this field in Indonesia.

As 20 May 2002 draws near, we are closer to
welcoming East Timor as a new State Member of the
United Nations. Three years ago, its name was
synonymous with conflict and human suffering. This
success is the fruit of courageous determination on the
part of the East Timorese people, the generous
commitment of the international community and the
will to achieve peace through dialogue and
reconciliation. Let us hope that this example is fully
realized there and followed in other afflicted regions of
the world.

