Mr. Corman (Turkey): I would like to welcome
Justice Renate Winter, President of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone, and Prosecutor Stephen Rapp, as well
as to thank them for their comprehensive briefings. I
also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very timely meeting, which is taking place at a
time when defence hearings are under way in The
Hague in the case of former Liberian President Charles
Taylor. That case represents one of the most significant
undertakings of the Court. It is therefore of great use
for the Council to be kept abreast of the work of the
Special Court.

Sierra Leone went through perilous times in the
19905. It is now a great pleasure to see that war-torn
country emerge from that difficult period with
promising signs of peace and stability. For that, we
commend the people and political leadership of the
country for showing resilience and taking bold steps
towards unity and reconciliation. That said, we also
highly appreciate the important role of the Special
Court in its efforts to end impunity and advance the
rule of law in Sierra Leone.

Indeed, since its establishment the Special Court
has done impressive work to that end, contributing not
only to national peace and harmony but also to regional
stability and understanding. In that regard, we agree
with President Winter that the Special Court for Sierra
Leone is an exemplary model of international justice.
As she pointed out, the firsts and precedents
established by the Court in the development of
international criminal law are all worth emphasizing.

In more specific terms, I would also like to
congratulate the Special Court on its significant
achievements in 2008, such as the completion of two
out of four trials, namely, the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council and the Civil Defence Forces
cases. We hope that the Revolutionary United Front
case will also be concluded soon through the appeals
judgement. Given the significance of the case related to
former Liberian President Charles Taylor, we think that
the continuation of the valuable work of the Special
Court may now be even more important than ever, for
the trial of Charles Taylor, which has attracted
worldwide attention, will be a turning point in
international efforts to end impunity.

In fact, a fair and effective trial process in each of
the four cases dealt with by the Special Court will send
a clear message to everyone involved and will, we
hope, discourage war crimes and crimes against
humanity all around the world. After all, those who
perpetrate such crimes must know that they will be
held responsible by the international community for
their acts.

We believe that the Special Court for Sierra
Leone will successfully complete its work within the
time frame described by the President and the
Prosecutor of the Court. For us, the successful
completion of the work is more important that merely
meeting deadlines. We therefore think that we should
be flexible in allowing the time needed by the Court,
taking into account the requirements of the tasks at
hand. Moreover, the effective completion of the
8

Court's work also depends upon the availability of the
necessary resources. In this regard, the continued
contribution of the international community should
also be seen as an essential element of the completion
strategy. For its part, Turkey has consistently made
voluntary financial contributions to the Special Court
since its inception.

Finally, the Special Court for Sierra Leone will
constitute yet another first by being the first
international court to set up a residual mechanism. This
is also worth noting when we speak about the
completion strategy. We believe that this residual
mechanism can constitute an example that could be
emulated by other international courts as well.

In conclusion, we thank the President and the
Prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone for
their most valuable work and wish them every success
in their future deliberations.

