Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement and
associate myself with the statement to be delivered by
the observer of the European Union. I will talk about
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the situation in
Syria and, finally, Lebanon and Iraq.

On the fifteenth day of open war between Israel
and Hamas, the conclusion ofa ceasefire can no longer
wait and must allow the resumption of efforts to achieve
a fundamental solution. The toll is overwhelming. On
the Israeli side, there is a population that lives in fear of
rocket fire. On the Palestinian side, there are hundreds
of dead and more than 100,000 displaced persons.
Neighbourhoods such as Shujaiya have become symbols
of the intense Israeli operations.

It is the third offensive waged by Israel on the Gaza
Strip since 2008. As on the previous occasions, in the
current situation no one can win. Hamas cannot win
because, by choosing to continue the escalation, it has
achieved only one thing - the triggering of Israeli fire
on Gaza. It did so deliberately, since Hamas knew what
Israel's response to hundreds of rockets fired towards its
territory would be. Israel cannot win because the ground
offensive launched last week will only weaken but not
dismantle the capability of Hamas or discredit it. It may
even emerge stronger from the show of force in the
eyes of a population that knows only Israel's missiles,
soldiers and tanks. Finally, the civilian population of
Gaza, in particular and once again, is the main victim
with heavier casualties every day and the subsequent
insecurity, exacerbated by the ongoing destruction.
As the President of the French Republic underscored,
everything must be done to put an immediate end to the
suffering of the civilian population in Gaza.

As the Secretary-General has said, our immediate
priority is the conclusion of a ceasefire on the basis
of the Egyptian proposal, supported by the League of
Arab States. Intense diplomatic efforts are under way in
many regional capitals, led by several senior officials.
The regional mediation efforts should be united. The
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, this weekend, and now Secretary of State Kerry
are in or have visited the region. We hope that their
efforts will quickly succeed. That will mean, first, an
immediate end to the firing of rockets by Hamas on
Israel, Whose security is an absolute right, and, secondly,
an immediate cessation of the Israeli offensive. Israel is
indeed targeting Hamas - an organization that France
and its European partners has recognized as terrorists.

However, the facts are clear. There are now more
than 580 dead, 75 per cent of whom were civilians,
according to the United Nations, many of whom were
children. That violates the legal imperative to protect
civilians. Yet we know that a ceasefire will not suffice.
A lasting truce that addresses the root causes of the
conflict and the legitimate concerns of the parties
and allows a relaunching of the peace process must be
concluded. Israel's security must be guaranteed, which,
in particular, means a more effective fight against
arms trafficking. Gaza must be able to resume its way
of life, since poverty, despair and inactivity swell the
ranks of Hamas more than they weaken it. It is therefore
important to work towards lifting the blockade and the
full implementation of the Agreement on Movement
and Access of2005, endorsed by resolution 1860 (2009).

The European Union could contribute to that by
reactivating the European Union Border Assistance
Mission at Rafah, as France has proposed. It is clearly
important to involve the Palestinian Authority in a
way out of the crisis. The reconstruction efforts and
the lifting of the blockade must be coordinated with
Mr. Abbas. Finally, most importantly, it is necessary to
work for a political settlement, which is the only way to
stop what we have seen on three occasions since 2008,
that is, a tragic repetition of outbreaks of violence.

Today is the last open debate on the Middle East
in which I shall participate. Allow me to move for a
moment from the bloody turbulence of a somewhat
repetitive situation to recall the basic facts of the
conflict. For 20 years, with infinite patience, resolve
and imagination, we have tried to put an end to the
conflict by convincing the two parties to negotiate
directly without international intervention. God alone
knows the number of initiatives and formulas that have
been tried and proposed in vain.

The time has therefore come to conclude that such
laudable efforts have failed because the method was
wrong. Israelis and Palestinians will never achieve
peace by themselves. The reasons are too numerous
and, I would say, too evident for me to list. It is not
a question, and I underscore this point, of resorting
to some kind of pressure on the parties. That will not
work.

On the contrary, it is a matter of the entire
international community proposing a positive agenda
to the two parties to encourage them to move towards
the path of peace. One side fears for its security and
the other for its national existence. The Americans,
Europeans and Arabs can all address those concerns.
Integration, joining regional bodies, financial
assistance, the guarantee of security and opening
full diplomatic relations are all proposals to explore.
However, there are others. We must convince the man
in the street in Tel AviV and Gaza that peace is not a leap
into the unknown or capitulation but entering a new
world. Rather than endlessly mending the engine of the
same vehicle, as the negotiators - who, moreover, are
often the same - have been doing for the past 20 years,
we must change the vehicle. We need new ideas that
seek, first, to break down the wall of fear, distrust and
hatred that prevents any progress and leave a way out
for the extremists on both sides. Until the man in the
street demands peace, there will be no peace. It may be
too late, I fear, but the entire international community
will then shoulder the responsibility of the long tragedy
that will be the future of the Holy Land.

In Syria, the tragedy continues in a country that
disappears a little more every day under the regime's
bombardment. All reports on the implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014) are unequivocal. The situation
of the civilian population has not improved. The sieges
of towns, three-quarters of which have not stopped or
even reduced owing to the regime, the indiscriminate
bombing, including by barrel bombs, which is a direct
and flagrant violation of resolution 2139 (2014), the
torture, the policy of terror against civilians and the
obstacles to humanitarian access continue.

The adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) should
improve the delivery of humanitarian aid, which must
be sent by the most direct routes, whether through the
frontlines or across borders from the neighbouring
countries. However, only a political solution will bring
an end to the conflict. France welcomes the appointment
of Mr. de Mistura to succeed Mr. Brahimi, whom we
thank for his efforts.

Our collective political objective remains the
same, namely, a political transition that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian peopl, based on the
full implementation of the Geneva final communique
(S/2012/522, annex).

Finally, France emphasizes that the thousands of
crimes committed in Syria must not go unpunished.
The Council was unable to agree on the French proposal
to refer the matter to the International Criminal Court;
nevertheless, those who are responsible for crimes in

Syria, Whoever they are and whatever side they are on,
should know that they will be judged.

In that context, we must also send a message of
support for Lebanon, which should not be dragged into
the spiral of the Syrian crisis. The dissociation policy
and the 2012 Baabda Declaration provide the framework
within which all Lebanese forces must operate.
Faced with the Syrian crisis, France welcomes
the generosity of Lebanon and underlines the burden
that hosting more than 1 million refugees represents.
Lebanon needs the support of its international partners.

We also call on Lebanon to meet its internal
constitutional deadlines. We recall the importance of
the fight against impunity and welcome in that respect
the role of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which is
expected to resume its activities on 18 June 2015.

I conclude with a word on Iraq, on which the
Security Council issued a statement to the press
yesterday at the initiative of France. France is obviously
deeply concerned about the progress of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which constitutes a threat
to the integrity of Iraq and to the stability of the entire
region. That progress could also further strengthen
the attractiveness of the Syrian-Iraqi theatre for jihad
candidates, who pose a threat to the international
community as a whole.

France condemns in the strongest terms the
atrocities committed by ISIL against ethnic and
religious minorities and those who do not adhere
to its barbaric ideology, including, specifically, the
ultimatum given to Christians in Mosul, one of the
oldest Christian communities of the world, with which
France has maintained relations for several centuries.
The ultimatum is a further illustration of the true nature
of that terrorist organization. France supports the State
of Iraq in its fight against terrorism and believes that
a sustainable response to the crisis must be primarily
political.

It is urgent today that conditions be created in Iraq
for an inclusive political dialogue that brings together
all communities in order to meet the challenges facing
the country. The alternative is clear. Either there is
no change in the governance of the country and we
will then likely see the breakup of Iraq, or a national
unity Government is promptly formed involving all
communities and a political solution will prevail.

The election of the new Speaker of the Parliament
is a positive development, but much remains to be done to
see a way out ofthe crisis. It is essential that the process
provided for by the Constitution be pursued and that it
lead as soon as possible to a coalition Government, if
we are to expect Iraq to recover.

