Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, allow me to thank the Lithuanian
presidency for holding today's meeting. We are grateful
to the Secretary-General for his participation in the
meeting and for his comprehensive briefing.

The Russian Federation is firmly committed to the
rule of law at the national and international levels. We
believe that the primary focus for the United Nations
should be on the maintenance of the rule of law at
the international level, incorporating the Security
Council's primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

We see that there is great potential for improving
the situation in terms of ensuring strict compliance by
Member States with their international obligations and
resolving international disputes by peaceful means.
Evidence that problems exist in the area of the rule of
law at the international level can be seen, for example, in
the continuing attempts to use force or the threat of the
use of force at the international level, in circumvention
of the Charter of the United Nations, and in attempts
to interfere in the internal affairs of States involved in
complex internal political processes.

The rule of law is of fundamental importance
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. Many
United Nations operations and special political missions
are being deployed in States that are far from having
overcome their internal political crises, and United
Nations missions are forced to assume those functions
that States are unable to fulfil fully in the immediate
aftermath of the hot phase of a conflict.

The Security Council, in responding to changing
international realities, is giving those missions more
integrated mandates that include peacebuilding
components, namely, security-sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and
support for the restoration of the rule of law. We are
convinced that mandates, despite their multifaceted
nature, should be as clear and as achieveable as possible
in the field and encompass those tasks that must be
addressed to overcome the causes of conflict and to
meet the real needs of specific post-conflict States.

The main objective of peacebuilding is to eradicate
the root causes of conflict in order to prevent them from
recurring. That is primarily an internal State process
in which the United Nations and regional organizations
are given the role of supporting national efforts. In the
process of the provision of support, it is imperative to
abide by the principles of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of post-conflict States and to
recognize national responsibility for peacebuilding.

The focus should be on developing balanced legal
mechanisms for reconciliation and integration in conflict
and post-conflict societies, based on a well-thought-out
and pragmatic approach. The Organization's efforts
in the area of constitution-building and strengthening
justice and governance institutions mustunconditionally
include the principle of non-interference in States'
internal affairs.

It is also important to take account of political,
historical, legal, cultural, religious and other
specificities and to avoid the introduction of elements
unsuited to local circumstances.

In the rule-of-law activities of the United Nations,
there is an increasing focus not on the international but
the national aspect of the rule of law. We are concerned
in that context by rule-of-law policy dimensions in
different countries that are based on single indicators
that were not previously agreed with States.

Mention has already been made of the fact that
this methodology is being used not only in post-
conflict peacebuilding settings but in other spheres, in
particular in the context of preparing for the post-2015
development agenda. We do not believe that the rule
of law can be measured in this way. The unique and
diverse nature of national rule-of-law models makes
it impossible to develop a single measurement for all.
Given the importance and sensitivity of this issue,
States should be included in work on the rule of law at
all stages of project development and implementation.
It is States that should determine the strategic areas of
work in this field. Only on that basis will it be possible in
principle to use the expert capacity of civil society. We
call on the Secretariat to ensure that work in this area
is carried out with full transparency and accountability.

In the light of the Secretariat's institutional reforms
and the importance of this area, we think that it would be
useful to conduct a comprehensive external assessment
of the effectiveness of the work of the existing United

Nations rule-of-law mechanisms in order to optimize
their structures and functions.

