Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): May I
begin by expressing my delegation's appreciation to
Ambassador Li Zhaoxing for his excellent service as
President of the Council this month and to you, Sir, for
your very able substitution and quick gavel today. May I
also express my delegation's indebtedness to the
Permanent Representative of Botswana for his
stewardship of the Council in February.

We voted on these resolutions today determined to
prevent, if we can, a wider war in the Balkans. We
proceed in the hope that leaders in the region do not want
such a war and that, given time, they will agree to the
principles of sovereignty, law and respect for human
rights that could form the basis for a lasting peace.

Since its creation three years ago, the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in the former Yugoslavia
has performed a multitude of difficult tasks. It has saved
hundreds of thousands of lives and restrained - although
it sometimes has been unable to prevent - further
aggression and violence. There has been understandable
frustration, on the part of the Governments of both
Croatia and Bosnia, with UNPROFOR's limitations. But
the withdrawal of the United Nations Force from either
country at this time is not a solution to those frustrations,
but, rather, an invitation to a new round of intense
violence that would cause further destruction of economic
and social structures and leave thousands more dead.

My Government supports continued diplomatic
efforts, through the Contact Group, to discourage new
fighting and to gain viable political settlements both in

 

Croatia and Bosnia. The intransigence of the Bosnian Serb
faction remains the major obstacle to peace. Renewed
efforts to tighten sanctions directed against that faction are
warranted.

With these general considerations in mind, I would
like to address the specific resolutions we have just
adopted.

First, with respect to Croatia, we understand the
concern expressed by President Tudj man's Government that
the situation on the ground, with approximately one quarter
of Croatia's territory under local Serb control, has become
increasingly untenable. This is because important elements
of the Vance plan designed to achieve a permanent solution
that respects the territorial sovereignty of Croatia have not
been implemented.

Today, the Council is proposing a new United Nations
peace-keeping force with a new mandate to assist in
controlling Croatia's international border, help implement
the Cease-Fire and Economic Agreements and facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian assistance through Croatia to
Bosnia.
The creation of this new force underlines the Council's
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Croatia within its internationally recognized
borders. That is why this new operation will be called the
United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in
Croatia. The Government of Croatia, and only the
Government of Croatia, has the right to control Croatia's
international borders.

My Government is concerned that goods are crossing
these borders in violation of paragraph 12 of Security
Council resolution 820 (1993), without Croatia's permission
or knowledge.

The resolution adopted today can be considered a
constructive response to a complex, dangerous and tangled
situation. It is better than renewed war, but it does not, in
itself, resolve the fundamental social, political and security-
related issues that now divide Croatia. Even the details of
how the new United Nations force will operate must still be
worked out. The continued international presence will keep
open a window of opportunity within which the parties may
negotiate to settle their differences. Whether that
opportunity is seized or squandered is up to the parties; a
settlement cannot be imposed by the Council or by any
other outside force.

 

My Government expresses its appreciation to other
Council members for their help and cooperation in
coming to agreement on this important resolution. Special
respect is due also to President Tudjman and his
Government for their wisdom and statesmanship -
despite intense pressure and justifiable frustration - in
choosing a path that will maximize prospects for a
durable peace.

The same general considerations that apply to the
presence of a United Nations force in Croatia apply in
Bosnia as well. The current situation is unsatisfactory; the
alternative of withdrawal and renewed all-out war is
worse.

UNPROFOR in Bosnia has not achieved its
mandates in full, but its presence, assisted at times by
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) enforcement
measures, has saved lives and helped make possible the
creation of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My Government is concerned by the recent increase
in violence in violation of the agreed-upon cease-fire,
which runs through the end of April. We urge an end to
these violations and an extension of the cessation of
hostilities beyond 30 April. We urge also that the parties
allow implementation of all elements of the original
agreement, including separation of forces and the
interposition of UNPROFOR troops along the separation
line.

My Government is also concerned by the continued,
blatant violation of human rights by the Bosnian Serb
party, especially in the Banja Luka area. We wish to
remind those guilty of human rights violations that they
will be held personally responsible for their crimes.

The presence of United Nations forces in Bosnia is
not an end in itself: to have meaning, it must contribute
to political progress. Such progress is dependent, in turn,
on the will of the parties. The same is true of an
agreement to cease hostilities temporarily. Real solutions
depend on the willingness of political leaders to make
hard decisions - to accept peace as a goal and to
compromise in order to allow communities to rebuild,
children to live like children and parents to put food on
the table at night. Here, the responsibility for failure thus
far rests squarely on the Bosnian Serb party for its
unwillingness to enter into negotiations on the basis of the
Contact Group plan.

 

Finally, in The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the name of the United Nations force deployed
here will change, but its purpose - to deter the spread of
conflict - will not. The change acknowledges that the
circumstances in the three countries where UNPROFOR
forces have been deployed differ and that specifically
tailored mandates are required. At the same time, by
retaining important links between the forces, the Council
recognizes that tensions and conflict in the region are
closely connected and that efficiency of operations is
essential.

In summary, we have reached another bend in the road
in our effort to contain and ultimately settle the complex
and tragic conflicts that erupted in Croatia and Bosnia
following the breakup of Yugoslavia. In the resolution we
approved today on Croatia, we may be satisfied that we
have avoided an immediate and disastrous widening of the
war. That is no small accomplishment. But whether we
have bought more than time for Bosnia or Croatia we
cannot now determine. In the weeks ahead we must
continue our diplomatic efforts on all fronts, while
recognizing that the ultimate success or failure of those
efforts will be determined - as they must - by the people
of the region itself.

