Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
convey France's deep appreciation to President Chiluba of
Zambia for his tireless efforts to bring about a peace
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Security Council and the United Nations at large frequently
invoke the primary responsibility of regional organizations;
this pertains especially to Africa. There, a regional
organization, the Southern African Development
Community, along with the President of Zambia have
shouldered their full responsibility to ensure agreement
among the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Security Council has duly
recognized the significance of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement.

But along with the responsibility borne by Africa,
the Security Council and the United Nations have their
own ways and means of supporting African efforts, in
particular those of President Chiluba of Zambia. Soon
after the signing of the Lusaka Agreement, the Security
Council adopted a resolution. Now, that resolution must
be implemented. The United Nations has already sent
liaison personnel to the capitals of the signatories and to
the headquarters of the Joint Military Commission. That
was but the first stage; as President Chiluba said, we must
very soon be in a position to deploy a survey mission to
make sure that we are able to contemplate the next stage,
that of dispatching ceasefire monitors, and to begin
actively to consider a third stage, as desired by President
Chiluba: the deployment of a true peacekeeping force.

As far as France is concerned, President Jacques
Chirac said at the end of August and the Prime Minister,
Mr. Lionel Jospin, reaffirmed to the General Assembly
yesterday that France is ready to lend its full support to
such a peacekeeping force in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We agree with President Chiluba that it is good that
the Security Council has been able speedily to take action
on crises such as those in Kosovo and East Timor. But at
the same time, the Council must be prepared and able to
act just as quickly with respect to conflicts in Africa.

I have a question for President Chiluba. Now that
the Joint Military Commission has been established, and
now that all the parties have named their representatives
to it, is the Commission able to begin verifying
information according to which troop movements continue
in some parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which could have implications for the full implementation
of the Lusaka Agreement?

