Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Of course, I was not planning to take the
floor again, and I certainly do not wish now to become
involved in a debate on the foundations of the
divergent assessments of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, or on the differing assessments of the
factors hindering agreement among the Bosnian parties
on pending problems. I do not think we need to do that
during today's meeting. The positions of all external
participants assisting the Bosnian settlement process
are well known. My country's position in particular is
well known.
Something on which we cannot fail to agree with
Mr. Silajdzic' is that the Dayton Agreements must be
strictly and fully implemented by all parties. That is
absolutely certain. And we have consistently been
assisting to that end through our contacts and our
relations with all the Bosnian parties. I will leave the
assessment we heard from Mr. Silajdzic' as a matter for
his own conscience. I am absolutely certain that the
ongoing efforts of the Russian Federation in support of
full implementation of the Dayton Agreements and in
support of the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are well known.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is currently a member of
the Security Council, and I will reaffirm what I have
already said: that we will continue to constructively
cooperate and interact with the delegation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the entire range of items on the
Council's agenda. This is an important and critical
stage in establishing Bosnia and Herzegovina's
statehood, and we are certain that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will successfully pass through this stage
and will work successfully in the Security Council.

The Russian Federation is absolutely convinced
also that we have every reason to believe that all
parties and political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
10-37267
on the firm basis of the Dayton Agreement, will
resolve their disputes and achieve consensus on all
pending issues for the effective establishment of a
democratic Bosnian State, in the interest of
strengthening stability and security in the country and
throughout the Balkan region.

