Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset to
express the appreciation of my delegation to you, Mr.
President, for having convened this important meeting
to address the alarming situation in the Middle East,
particularly in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Indonesia is gravely concerned about Israel's
continuing territorial expansion through its illegal
construction of settlements, outposts and road
networks, and the accompanying demolition of
Palestinian homes and property. This ongoing process
has undoubtedly changed the status quo.

This situation has further worsened with the
illegal construction of the wall in the West Bank and
other areas by the Israeli Government. The
construction of the wall not only amounts to the illegal
confiscation of Palestinian land, but also impoverishes
the affected Palestinian communities. Indeed, the
construction of the wall further disrupts the delivery of
basic social services, thereby making life even more
difficult for the Palestinians in those areas.

The most recent report of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People noted that the construction of the wall is taking
place deep - as much as 6 kilometres - inside the
West Bank, and that vast areas of land are being seized
and bulldozed. Indeed, the completed construction has
resulted in the unlawful confiscation of 2,850 acres of
high-income Palestinian land, and the process is still
going on. We cannot let this continue, because the main
objective of this policy is obvious: it is designed to
erode the capability of Palestine to survive as an
independent State in the future.

Needless to say, Israel's construction of the wall
is capable of derailing the Middle East peace process,
plunging the region into a deeper cycle of violence and
threatening the road map. My delegation continues to
maintain that the road map currently represents the
most viable vehicle for a solution to the challenge of
peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis and the
actualization of an independent Palestinian State by
2005. The Israeli policies must therefore cease and be
reversed immediately.

Finally, Indonesia shares the views of other
countries of the Arab Group, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement in
condemning Israel's ill-considered policies, including
the construction of the wall and the continuing
resettlement plan. Such activities are illegal under
international law.

My delegation is also of the View that the
proposed draft resolution on the situation in Middle
East is not only timely, but also necessary if a
comprehensive resolution of the conflict is to be
achieved. Given this situation, Indonesia calls for its
adoption by the Security Council.

