Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are gratified to welcome Ms. Dora
Bakoyannis, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Greece,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); we are grateful for
her briefing.

The Russian Federation has consistently
championed the multilateral development and stepping
up of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Security Council and regional and subregional
mechanisms. This cooperation should be based on the
sound foundation of the Charter of the United Nations,
including its Chapter VIII, with due attention paid to
the comparative advantages of this universal
Organization and of those mechanisms. What must not
be forgotten here is respect for the fact that the
Security Council bears primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
interaction would bolster the collective potential of the
international community to confront crises.

As a regional mechanism, the OSCE has on the
whole established fruitful cooperation with the United
Nations in a number of key areas. Here I am referring
first and foremost to security and the settlement of
regional conflicts. Unfortunately, however, in the

context of the August events referred to by
Ms. Bakoyannis, the OSCE clearly did not fulfil its
role or live up to its responsibility as an important
instrument for ensuring security in the Euro-Atlantic
region. It was not able either to prevent the Georgian
attack on South Ossetia or to appropriately assess the
actions of the Saakashvili regime. The information
from the OSCE military observers in the former
Georgian South Ossetia conflict zone on the
preparation and launching of the aggression by Tbilisi
on South Ossetia was not brought to the attention of all
the OSCE participating States or its collective
decision-making bodies. That only became known
much later from an interview given to Western media
by former personnel of the OSCE mission to Georgia.

Let us be candid. The lack of the aforementioned
key information from OSCE military observers had a
negative effect on the Security Council's consideration
of the situation that emerged as a result of Georgian
aggression against South Ossetia. That is far from the
best possible example of cooperation between the two
organizations. We cherish the hope that the necessary
lessons will be learnt by our partners of this pan-
European organization.

The mandate of the OSCE mission in Georgia,
which is no longer in step with reality, expired on
31 December 2008. From 1 January, the mission
started to wind up its activities. The Russian Federation
is ready to back an extension of the OSCE's field
activity both in Georgia and in South Ossetia, taking
into account the new political and legal realities in the
region with the establishment of two separate OSCE
missions to Georgia and South Ossetia.

On 12 February, the OSCE's Permanent Council
decided to extend the work of the 20 OSCE observers
deployed in the areas of Georgia adjacent to South
Ossetia in line with the Medvedev-Sarkozy plan. That
decision of the Permanent Council did not mention
other OSCE decisions, or the lack thereof, with regard
to the region.

We believe that the key task of those 20 observers
is to prevent further Georgian aggression in South
Ossetia by monitoring and informing participating
States of the OSCE on the security situation in the
border areas between South Ossetia and Georgia, as
well as Georgia's implementation of its commitments
to withdraw its troops and military equipment to their
cantonments.

We expect that the OSCE mechanism for
preventing and responding to incidents - relevant
agreements on which were reached during a regular
round of the Geneva negotiations on 17 and
18 February - will increase trust between South
Ossetia and Georgia and generally contribute to
strengthening stability and security in the region.

The timely conclusion of that organization's
institutional capacity-building process would help it to
carry out its functions in the prevention and peaceful
settlement of conflicts more effectively. That would
contribute to strengthening cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations.

The main task of the OSCE is to ensure equal and
indivisible security for all participating States. No one
should strengthen their security at the expense of the
security of others. However, that key tenet of the
European security charter remains unfulfilled. There is
an increasing lack of trust throughout the OSCE space.

The August crisis in the southern Caucuses
demonstrated yet again the shortcomings in the
effectiveness of existing mechanisms to ensure security
in the Euro-Atlantic area. Improving the situation is the
aim of the initiative of the President Medvedev of the
Russian Federation in drawing up a comprehensive
legally binding document on European security that
would enable us to set up a common area of collective
security for all States of the Euro-Atlantic region,
which would certainly also strengthen international
security on the whole.

Currently, the Russian initiative is being actively
discussed, including within the framework of the
OSCE. We expect that there will be close cooperation
with the Greek Chairperson-in-Office in the further
discussion of our initiative. We hope that the
philosophy of work of the Greek chairmanship, as
described by Minister Bakoyannis, will help to
overcome the crisis situation within the OSCE of
recent years and to adapt it to the new global realities.
We anticipate that, by the end of the year, the Greek
chairmanship will hand over a stronger and more
effective OSCE to the incoming Chair.

