Indonesia reaffirms its support and commitment to upholding resolution 2231 (2015), the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and regional security and stability. We take note of some issues relating to the specific concerns that draft resolution S/2020/797 attempted to address. However, we are not in a position to support the draft resolution. Indonesia is of the view that the current draft resolution is not in line with the JCPOA. Therefore, it is difficult to see its effectiveness in contributing positively to non-proliferation or regional security issues. The good-faith implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA in their entirety is the only way to ensure that the Iranian nuclear programme remains peaceful. Indonesia abstained in the voting on draft resolution S/2020/797 because it believes that, in moving forward to create regional peace and stability, the previously agreed multilateral commitments, particularly the JCPOA, should be affirmed and actualized. All parties must refrain from actions that can exacerbate instability and deteriorate the environment for the JCPOA's implementation, as well as fully live up to their commitments. We call on Iran to resume its compliance with its JCPOA commitments in full, as well as other JCPOA participants to fulfil their obligations completely and effectively. We continue to regret the United States withdrawal from the JCPOA and sincerely hope that the United States will consider rejoining. We also call on all parties to resolve their differences peacefully through dialogue and, where appropriate, in the designated venues, such as the JCPOA dispute resolution mechanism. While all parties to the JCPOA have a special responsibility to ensure that the JCPOA is implemented comprehensively and smoothly, resolution 2231 (2015) demands that all members of the international community play a supporting role to that end. Indonesia stands ready to work together constructively in resolving this matter. Let us all be mindful of our common goal of maintaining peace and security and, therefore, let us work without hesitation to achieve a world free from nuclear weapons, uphold the rule of law and enable sustainable peace and development everywhere.
