Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by thanking Mr. J acques-Paul Klein,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his brilliant briefing on the United Nations Mission on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This briefing is a timely
complement to the Secretary-General's report on recent
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Tunisia notes with satisfaction the positive
development of the situation as a whole, and we
particularly welcome the significant improvement in
security conditions, thanks particularly to ethnic
reconciliation among the Bosnian communities.

However, despite success in various areas, which
has provided a basis for effective, democratic and
multi-ethnic institutions, we believe that the road to the
full implementation of a lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains long and requires the firm
commitment and resolve of the international
community to deal with all of the obstacles and to
support the inhabitants of the country in their efforts to
build a new Bosnian society.

Furthermore, we believe that any premature
disengagement that is not based on an objective
assessment of risks could lead to the collapse of the
entire structure. We cannot afford a failure of this
magnitude in Bosnia and Herzegovina after such a long
commitment that has lasted for six years. It is essential
that, whatever the recommended exit strategy may be,
it take into consideration the situation in the Balkans as
a whole and the capacity of Bosnian society for self-
government.

Allow me to make a few comments on questions
which, in our opinion, are particularly important to
ensuring stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

First, while welcoming the encouraging results
achieved in the areas of police reform and
restructuring, particularly the formation of a police
force in accordance with international standards of
personal integrity and professional competence, as well
as the streamlining of its staff, organization and
resources, we must emphasize that the operation's
success remains largely dependent on a comprehensive
vision of police action. All political, partisan or ethnic
considerations that would impede the reform and the
restructuring ofthis sector must be eliminated.

Further, the participation of ethnic minorities in
local police forces should be increased. In that
connection, we welcome the campaigns to increase
public awareness of the rules of conduct that should
govern relations between citizens and police officers.
We support UNMIBH's decision to severely punish
ethnic crimes. Such crimes pose a genuine threat to the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society in Bosnia, and
they undermine the international community's efforts
to bring about lasting inter-ethnic reconciliation.
Secondly, my delegation supports UNMIBH's
judicial reform efforts. It is essential that the justice
system be independent, impartial and non-
discriminatory vis-a-vis the entire population of
Bosnia. Defendants must enjoy legal guarantees during
trial, but must also believe that the decisions of the
judges are fair. We believe that once trust is
established, it will be easier to attain coexistence
among all the ethnic communities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Here, we welcome the plan to establish a
court police service, to include mechanisms for the
protection of judges and witnesses. That would
definitely have a positive impact on judicial
independence.

We wish, thirdly, to hail the activities of the State
Border Service. That service has a weighty
responsibility in all areas related to waging the battle
against drug trafficking, smuggling and illegal
migration. Its role is all the more important because it
is proving to be an example of the success of the multi-
ethnic model advocated in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Fourthly, my delegation pays tribute to United
Nations agencies for their contribution to
reconstruction efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
particularly welcome the assistance provided by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to refugees and displaced persons upon their
return. The United Nations Educational, Cultural and
Scientific Organization too is playing an important part
and deserves our support. Here, we welcome its expert
endeavours to build dialogue and cooperation among
religious communities. We also welcome the plan of
action for children formulated by the Bosnian State in
cooperation with the United Nations Children's Fund.

My delegation supports the recommendation, set
out in paragraph 53 of the report of the Secretary-
General, that the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina be extended for a
12-month period.

