Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I congratulate Gabon on
organizing this open debate. We also thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for her remarks and her presence
among us today. We appreciate the contributions made
by Mr. Antonio Maria Costa and by Mr. Louis Sylvain-
Goma.

The issue before the Council today is timely and
appropriate. The consequences of arms trafficking and
its threats to peace and security are troubling, as
highlighted in the concept paper (S/2010/l43) prepared
for this debate. The international community should
spare no effort in tackling such a challenge. As
mentioned by Mr. Costa, the instruments to curtail the
illicit arms trade are available. What is needed is their
universalization and effective implementation.

Several important initiatives to address this
problem have recently been adopted in different parts
of Africa, including by national Governments, and in
particular in Central Africa. In that region, the illegal
trade of arms is a source of particular concern, given
that some conflicts are still under way and given the
severe impact on civilians, especially children and
women.

However, the problem of arms trafficking is not
exclusive to Central Africa. It concerns all of us. The
review next June of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects will provide an excellent opportunity to
engage all Member States in strengthening this key
United Nations programme.

Brazil has strongly supported the Register of
Conventional Arms since its creation by resolution
46/36 L of 1991, and has regularly provided
information on the Register's seven categories.

Brazil also supports a legally binding instrument
that would allow States to identify and trace illicit

small arms and light weapons in a timely and reliable
manner. We have already incorporated the
recommendations of the International Tracing
Instrument, adopted in the context of the United
Nations Programme of Action, into our national
legislation. We believe that the United Nations
Programme of Action should be expanded to also cover
ammunition and explosives.

An arms trade treaty would also go a long way
towards regulating the trade and curbing the illicit
traffic in arms. We are actively involved in the
negotiations and urge all countries to fully engage in
the preparations for the 2012 United Nations
Conference on an Arms Trade Treaty. In our View, the
arms trade treaty must include objective and
non-discriminatory normative criteria, which should be
taken into account when authorizing arms exports.
These criteria should be based on a balance of
responsibility among exporting, importing and transit
countries. It should also provide an explicit prohibition
on shipments of arms without the authorization of the
competent organs of the Government of the country of
transit or destination.

In addition to the multilateral response to the
problem of arms trafficking, regions affected should
also strive to create stronger regulatory frameworks.
We are pleased with the initiative of the Central
African region to negotiate a legally binding
instrument to monitor the trade of small arms and light
weapons. The Economic Community of Central
African States can provide important support to this
initiative and mobilize in so doing the experience of
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Southern African Development
Community. Such an initiative is a step in the right
direction that should also be supported by the
international community as a whole.
The fight against the scourge of illicit trafficking
of arms will also require addressing the demand side of
the problem in all its dimensions, changing the culture
of violence, improving the humanitarian situation and
promoting democracy and development in the
continent are the surest way to successful and
sustainable results.

Finally, let me express my delegation's support
for the draft presidential statement to be adopted by the
Council.

