Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her report and for her continued engagement with the
Security Council on the importance of accountability
for atrocity crimes committed in Libya.

Libya's ongoing crisis provides a climate of
impunity for such crimes. More broadly, it has impeded
the ability of the Libyan people to see the hope of
their country's revolution translated into an enduring
foundation for peace, stability and prosperity. The next
step towards a solution is a stable, unified and inclusive
Government. The international community must
therefore help Prime Minister Serraj to consolidate
progress towards implementing the Libyan Political
Agreement and strengthen Libya's institutions.

To that end, we urge Libyans on all sides to
make progress towards national reconciliation. The
Presidency Council should present an inclusive new
Cabinet proposal, and the House of Representatives
must fulfil its duty to allow a free and fair vote on that
Cabinet. The Libyan Political Agreement is of course
a transitional framework. We urge the constitutional
drafting assembly to complete its work as quickly as
possible and, in 2017, Libya should hold a referendum
on a new Constitution and elect a new Government.

Nothing could more clearly emphasize the
human stakes of making political progress than the
reports of civilian suffering that the Security Council
continues to receive. Violations and abuses continue
to be committed against people from a broad range of
vulnerable populations, ranging from civilians who are
subject to indiscriminate or even deliberate attacks, to
captured combatants who have been tortured and killed,
to migrants who have sought to pass through Libya and
have been inhumanely detained, extorted, sexually
assaulted and otherwise exploited by smugglers and
traffickers. The United Nations Support Mission in
Libya has reported that there is "total impunity" for
serious abuses that are committed by armed groups.
Those violations and abuses are appalling in their own
right. Furthermore, they create grievances that sustain
the broader political crisis, and therefore work against
our common efforts to achieve a lasting peace. We
call on all parties to refrain from unlawfully targeting
civilians, and we urge that those responsible for serious
crimes be held accountable. Much more must be done
to establish a functioning justice system that is capable
of addressing that problem.

We are encouraged by the progress of the forces
aligned with the Government of National Accord in
retaking the city of Sirte. We look forward to seeing
that progress further consolidated in the coming days
and weeks.

The presence of Da'esh is a threat to Libya's
future and to regional security. Its eventual military
defeat must be reinforced with progress towards
reconciliation, dialogue and the rule of law. In that vein,
the atrocities allegedly committed in the last days of the
Al-Qadhafi regime may seem far removed from today's
conflict, but we believe that promoting accountability
for those acts remains a key element of the broader
effort to re-establish the rule of law in Libya. The ICC
investigation has helped to ensure that the Al-Qadhafi
regime's acts in early 2011 were seen as the crimes that
they are, and that those responsible for such acts could
not count on impunity.

We remain encouraged by the reports of continued

cooperation between Libya's judicial authorities and the
Office of the Prosecutor. While we recognize that Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi is not in the Libyan Government's
custody, we continue to urge the Government of
National Accord to take the appropriate steps to seek his
transfer to the International Criminal Court, consistent
with Libya's obligations under resolution 1970 (2011)
and the repeated calls of the Security Council for Libya
to cooperate fully with the ICC and the Prosecutor. To
the extent that other actors continue to frustrate that
process, we encourage the Council to add its voice to the
call for Mr. Al-Qadhafi to be transferred to The Hague
and face charges there for the crimes against humanity
that he has alleged to have committed. We appreciate
the Prosecutor's efforts to help ensure that the victims
of such atrocities do not escape our continued focus.

The Libyan people face an array of challenges,
and only they can take the steps needed to resolve
their country's crisis. However, they should know that
they do not stand alone. We are encouraged by the
agreement reached in August between representatives
from Misrata and Tawergha, cities that fought bitterly in
2011 but have now agreed to compensate the victims of
abuses and allow the return of the internally displaced,
a process that was assisted by the good offices of the
United Nations Mission. We appreciate the continued
work of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Martin Kobler and the attention of the Council
and of the Human Rights Council to the situation. The
United States will continue to work with our partners in
pursuit of a lasting peace for Libya.

