Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I wish to thank
Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, for his briefing. As this
has been his last intervention in the Council in that
capacity, I take this opportunity to commend him
for his dedication and achievements in Afghanistan,
together with his entire team. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his statement.

Afghanistan continues to face significant political
and security challenges. As we speak, millions of
Afghans are still patiently awaiting the final outcome
of the presidential elections, which will lead to the
first-ever, democratic transfer of power in the country.
The enthusiastic voter participation amid the grave
security risks has raised hope and has demonstrated the
will of the Afghan people to assume ownership of their
country. It would be unfortunate if the current deadlock
over the election results were to jeopardize the future
of the country.

In that regard, Rwanda is encouraged by the
agreement between both candidates on their shared
vision with regard to the elections audit and the
formation of a Government of national unity. While
awaiting the results of the audit, we welcome the
consultations initiated by President Hamid Karzai with
both campaigns to end the gridlock and ensure that the
current political climate does not lead to Afghanistan
relapsing into conflict. We call on both candidates to
demonstrate leadership and help the process to move
forward.

At this crucial moment, Afghanistan needs
continuing international support. In that regard, we
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and United
States Secretary of State John Kerry for their efforts in
engaging both candidates to form a unity Government.

For Afghanistan to realize sustainable stability and
security, we all agree in the Council that there should
be an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process, as
a foundation for peace in Afghanistan and the region.
However, that does not seem possible, given the current
violence perpetuated by the Taliban and other armed
groups, which we strongly condemn. We are reminded
that the prolonged political impasse is also a factor of
instability, as it enhances the spoilers - including the
Taliban * that are taking advantage of the situation to
further destabilize the country.
In that respect, we commend the Afghan National
Security Forces, which have demonstrated, since June
of last year, their capability to ensure national security,
despite a number of security incidents, including attacks
on civilians and United Nations staff. The international
community must continue to support the Afghan
forces in enhancing their capacities, in both training
and equipment, especially during the post-2014 period,
in order to enable them to decisively counter ongoing
threats, including organized crime and illicit drugs.

Noting the 63 per cent decrease in opium production
in 2014, as compared to 2013, attributed to the efforts
of the Afghan National Security Forces, we believe that
sustained collective action is important in the region to
curtail the continuing threat from drugs and organized
crime.

Regional cooperation, mainly with neighbouring
countries, is paramount in the areas of shared interests,
such as the long-term counter-narcotics campaign,
security, counter-terrorism, reconciliation and
economic development. We believe that the meeting
of the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan, held
in Tianjin, and the leadership of China are important in
that regard.

The political uncertainties and prolonged
electoral period in the country have gravely affected
Afghanistan's economy, which have led to declining
investor confidence and poor revenue performance.
We welcome, in that respect, the upcoming ministerial
conference on development in Afghanistan, to be held
in London in November. We hope that during the
conference, the donor community will be able to breach
the growing funding gap and that the new Government
will reaffirm its partnership with the donors, in line
with the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework.

In conclusion, we believe that, in order to overcome
the enormous challenges ahead, Afghans need strong
leadership, one that will leave no stone unturned to
ensure economic growth and inclusive governance,
while fighting insecurity and illicit drugs, among other
things.

With the drawdown of the International Security
Assistance Force by the end of the year, we appeal to
the international community and to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in particular to
continue to support the Afghan people and the new
Administration with a view to helping them to overcome
the multifaceted challenges they face.
