The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Pakistan for his kind words addressed
to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Guinea.

I should like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
for their briefings and to express once again Guinea's
confidence in and support for them.

This statement comes at a special time.
Humankind today finds itself at the crossroads in a
period fraught with dangers and full of uncertainty,
which threaten to call into question the basic common
values that have always governed relations among
States and that are the bedrock on which the United
Nations is built. The world in which we live is
characterized primarily by many hotbeds of tension,
the combined effects of which seriously jeopardize
international peace and security.

It is at this particularly critical moment in
international life, defined by contradictory trends, that
we are holding this public meeting on the thorny
question of Iraq. The presence in this Chamber of
almost all the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of States
members of the Security Council bears witness to the
importance of the subject we are debating today.

A few months ago, with a view to finding a final
solution to the Iraqi crisis, on which all international
attention is now focused, our Council adopted
resolution 1441 (2002) after arduous negotiations. It is
true that significant progress has been made in the
implementation of that resolution since then. My
delegation welcomes that progress and expresses the
hope that this trend will continue so as to consolidate
this first active cooperation by Iraq. These facts must
be rapidly confirmed by further and more significant
gestures so as definitively to re-establish confidence
and bring us closer to our common share objective: the
complete and effective disarmament of Iraq.

Since the onset of the crisis, Guinea, which has
opted for the peaceful disarmament of Iraq, has
remained convinced that, while the opportunity for a
political solution still exists, it can be seized only if the
Iraqi authorities cooperate sincerely to guarantee an
effective inspection regime.

To that end, Baghdad must provide precise
responses to important pending issues, in particular by
giving convincing proof of the unilateral destruction of
certain biological and chemical weapons; by further
encouraging scientists and experts to submit to private
interviews, inside and outside the country, in
accordance with the modalities provided for under
resolution 1441 (2002); by providing without delay an
updated list of all those scientists involved in
armaments programmes; and by expanding the scope of
legislation on the production, import and export of
weapons of mass destruction.

We can never say this enough: this is in Iraq's
own interests. It is especially in the interests of its
people, who have suffered too much under the ongoing
sanctions. The international community, which today
seems to be in favour of a political solution, will not
understand if Iraq should pursue the equivocation of
the past.

In the current state of crisis, Guinea, while in
favour of continued inspections, believes that they
cannot go on indefinitely. In the face of the challenge
confronting us all, we remain more convinced than
ever that the adoption of a unified approach is the only
course that can give our action the necessary authority
and legitimacy.

We are among those who believe that if the
Security Council manages this crisis effectively, its
credibility and influence will be considerably
strengthened. For its part, my delegation, during its
presidency, will endeavour to seek elements of
consensus to attain that objective.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Iraq, on
whom I now call.

