Mr. Aboulatta: At the outset, I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having provided me with this
opportunity to brief the Council in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

This is my first time briefing the Council in this
open format; I should like to stress that Egypt has been
honoured to chair this Committee since the beginning
of its membership in the Security Council.

During my most recent briefing to the Council, in
closed consultations last June, I highlighted some of
the findings and recommendations contained in the
final report of the Group of Experts, extended pursuant
to resolution 2198 (2015), and also touched upon the
Committee's consideration ofthe report. I also provided
a brief overview of possible activities that were being
considered by the Committee.

In my statement today, I intend to provide an
update on the work of the Committee since my last
briefing and discuss possible avenues for enhancing the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.

Egypt, together with the members ofthe Committee,
is fully aware of the tremendous challenges facing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly this
year. Members of the Committee are determined to
ensure that the work of the Committee and its Group
of Experts contribute significantly to achieving
peace and stability in the country. It was within this
context that I visited the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda from 1 to 6 August. The
trip itself represented only the second time since the
establishment of the Committee in 2004 that a Chair of
the Committee had travelled to the Great Lakes region.
In this connection, I should like to extend my utmost
appreciation to the Government of those three countries
for their cooperation and for facilitating the visit.

I should like also to take this opportunity to convey
my personal thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Maman Sidikou and his team in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which provided invaluable assistance during the visit.

A number of themes resonated during the course
of the visit and the several meetings I had with
Government interlocutors and representatives of civil
society and the diplomatic community. They included
the growing tension over the uncertainty in the electoral
cycle, the security situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and measures to
counter the illicit trade in natural resources. During my
trip to Beni and Erengeti, I was able to hear first-hand
the frustrations of the population over the persistence
of violence and the continued suffering inflicted upon
them by the armed groups.

As I approach the end of my first year as the Chair
of this regime, I am of the view that the sanctions
regime remains vital to addressing the critical issue
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces. In
this connection, the Committee is continuing to work
to enhance the effectiveness of the sanctions regime
by focusing on, among other things, improving
cooperation with regional States and the effective
implementation of the sanctions measures. I therefore
paid attention to promoting a better understanding of
the work of the sanctions Committee during my visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
region, and I encourage interlocutors to raise issues of
concern that could be relayed to the Committee in New
York.
The key point that I would like to raise here today
is that the regime was established to work with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to promote peace in the country. Towards this end,
I encourage officials to cooperate with the Group
of Experts by facilitating their visits and providing
information as appropriate and welcome a continued
dialogue with Government officials, as well as express
the hope that the visit will serve to further facilitate and
strengthen cooperation.

Following my visit, I capitalized on the momentum
back here in New York by following up informally with
the representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. Yesterday, 10 October, the
Committee also met with those States and other States
of the region during formal consultations to continue
our reflection on how to improve the implementation
of the measures and enhance collaboration. I should
like to stress that these questions require thoughtful
consideration by the Committee and a renewed
engagement with the States of the region, with a view
to enhancing the effectiveness of the sanctions regime
and its contribution to the stabilization effort.

I am also aware of the fact that key challenges
continue to impede the achievement of peace in the
successful implementation of the sanctions regime.
Armed groups, in particular the Allied Democratic
Forces, remain a major threat to peace and stability
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Forces
democratiques pour la liberation du Rwanda, while
causing significant disruption to border communities,
is reportedly more fragmented and weakened. However,
it remains critical to continue working to limit the
capacity of these armed groups to pose a threat not
only to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo but also to the region. I would like to seize this
opportunity to acknowledge the new momentum in the
cooperation among the countries of the region in this
regard.

Another issue of key concern remains the illicit
exploitation of natural resources. The potential for
armed groups to benefit from illicit exploitation and
smuggling remains great, and criminal networks inside
and outside the Democratic Republic of the Congo
indirectly support armed groups and contribute to the
instability. As Chair, I will continue to focus on these
matters and encourage the Group of Experts and the
Committee to remain vigilant, including by discussing
means to help country address this matter.
Lastly, the rising political tension in the country
has the potential to further exacerbate the security
situation and undermine the hard-fought gains made in
stabilizing the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

In conclusion, I should like to note that in addition
to our focus on humanitarian concerns and the related
attacks by armed groups, the illicit exploitation of
natural resources and cooperation with regional States,
the Committee has also continued to engage with
the Group of Experts towards the regular and timely
submission of reports concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I therefore stress the fact that
support for the work of the Group remains critical for
the implementation of the sanctions regime.

Furthermore, and in ensuring regular discussion
and information-sharing with the relevant actors,
the Secretariat has contacted the Office of the
Special Representatives on Sexual Violence in
Conflict and for Children in Armed Conflict for
additional information-sharing with the Committee
on humanitarian-related issues pertaining to their
respective mandates. I intend to invite both Special
Representatives to provide briefings to the Committee
in the context of informal consultations.

Finally, as mandated by the Security Council, the
Group of Experts will be presenting its mid-term report
to the Committee during the month of December.
Following the Group's presentation and after the
publication ofthe report, I also intend to invite the States
of the region to present to the Committee their views on
the report. This will further continue to enhance our
engagement and cooperation with those States.

