Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to organize this public meeting on the matter
of the re-establishment of the rule of law and the
administration of transitional justice in societies in the
midst of conflict, which is at the very heart of the work
of the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for providing us with a report on the
role of the United Nations in establishing justice and
the rule of law in post-conflict societies and on
national reconciliation.

Justice and the rule of law are very closely linked
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council is therefore intimately involved
in this matter, which is also associated with the
prevention of conflict.

Experience has shown that United Nations peace
operations - such as those in Timor-Leste, Haiti and
Liberia, for example - can sometimes have direct
responsibility for the administration of judicial services
and police and penal systems, thereby helping to
strengthen judicial institutions, train judges, ensure that
courts function properly and provide advice to host-
country institutions responsible for ensuring respect for
the law. United Nations peacekeeping operations
increasingly include a civilian component assigned to
those matters. Given this historic development and the
increasingly important role played by the United
Nations in this area - often under difficult
circumstances - the establishment of a legal
framework for peacekeeping operations under Chapter
VII seems to us to be necessary.

In addition, we share the Secretary-General's
view that no institutional reform generally - and in
particular that of an institution charged with
guaranteeing the rule of law - that is carried out
during a period of transition has any hope of lasting if
it is imposed from the outside. The role of the United
Nations and the international community is not to act
as a substitute for local initiatives; rather, it is to
provide them with the necessary support.

In that regard, organizing post-conflict elections
must be strategically planned. Rushing into elections
without proper political and security preparations can
actually be detrimental to the rule of law by bringing
back persons involved in the crisis to begin with or by
encouraging sensibilities that do not actually reflect the
real political situation in a given country, thereby
further damaging the democratic process.

My delegation also believes that the ultimate goal
of reconciliation is not always compatible with
immediate justice, although we must always reaffirm
our commitment to putting an end to impunity.

With regard to international criminal justice,
keeping in mind that it is above all the responsibility of
national judicial systems to determine responsibility
for crimes, we should emphasize the important role
played by the international and mixed criminal
tribunals that have come into existence in the last 10
years. The establishment of such institutions is a
significant milestone. We note that, while the two ad
hoc Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
were able to function thanks to their extremely high
budgetary resources, the mixed Tribunals for Sierra
Leone and Cambodia were financed exclusively by
voluntary contributions, which in particular for the
former has led to a financial crisis with a negative
impact on its activities. We therefore have the problem
of mobilizing sufficient resources.

In addition, the International Criminal Court must
see its role strengthened, and the integrity of its
Statutes should be preserved so as to advance the cause
of justice and law and put an end to impunity.

My delegation, furthermore, supports the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on mandates approved by the
Security Council and on measures to be taken within
the United Nations system.

I would not wish to end without noting that re-
establishing the rule of law means building the three
pillars - peace, freedom and development - that are
the goals of the United Nations.

Finally, my delegation feels there can be no re-
establishment of the rule of law at the national level
when there has been recently such dangerous drifting
off course, undermining the most fundamental
principles of law, including those relating to human
rights and international humanitarian law.

The tragedy of the Palestinian people, with the
complacent silence of the international community, is
indicative of how precarious, if not absent, the rule of
law is at the international level. It also shows a
singularly selective approach to the notion of respect
for human rights.

