Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, for his update, and we
were glad to hear some encouraging notes of optimism
in his briefing.

Despite the numerous problems on the humanitarian
and political fronts in Syria, Kazakhstan believes that it
is imperative to continue to promote a settlement of the
crisis while implementing resolution 2254 (2015). We
are glad that at their meetings held on 14 and 15 May in
Astana, the representatives of Syria's Government and
opposition, along with those of the guarantor States,
unanimously confirmed the importance of continuing
the process. Among other issues, they addressed the
importance of increasing efforts to ensure compliance
with the various agreements reached during the
previous eight rounds of the Astana talks. On the other
hand, they also agreed that Geneva should remain the
main international platform from which to seek and
implement a political settlement of the Syrian crisis. It
will also be important to continue to support the aims
of the Astana talks and further Geneva negotiations,
while ultimately merging those important platforms
with the aim of achieving positive results.
We thank the Special Envoy for his consultations
with various Foreign Ministers at the recent summit of
the League of Arab States, as well as with Ms. Federica
Mogherini, the European Union's High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. His high-level
meetings in Moscow, Tehran, Riyadh and Ankara,
as well as his consultations with several European
ministers and senior representatives of the United
States, are also commendable. We are encouraged by
his summary today of his meetings and the outcomes of
the Astana process, and we note his hopes for progress
and his readiness to increase his own efforts and those
of several of the principal stakeholders to revive the
political process.

We can all see that de-confliction and the
precautionary measures to safeguard protected sites
under humanitarian law are working. So far this
year, 500 additional sites have been de-conflicted, as
the process is known. Their coordinates have been
voluntarily submitted through the United Nations, and
today the total number of sites stands at 661.

We are hearing a number of continuing questions
and concerns about the outlook for Idlib, which should
certainly be our top priority, simply because it has
such a large population of vulnerable ordinary citizens.
We agree with Mr. De Mistura that since Idlib is six
times larger than eastern Ghouta, and therefore has
six times more civilian residents, it is in an extremely
vulnerable position. We cannot afford a war in Idlib
and we therefore call on the main stakeholders with an
influence on the conflicting parties to hold negotiations
at the national and local levels and in the wider region
in order to mitigate the potential tensions.

We are impressed by the courageous stance of and
the sacrifices made by the United Nations, the Red
Crescent, the International Committee ofthe Red Cross
and the Norwegian Refugee Council, which are serving
under the most challenging circumstances.

To conclude, we also hope that the Brussels
Conference, held on 24 and 25 April, will help to
generate conditions conducive to the peaceful resolution
of the Syrian crisis.

Finally, we emphasize once again that the most
important condition for the settlement of the Syrian
crisis is a political process, through direct dialogue and
the use of confidence-building measures among the
parties, without which there can be no lasting results.
We should not forget that it is the Syrians themselves
who should begin to shape the future political system
of the Syrian State, with the necessary legislative
reforms, its territorial and administrative structure, and
presidential and parliamentary elections, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).

