Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I also
wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno, for his briefing on the military
situation. As usual, his briefing was very complete and
very useful. We also thank the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mr. Sergio Vieiro de Mello, for his
briefing, particularly following his courageous visit to
Kisangani, in the Congo.

What we have just heard strengthens my
conviction that following the Pretoria agreements the
different Congolese groupings and their foreign
protectors are seeking to better position themselves
before the entry into force of the final agreements and
the establishment of the transitional authority. As we
know full well from other conflicts, this period of
instability is, unfortunately, most conducive to massive
abuses of human rights. The report we just had from
the High Commissioner of Human Rights is of grave
concern, and it confirms these facts. It seems that the
level of atrocities committed in the eastern part of the
Congo has become completely untenable, and it is
important that the Council give further consideration to
this reality. From this standpoint it seems to me
extremely useful for the Council to give greater
attention to this aspect of the Congolese situation, and
that it strengthen its cooperation with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

Mr. Guehenno said a few minutes ago, and I
agree with him, that the future of the Congo cannot be
based on a culture of impunity. This would be morally
unacceptable, but in addition it could in no way
contribute to the establishment of stable institutions
and to national reconciliation. From this standpoint it
seems to me that the ideas expressed by the High
Commissioner regarding the establishment of a human
rights observatory in the Congo and of an international
commission to investigate the crimes committed are
very timely. It is important that the Council give its
complete support to these ideas.

With regard to the immediate situation, it is
important that those who are guilty of barbaric acts be
brought without delay before the institutions of justice
in the transitional authority being established. They
alone can deal with these crimes and have international
legitimacy recognized by the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would also like to say that
Bulgaria supports the wish expressed by the High
Commissioner that a clear mandate be given by the
Security Council to his Office to strengthen his
capabilities, and those of MONUC, in order to improve
the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In this regard, I have a question for the
High Commissioner: what might the nature of that
mandate be? What form could it take? In his opinion,
what is the timing of its entry into force; how soon
should that be?

