Mr. Gnaedinger (spoke in French): Allow me
first to thank you, Madam President, for having invited
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
to state its concerns about the important item on the
Council's agenda, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

The ICRC broadly agrees with the alarming
analysis provided by the Secretary-General in his three
reports on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(5/1999/957, S/2001/33l and S/2002/1300). Through
our some 10,000 staff in 80 delegations and missions,
the ICRC, sadly, is in an excellent position to attest to
the unspeakable suffering inflicted during armed
conflicts on civilian populations that are often the
prime targets of these conflicts. This suffering includes
acts of genocide, ethnic cleansing, forced
displacements, indiscriminate attacks committed by
regular armies or other armed elements, terrorist acts,
starving populations, women who have fallen victim to
sexual violence, child soldiers, families that have been
separated without news of their loved ones and forced
disappearances.

Yet such situations are precisely the subject of
international humanitarian law, one of whose pillars is
the protection of civilian populations. With regard to
methods of combat, the key principle of the entire body
of humanitarian law is indeed that of distinction. This
principle prohibits any attack against civilians and
stipulates that at all times the parties to a conflict must
draw a distinction between civilians and combatants.
Combatants alone may be the target of attack.

This same principle applies also to the means of
combat and prohibits the use of weapons that strike
indiscriminately. Furthermore, when civilians are in the
hands of a party to a conflict, they must be treated
humanely. Yet humanitarian organizations are working
tirelessly to try to provide at least minimum protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

Specifically with regard to the ICRC, such
protection activities are the very essence of the
mandate conferred to it by the 190 States parties to the
Geneva Conventions. For the ICRC, the concept of
protection encompasses all activities that seek to
ensure full respect for the rights of the individual
which are granted by the spirit and the letter of the
body of applicable law, meaning all activities that
would seek to prevent, halt or limit the effects of
violations of the law.

The ICRC strives to protect civilians in armed
conflict by intervening directly with all parties,
whatever the cause they claim to defend. This means
that, of necessity, we must engage in dialogue with a
great variety of actors, including non-State actors. Such
an approach is essential when it is a question of gaining
access to persons protected by the law, regardless of
which authority controls them. Not to do this would be
tantamount to discriminating between "good" and
"bad" victims of conflicts, and to denying some of
them relief and protection.

The operational philosophy of the ICRC is to try,
in a comprehensive and consistent way, to respond to
the needs of all civilian populations, giving priority to
those needs which are most urgent, according to the
principle of impartiality. That approach means that we
focus on particularly vulnerable categories, including
displaced persons, children, missing persons and their
families, but without losing sight of the big
humanitarian picture.

Why are these populations - protected by a body
of law which has been universally ratified, with
humanitarian organizations working to guarantee
humane treatment for civilians - subjected to so much
suffering? Is the law not properly adapted? We think
that it is. It must be noted that the great suffering that
civilians endure on a daily basis is already the subject
of those legally binding rules whose essential
principles we have referred to. Humanitarian law,
therefore, remains an essential frame of reference to
guarantee effective protection and assistance to civilian
populations that have been trapped in conflicts. Those
norms, contained in the Geneva Conventions and the
additional Protocols, are a consistent whole that clearly
establish a right to protection and assistance.

Furthermore, far from being static, humanitarian
law has constantly evolved over time. Many
instruments have supplemented and strengthened the
1949 Geneva Conventions to prohibit or restrict the use
of certain weapons or to establish legal institutions to
punish serious violations of humanitarian law. For the
ICRC, recalling that evolution in no way signifies that
the law cannot be improved.

This year, which is the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions,
the ICRC has embarked on an important discussion
about the appropriateness of humanitarian law with
regard to new types of conflict. The ICRC will share
the outcome of that discussion with States at the
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement in December 2003.

Without ignoring the possibility of improving the
level of protection provided by existing law, the ICRC
believes that the greatest challenge now is not so much
to develop new norms as to ensure greater compliance
with existing law.

Is it the humanitarian organizations that are not
up to the task? Given the complexity of so many
situations of armed conflict, as well as the magnitude
and the diversity of humanitarian needs, it is not
possible for a single organization to respond
adequately. Coordination has therefore become
essential to make humanitarian action effective for
victims. The ICRC has integrated it into its operational
strategy. It, therefore, coordinates its approaches at the
thematic and operational levels with other
humanitarian actors through various structures and
mechanisms, while respecting the mandates, principles
and operational methods of each organization.

Turning more specifically to the question of
protection, the ICRC tries to promote a harmonized
approach by humanitarian actors. Since 1996, it has
undertaken the initiative of organizing four workshops
on the problems associated with the protection of
victims of armed conflict in order to try to improve the
effectiveness of humanitarian and human rights
organizations. We must agree on the concept of
protection, as understood by humanitarian law, human
rights and the law of refugees.

The effectiveness of humanitarian organizations
can definitely be improved. The effectiveness of
humanitarian action, however, can never be a substitute
for political inaction. Humanitarian action is ad hoc in
nature, working to relieve the consequences of conflict.
Political action, working upstream, seeks to prevent
those conflicts and, later, to resolve them, opening the
way to reconstruction and development.

Allow me to conclude with two observations. If
law exists and remains relevant, it then follows that the
major challenge for us is applying it. That is primarily
the responsibility of States. The ICRC can only
encourage them to promote a culture of respect. It is
not only incumbent on the parties to the conflict, but it
is also incumbent on all members of the international
community, which, pursuant to the Geneva
Conventions, have undertaken to respect them and to
ensure respect for them in all circumstances.

That involves the need to punish violations. To
borrow the language used by a famous philosopher,
disregarding the crime means abolishing the law. One
could add to that maxim that disregarding the crime is
also oneself being guilty of denial of justice to victims
of violence, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In View of that, the creation of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) is a major advance in an
environment that until now has been dominated by
impunity. However, that dimension can only
supplement the legislative and institutional work done
at the national level.

Finally, let us stress that that effort must be
accompanied by preventive measures. Indeed, if
harsher punishment for serious violations of
humanitarian law can have a decided deterrent effect
and may therefore prevent violations of humanitarian
law, respect for that law must be built before crises
emerge, during times of peace, through mobilizing and
informing public opinion each time the rights of
victims are seriously disregarded or flouted, through
humanitarian education programmes in schools, by
teaching humanitarian law at universities and by
providing proper instruction at military training
centres. I believe that it is very important that we
finally realize that providing protection for victims of
war cannot just be reduced to an emergency strategy,
which we know is often doomed to failure.

