Ms. Sheard (United Kingdom): Ijoin others in
thanking Ambassador Osorio for his briefing to the
Council today and for his report on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and its Panel of Experts.

Five years have passed since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1737 (2006), in December 2006.
Despite the sanctions imposed since 2006, however,
the Iranian nuclear programme has continued to
develop in direct contravention of the Council's
resolutions and Iran's obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. No one
following those issues can be in any doubt that Iran's
clear objective is to develop the technology required
for a nuclear weapon.
The November report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) provides detailed and
unambiguous evidence to support that assertion. The
evidence is compelling in its description of both the
possible military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear
programme and Iran's evasion of IAEA scrutiny. In
particular, it is worth highlighting the report's findings
that Iran has carried out "activities that are relevant to
the development of a nuclear explosive device"
(5/2011/695, annex, para. 43), that "While some of the
activities identified in the Annex have civilian as well
as military applications, others are specific to nuclear
weapons" (ibid., para. 44), and that some of those
activities "may still be ongoing" (ibid., para. 45).

Some argue that sanctions are a hindrance to
further negotiations. That is not the case. Iran has been
presented with a series of offers over the years. Indeed,
there remains on the table a generous offer from the
E3+3, with which Iran has decided not to engage
meaningfully.

In January, the Istanbul offer made it clear that if
Iran verifiably suspended its enrichment and
reprocessing activities and heeded the relevant Security
Council resolutions and IAEA obligations, it would be
able to pursue peaceful civilian nuclear activity. In
addition, Iran would enjoy increased political,
economic and energy cooperation. That is just the
latest in a series of serious offers made to, and rejected
by, the Iranian Government since June 2008.

In October 2009, the original offer was enhanced
by a confidence-building proposal to provide fuel for
the Tehran Research Reactor in exchange for Iran's
enriched uranium. It is difficult to understand why an
Iran pursuing only civilian nuclear power would have
rejected those offers. The E3+3 has made those serious,
good-faith attempts to present Iran with an alternative
to sanctions and isolation. It is Iran's intransigence and
its rejection of such offers that has resulted in the
intensification of sanctions agreed upon by the
Council.

Iran says that it wants a peaceful nuclear
programme, but the facts do not bear that out. The
rejection of the deal designed to provide Iran with
reliable civilian nuclear fuel and other incentives,
combined with IAEA evidence, can lead us to only one
conclusion: Iran is determined to develop nuclear
weapons capability. Now more than ever, the dual-
track strategy of pressure and engagement is necessary.
Sanctions are a key tool to convince Iran to engage
seriously in response to the offers on the table. The
Council needs to engage constructively to ensure that
the sanctions in place are effective in changing the
calculus of the Iranian regime.

The Iran Sanctions Committee needs to act more
constructively to ensure that sanctions play an effective
part in that dual-track strategy. It should start by
agreeing to the publication of the Panel of Experts'
independent report. Withholding that report is to deny
the wider membership comprehensive insight into
Iran's activity to circumvent sanctions. It is a report
that every United Nations Member has paid for and has
a right to see. They should be allowed to form their
own judgments on its value.

In parallel, the Committee needs to act on the
recommendations in the report. It should focus on
designating individuals and entities that have violated
sanctions and it should clarify what Member States
need to be doing to implement sanctions by publishing
advisory implementation assistance notes.

It is also important that Member States be
equipped with the knowledge and expertise to identify
and act upon suspected violations. We therefore
welcome the efforts by the Panel of Experts to raise
awareness of those steps, which all Member States are
required to take in order to implement sanctions and
foster greater general knowledge-sharing and
collaboration among States.

We remain committed to engaging Iran and to
addressing the international community's genuine
concern regarding its nuclear programme. For the time
being, however, Iran has given us no reason to believe
that our engagement in negotiations on their nuclear
programme will be reciprocated in a meaningful way. It
has not even responded to Baroness Ashton's latest
letter on the subject.

Iran must know that unless it returns to
meaningful negotiations without preconditions, it faces
further and deeper isolation.

