Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Jayathma, Sophia and Kessy for their briefings
this morning. These amazing young women inspire and
humble us all with their poise, power and energy.

It is such a great relief to be here today. Whereas
we usually spend our time discussing some of the
most challenging and dispiriting events in the world,
today, instead, we get to discuss a topic that is positive,
motivating and encouraging for all of us: youth, peace
and security.

The United States supported resolution 2250 (2015)
because we believe it is imperative for the Security
Council to encourage youth to contribute to peace and
security. We strongly welcome the Secretary-General's
progress study on youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86), which says very clearlyjust how crucial and
overdue this conversation is, and we thank Mr. Simpson
for his work on the report.

When we say youth, it is important to put the
numbers into perspective. The progress study notes that
there are 1.8 billion young people in the world, which
is a huge number but it only represents young people
between the ages of 10 and 24, the former United
Nations definition before resolution 2250 (2015). Within
the United States, we often define youth more broadly,
as anyone under the age of 35. If that definition is used,
we are talking about more than 4.5 billion people, or
60 per cent of the world's population. This is both an
incredible opportunity and a huge challenge.

If empowered with meaningful opportunities and
treated in a fair, just and inclusive manner, global
youth can be a catalyst for economic growth and lasting
peace the world over, but if ignored, marginalized
or disempowered, if treated in an unjust or unfair
manner, they risk becoming vulnerable to the forces of
instability and conflict. The stakes could therefore not
be higher for all of us. We cannot afford to marginalize
or ignore 4.5 billion people, especially when we have
the ability to influence their choices in a positive
way. As evidenced by our incredible speakers today,
many young people have the drive, tenacity and ability
necessary to help bring sustainable peace and stability
to countries around the world, and we should waste no
time in tapping into that talent. Young people today
demand a seat at the table, and we should not hesitate to
make room for them.

The United States has long recognized that young
people have the ability to help drive their communities,
economies and countries forward, and we proudly invest
in exchanges and programmes aimed at empowering
youth to achieve greater peace and prosperity. Next
week, on 2 May, we will hold the third Emerging
Young Leaders Awards and Exchange Programme
in Washington, DC, where we will recognize 10
outstanding global youth leaders who have made a real
impact as peacebuilders.

One of those outstanding leaders is 24-year-old
Tanzil Ferdous of Bangladesh, who promotes youth and
community development and women's rights in that
country. As the President of Volunteer for Bangladesh,
Chittagong, the largest platform for youth volunteerism
in Bangladesh, in 2015 Tanzil organized numerous
successful events for community development, engaged
hundreds of young people in volunteerism simply
because she believes that if young people are engaged
and motivated to do community service, they will be
deterred from violent extremist activities. She is now
working with Rohingya refugees, helping to support a
safe space for 500 children in the Rohingya camps.

We will also recognize Omar Dahman, Executive
Director of the Hebron Youth Development Resource
Centre, in the West Bank. He has created a unique
safe space for over 2,000 Palestinian young people
to learn, interact and lead, including using youth-to-
youth entrepreneurship, peacebuilding training and
civic engagement.

The knowledge that young people are the
primary targets for potential recruitment by extremist
organizations should prompt us to build upon current
efforts to engage this generation by supporting their
voices, ideas and youth-led local solutions. Push
factors such as poverty, unemployment, illiteracy,
discrimination, boredom and marginalization can lead
people down paths of violent extremism. Pull factors
such as ideology, a sense of belonging, the prospects
of fame or glory and other benefits can draw people
towards violent extremist groups. We are in a race
against terrorists and violent extremists. We must
do more to address the push and pull factors driving
young people to violent extremism and provide
better alternatives.

We can start by providing greater educational
opportunities to youth across the globe, to both young
men and women. Education is also a critical preventive
tool that can help deter youth from the enticement of
global extremists or global criminal networks. We
can also address some of the underlying feelings in
relation to a lack of fairness and justice that many
young people feel when rule-of-law issues are ignored.
Important factors such as equal treatment under the
law, protecting the freedom of expression and public
avenues to voice discontent and ensuring access to
political and economic opportunities help to thwart the
attraction of violent extremist ideologies.

The United States is committed to developing
programmes that promote leadership and prosperity.
One example of a programme we undertake that aims
to prevent violent extremism is the Peer-To-Peer:
Challenging Extremism programme, which is a public-
private partnership with over 40 universities worldwide,
in which university students compete to develop the
best anti-terrorist narratives. In Tunisia, we support
young leaders through the Sharekna project, working
with their communities to strengthen resilience in the
face of economic, political and social stresses. Young
leaders are mapping their communities and facilitating
community dialogues to identify issues, then working
with stakeholders to respond to these challenges.

The Secretary-General's progress study shows
that in 2016 there were more than 408 million young
people residing in settings affected by armed conflict
or organized violence. How can we empower them to
define their futures and overcome life's obstacles? This
is done, first of all, by protecting them. In fiscal year
2017, the United States provided more than $8 billion in
emergency humanitarian assistance worldwide, and we
will continue to provide life-saving protection for the
world's most vulnerable populations.

The United States, through our more than 300
Embassies, Consulates and Diplomatic Missions all
over the world, maintains strong partnerships with
host Governments, non-governmental organizations
and youth-focused organizations on the ground. We
strongly support programmes that address drivers of
conflict and violence, by engaging young people as
partners and key actors in fostering social cohesion
and tolerance. We must focus on those and other efforts
aimed at ensuring that young people are engaged on
issues of conflict and security, that they are empowered
to take action to prevent and mitigate violence affecting
their communities and that their voices are elevated
above the fray of conflicting geopolitical interests.

We have come a long way and made strides in
firmly establishing young people as partners for peace,
but we need to continue building upon resolution 2250
(2015) and turn the ink into action. More than half of the
global population will be affected by the commitments
made in the Security Council today, and we therefore
urge Council members to redouble their efforts aimed at
amplifying the voices of young peacebuilders and youth
leaders in the fight against violent extremism and its
drivers, address the push and pull factors that open the
door to violent extremism for so many disenfranchised
youth, allow space for young leaders to bring forward
political solutions to some of today's most intractable
problems, provide more positive alternative pathways
for our young people and continue to find creative
ways to strengthen partnerships between Government
and youth, because the young people with us in the
Chamber today are not just our future, they are also our
present - right now, today.

