The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hashi
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, documents S/2004/115 and Corr.l.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its
previous decisions concerning the situation in
Somalia, in particular the statement of its
President of 11 November 2003
(S/PRST/2003/l9), and welcoming the report of
the Secretary-General of February 2004
(8/2004/115), reaffirms its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
situation in Somalia, and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of the country, consistent
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

"The Security Council reiterates its firm
support for the Somali national reconciliation
process and the ongoing Somalia National
Reconciliation Conference in Kenya, launched
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD).

"The Security Council commends President
Mwai Kibaki of Kenya, President Yoweri
Museveni of Uganda, other leaders of IGAD, and
international supporters of the Somalia National
Reconciliation Conference for their perseverance
to help Somalis reach national reconciliation.

"The Security Council welcomes the
signing, on 29 January 2004, of the Declaration
on the Harmonization of the Various Issues
Proposed by the Somali Delegates at the Somali
Consultative Meetings, held from 9 to 29 January
2004 in Nairobi, as an important step towards
lasting peace and reconciliation in Somalia, and
urges all signatories to the agreement to fully
abide by their commitment to take forward the
peace process.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Somali parties to build on the progress achieved
and swiftly conclude the Somalia National
Reconciliation Conference with a durable and
inclusive solution to the conflict in Somalia by
establishing a viable transitional government.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
Somali parties should abide by and implement
expeditiously the Eldoret Declaration of 27
October 2002 on cessation of hostilities, and calls
on the Somali parties to continue working
towards a comprehensive security arrangement
for Somalia.

"The Security Council stresses the urgent
need for a comprehensive ceasefire throughout
Somalia, and that the Somali parties themselves
bear the responsibility of achieving it. The
Council calls on the Somali parties to fully
implement the ceasefire, to ensure security and to
resolve their differences through peaceful means.

"The Security Council condemns those who
obstruct the peace process, and stresses that those
who persist on the path of confrontation and
conflict will be held accountable. The Council
will continue to monitor the situation closely.

"The Security Council calls upon

all

neighbouring States to continue their endeavour
to participate fully and constructively for the
success of the Somali national reconciliation
process and the attainment of peace in the region.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitment and preparation of the African
Union to deploy a military observer mission to
Somalia, and calls upon the international
community to support the African Union's efforts
to improve the security situation in Somalia.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community to continue its efforts to
support IGAD in its facilitation of the Somalia
National Reconciliation Conference, and calls on
the donor countries to contribute to the
Conference, the United Nations Trust Fund for
Peace-building in Somalia and the United Nations
consolidated inter-agency appeal for Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern regarding the humanitarian situation in
Somalia, and calls on the Somali leaders to
facilitate the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian assistance and to assure the safety
of all international and national aid workers.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
over the continued flow of weapons and
ammunition supplies to Somalia, welcomes the
establishment of the Monitoring Group pursuant
to resolution 1519 (2003) of 16 December 2003,
and calls on relevant States and entities to comply
scrupulously with the arms embargo and to
cooperate with the Monitoring Group.

"The Security Council welcomes the
readiness of the Secretary-General to enhance the
attention of the United Nations to developments
in Somalia within existing resources. The Council
reiterates that a comprehensive peace-building
programme with special emphasis on
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration will be important to post-conflict
Somalia as stipulated in the statement of its
President of 28 March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/8).

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to consider and to suggest in
his next report ways to develop the role of the
United Nations in support of the IGAD-facilitated
Somali reconciliation process.

"The Security Council reiterates its
readiness to assist the Somali parties and support
IGAD in implementation of the agreements
reached in the Somalia National Reconciliation
Conference."
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

