Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to join others in thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh for his briefing.

I align myself with the statement to be made
shortly on behalf of the European Union by the
Austrian presidency.

It is the Security Council's responsibility to
maintain the momentum of the Middle East peace
process. Indeed, at this time of new Governments -
and we discuss the Middle East at a critical time - we
must remind ourselves and all those involved of the
obligations that have been taken on, including under
the road map, with a view to achieving the vision of
two democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side
by side in peace and security.

Congratulations are due to Ehud Olmert and the
Kadima party on their election victory in Israel. The
British Government looks forward to working with
Mr. Olmert as he takes over the peace process and
moves it forward.

Yesterday, the newly appointed cabinet of the
Palestinian Authority was sworn in by President
Abbas. The United Kingdom's policy on Hamas
remains unchanged. The new cabinet needs to
recognize that with a democratic mandate come
responsibilities, responsibility to govern in the best
interests of the Palestinian people. Democracy is much
more than winning an election. It is our firm view that
democracy includes renouncing violence, and in this
case recognizing the State of Israel and accepting the
previous agreements reached by the Palestinian
Authority. All those conditions have been set out by
the Quartet in its statement of 30 January 2006, which
we fully applaud, a statement which was reiterated this
morning. It is unacceptable in our view to pursue
political goals through violent means.

As Foreign Secretary Straw has made clear, the
Palestinian people should not be punished for the
decisions that the new Government might take. We are
concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
in particular by the troubling news that recently food
has had to be rationed in Gaza. The United Kingdom is
doing what it can to ensure that we can continue to
provide humanitarian and development support to the
Palestinian people to help them build a better future.
We have been one of the largest bilateral donors to the
Palestinian people, and we hope that we and the
international community can continue to deliver such
aid.

But we need to be absolutely clear that that
funding does not support terrorism. The United
Kingdom is deeply concerned by restrictions on
freedom of movement in the West Bank and by the
closure of crossing points between Gaza and Israel. We
call on Israel to keep the crossings open, to maintain
the re-opening that we have heard this morning, and we
call on the Palestinian Authority to implement the
Agreement on Movement and Access.

In our view, Israel should freeze all settlement
expansion and dismantle outposts. The barrier's route
should be on or behind the Green Line, not on
occupied territory. But again, for its part, the
Palestinian Authority needs to take effective measures
to prevent terrorism, including the launching of some
Kasam rockets which we have heard of, and to reform
the security services, which is so much needed.

Above all, the United Kingdom remains
committed to the principles of a negotiated two-State
solution.

Turning to Lebanon, the United Kingdom
welcomes the launch of a national dialogue and the
consensus reached on certain key issues as a result of
this process. This is an important step, not just towards
the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), but
also in the process of building a unified, stable and
prosperous Lebanon.

We are concerned by recent reports of arms
transfers across the Syria-Lebanon border. We look
forward to the report next month by Special Envoy
Roed-Larsen.

We welcome the Council's adoption yesterday of
resolution 1664 (2006), mandating the Secretary-
General to negotiate an agreement with the Lebanese
on a tribunal of an international character to try those
eventually indicted for the killing of Rafik Hariri. We
believe that the process of reaching agreement on the
shape and structure of that tribunal will support the
work of the United Nations International Independent
Investigation Commission.

The successful completion of the Commission's
investigation remains an essential element of efforts to
promote security and stability in Lebanon and in the
wider region. We reiterate the commitments and the
requirements set out in Security Council resolutions
1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005), and now 1664
(2006), for all Member States to cooperate fully and
unconditionally with the Commission.

