Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): 1 am honoured
to deliver this statement on behalf of Belgium,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands. Let me first express
appreciation to Spain for organizing this important
open debate.

As the United Nations marks its seventieth
anniversary, we are faced with a conflict-ridden
world, numbers of displaced persons and refugees
unheard of since the Second World War, and a global
terrorist threat emanating from an increasing number
of non-State armed groups. Today's crises, more than
ever, call for a Security Council with its doors wide
open to the outside world and its concerns. Against that
backdrop, the Council's working methods should be
adapted with the need for an effective, inclusive and
transparent Security Council in mind. Improvements
have been made in the past, but there is still much to be
done. Let me share our views regarding three aspects
of working methods: transparency, inclusiveness and
effectiveness.

With respect to transparency, and with regard to
strengthening the relationship between the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the process of
the selection and appointment of the next Secretary-
General is of eminent importance. Significant steps
were made with the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 69/321, such as the decision to request the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Security
Council to start the process of soliciting candidates
for the position of Secretary-General through a joint
letter addressed to all Member States. In this regard,
let me acknowledge the individual efforts made by both
permanent and non-permanent members of the Security
Council. We encourage the Council to contribute further
to the transparency of the selection process through
the implementation of resolution 69/321, as well as by
organizing meetings open to the wider membership
and civil society, such as Arria Formula meetings, with
candidates for the position of Secretary-General.

With regard to inclusiveness, we would welcome
increased cooperation between members and
non-members of the Council, in order to widen
support for the Council's decisions among the
general membership and beyond. This is of particular
importance when the Council discusses situations that
affect the interests of a country that is not a member
of the Council. In a similar vein, greater involvement
of troop-contributing countries and police-contributing
countries when discussing specific peace operations
would contribute to greater support for the mandates
of such operations and, therefore, to a more effective
fulfilment of those mandates.

Other options include regular public briefings
by special envoys and special representatives of
the Secretary-General and public horizon-scanning
briefings by the Secretary-General. The latter option
would also increase the Council's ability to operate in a
proactive and preventive manner. In addition, both the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the Advisory Group of Experts for the 2015 Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture underline that, in order
to achieve sustainable peace, all United Nations actors
must come together in a much more coherent way.
Building sustainable peace is a long-term endeavour
that requires attention throughout the whole conflict
cycle and beyond the immediate aftermath of a crisis.

From this point of View, we could benefit from
closer cooperation between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. The Council
could draw upon the Commission's advice regarding
peacebuilding dimensions of mandates. This would
help ensure that the mandates, benchmarks and reviews
of peace operations reflect the longer view required
for sustaining peace. The Peacebuilding Commission
might also play a useful role for countries transitioning
off the agenda of the Security Council.

With respect to effectiveness, let me recall the
pressing need for the Security Council to take action
in the case of mass atrocities. Increasingly, we see
civilian populations at risk of mass atrocities. The
Council has a duty to use its powers to prevent and halt
these atrocities. However, on several occasions this
Council failed to exercise its responsibility due to the
use ofthe veto. In the case ofrisk of mass atrocities, the
use of the veto is irreconcilable with the fundamental
purposes and principles of the United Nations. It
delegitimizes both the Council and the United Nations
as a whole. What remains is an image of the United
Nations as an organization incapable of fulfilling its
core responsibilities.

We therefore recommend that all current and future
Council members - indeed, all States Members of the
United Nations - support and implement the proposals
of France and Mexico, as well as the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, to support timely
and decisive action by the Security Council aimed
at preventing or ending the commission of genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes.

We need a Security Council that is transparent in
its working methods and inclusive towards non-Council
members and other United Nations organs and that
acts effectively and decisively for the maintenance of
international peace and security, in particular when
faced with mass atrocities. The seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations provides an excellent opportunity
to reform the working methods of the Security Council
and to ensure that it can operate truly in the spirit of
the Charter.

It is up to all ofus, members and non-members alike,
to seize this moment. In that spirit, and speaking in my
national capacity as the representative of an aspiring
member ofthe Security Council for the 2017-2018 term,
I would like to pledge the commitment of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands to the principles of transparency,
inclusiveness and effectiveness, on and off the Council,
as a partner for peace, justice and development.

