Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of our Council and to
assure you of our full cooperation. We are very grateful
also to Ambassador Jones Parry for his excellent
conduct of our work during September.

Allow me to express my delegation's appreciation
for the wisdom you demonstrated in the prompt
organization of this public meeting of our Council in
the face of the escalation of tensions in the Middle East
following the violation of Syria's air space by the Israel
Government and the extension of extrajudicial State
violence to that neighbouring Arab State.

Nothing - absolutely, nothing - can justify
such an act, which is contrary to all acceptable
standards of international conduct, and whose sole
purpose is to extend the strategy of chaos already
imposed on the people of Palestine to all the
neighbouring Arab Islamic States. Such an act violates
all the relevant Security Council resolutions designed
to bring about a negotiated political peace settlement to
the Israeli-Arab crisis.

Thirty years after the signing of the
disengagement agreement of 30 May 1974 between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic, Israel's unjustified
attack on Syria is a particularly serious and alarming
threat to international peace and security and is liable
to jeopardize the implementation of the Quartet's road
map, whose ultimate goal is to overcome the problems
raised by the cycle of violence and to safeguard the
peace process in the Middle East.

My country, the Republic of Guinea, firmly
condemns the use of force and violence and,
particularly, terrorism as a means of political and
diplomatic negotiation or of pressure to advance
political views. We condemn terrorism in all its forms,
including in the form of State terrorism. In that respect,
we have condemned the terrorist attacks committed on
the eve of Yom Kippur in Haifa, which struck innocent
Israeli citizens.

Such blind violence can only damage the noble
Palestinian cause, which my country has always
supported. The Israeli armed reprisal is a
disproportionate reaction stemming from a political
will to destroy the peace efforts in the region of the
international Islamic community. We firmly condemn
this military attack, and we express our concern at the
attempt to illegally expand the zone of conflict and
destabilize the entire Middle East.

My country commends the measured and very
responsible reaction of the Syrian Government. In
promoting the path to dialogue and appealing to the
conscience of Security Council members, Syria is
setting an encouraging and laudable example.

We believe yet again that we must call on the
Israeli Government to show more self-restraint and
moderation and comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that context, my delegation
fully supports the draft resolution submitted by Syria.
That draft is moderate, and could be a positive and
beneficial signal to the peoples of the Middle East and
the world.

