Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): Estonia welcomes the adoption of the resolution on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We thank co-penholders Germany and Indonesia for their hard and efficient work. We believe that resolution 2543 (2020) is well balanced and highlights the Council's priorities and the most important aspects of UNAMA's present and future activities. We welcome the start of intra-Afghan negotiations between the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban in Doha on 12 September. This is a ground- breaking moment. It is now more important than ever for the United Nations, including UNAMA, to fully support Afghanistan so that the peace negotiations can lead to an inclusive political settlement. A stable, peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan is in all Afghans' and our interests. A global ceasefire has been repeatedly called for by the entire international community, the Secretary- General and the Council. We stress once again that both parties must fulfil their commitments and work towards ending the violence in order to save civilian lives. Afghans need a comprehensive and permanent ceasefire to accompany the intra-Afghan negotiations. The fundamental freedoms and human_ rights guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution, particularly those of women and children, are inalienable and should be of the highest priority on the agenda of the intra-Afghan negotiations. The meaningful participation of women and minorities is important at all levels of decision-making. The aim should be acountry with economic development and growth providing new opportunities for its citizens, and where rights are upheld and women, children and marginalized groups are protected. Finally, considering the important times ahead in Afghanistan, Estonia recognizes that UNAMA has a crucial role to play in supporting Afghanistan's way towards peace and security. To that end, it is important for UNAMA to work closely with all parties of Afghanistan, the international community and other international organizations, particularly the European Union.
