Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
excellent briefing on the situation in Kosovo.

The briefing he just delivered described the grave
inter-ethnic confrontation and violence that shook
Kosovo in March and from which United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
members themselves suffered. It revealed the extreme
precariousness of the situation in a battered country
that has not yet been able to overcome the aftermath of
a war ruthlessly undertaken by two communities.

Algeria, which along with other members of the
Security Council condemned those acts of violence,
insists on the need to show restraint and a sense of
responsibility and to pursue and prosecute those who
were responsible for those atrocities and crimes. The
Kosovar leaders must learn from the disintegration of
the situation that took place in March and take the
necessary measures to prevent such a disintegration
from reoccurring. Indeed, the serious developments in
March stress the need to continue and strengthen the
ongoing political process in Kosovo and the launching
of the Standards Implementation Plan for Kosovo.

In this regard, that Plan is a step in the right
direction, even if it is regrettable that all communities
in Kosovo were not able to participate in its drafting.
That achievement is a timely reinforcement of the
policy of "standards before status" and gives new life
to the process of implementing Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) that eventually should lead to
consideration of the basic question of the future status
of Kosovo.

The Implementation Plan, as it is the outcome of
dialogue and close cooperation between UNMIK and
the Provisional Institutions of Kosovo, establishes
guidelines and actions that Kosovo must undertake
within the context of a precise timetable to meet the
eight standards. Attaining the standards is a
considerable challenge that the Kosovars absolutely
must meet. It is a difficult endeavour and it requires
sustained sacrifices and efforts of all Kosovars.

Likewise, the international community must help
Kosovo to meet these goals and support it in this
process. Joint efforts and solidarity are indispensable.
The building of a stable, prosperous, democratic,
tolerant and multi-ethnic Kosovo is - and this point
cannot be repeated too often - our common
responsibility.

In this respect, my delegation welcomes the fact
that the Plan clearly distributes responsibilities for the
implementation of the standards and that it clearly
defines the tasks that the Provisional Institutions and
UNMIK must carry out within the established
deadlines. The progress made in spelling out the eight
goals will, we are sure, create new political prospects
for Kosovo. Indeed, UNMIK and the Provisional
Institutions must implement in full the eight standards
before proceeding to an overall assessment of progress
in mid-2005, an essential stage which will allow the
consideration of the future status of Kosovo to begin.

In order to implement those standards fully,
Kosovo will need all of the energy and support of its
people, just as it must have the conditions necessary
for security and calm established. Prosperity, peace,
democracy, coexistence among ethnic groups and the
multi-ethnicity of Kosovo cannot be established by
decree, since it is true that they will be the outcome of
an ongoing and painstaking effort of reconciliation
among all communities. That clearly means that
confidence must gradually be established, that the
effects of the past must be overcome and that a final
end must be put to inter-ethnic clashes. There should
be a place for everyone in Kosovo, and Kosovars must
realize that they have no other alternative than to live
together in harmony.

The events of March were a brutal reminder of
the urgent need to work to create a multi-ethnic and
tolerant society, a goal which must remain the top
priority and to which all efforts should aim. Dialogue
and trust among all communities will help Kosovo
implement standards and speed up the pace of the
process that will lead to final status.

If those elements are lacking, it will be difficult
to guarantee the full participation of all communities in
the institutions, in the administering of political life
and in the dismantling of parallel structures in Kosovo,
just as it will be difficult to provide for freedom of
movement for individuals and the sustainable return, in
security and dignity, of displaced persons. Furthermore,
distrust and the difficulties encountered in the process
of reconciliation will remain an obstacle that will have
to be overcome to permit the promotion of dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, the consolidation of the
rule of law, the protection of property rights and the
strengthening of links among all components of
Kosovar society.
The economic revival of Kosovo also requires
stability and calm in order to promote domestic and
foreign investment, to create jobs and to improve the
social situation of Kosovars. Moreover, the
development of Kosovo's economy depends on
opening up regional markets to the province's products.

The implementation of the "standards before
status" policy and the building of a prosperous,
democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic Kosovo should be
supported politically and financially by the
international community.

