Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Croatia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland
and Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.

Let me start by thanking Under-Secretary General
Amos, Under-Secretary General Le Roy and Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie for their briefings and
important contributions to this very timely debate.

In recent months, the challenges regarding the
protection of civilians have been high on the agenda of
the Security Council. The European Union (EU)
welcomes the increased attention paid by the Security
Council to this important issue.

The European Union commends the work
conducted within the United Nations in recent years to
foster and strengthen a common understanding of
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. The joint
efforts in the United Nations have, in addition to
increasing the understanding of the concept of the
protection of civilians, also resulted in the
establishment of a platform for action. The landmark
resolution 1894 (2009) provides a solid basis, and
recent developments in this regard include the
presidential statement and updated aide-memoire of
November last year (S/PRST/2010/25), the adoption of
resolution 1960 (2010) on sexual violence in conflict,
and the development of a stronger framework for the
11-33111
protection of civilians by peacekeepers. The European
Union strongly welcomes these developments. Indeed,
what is important is to make full and coherent use of
this platform in order to make a difference on the
ground. The informal expert group on protection of
civilians has an important role to play in this regard.

Despite all efforts, civilians continue to be
victims of disproportionate attacks, deliberate targeting
and the indiscriminate use of weapons. Explosive
weapons used in populated areas have a high
humanitarian impact on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. It is estimated that, in contemporary
armed conflicts, 90 per cent of the casualties are
civilians and only 10 per cent are active combatants.
Contemporary armed conflicts leave behind thousands
of victims needing, among other things, appropriate
medical care and psychological assistance, in many
cases for their entire lives.

We need to pay more attention to the situation of
victims. The European Union calls on all parties to
conflicts, including non-State actors, to fully comply
with their international legal obligations to protect
civilians and to prevent human rights violations and
violations of international humanitarian law.
Compliance with and respect for international
humanitarian law need to be reinforced, as they also
contribute to securing and sustaining humanitarian
space and to guaranteeing safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian operations and humanitarian workers
to populations in need. We are particularly concerned
in this regard by the situation in Darfur, where nothing
has changed. The Government bombing of civilians is
continuing and militia continue to surround internally
displaced persons camps.

Further, it is vital to address the question of
impunity in the context of the protection of civilians.
There must be strong mechanisms of accountability in
case of violations, which also provide an essential
preventive element. Activities in this regard should
seek to support the establishment of an environment in
which all persons, institutions and entities are
accountable to laws that are consistent with
international law, including human rights norms and
standards, and international humanitarian law. There
must be no impunity for perpetrators of the most
serious international crimes: war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. The EU supports
accountability mechanisms at the international and
national levels. The EU also supports the
3
recommendation of the Secretary-General in his 2010
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2010/579) to establish commissions of inquiry.

With regard to the protection of civilians in the
context of peacekeeping operations, I would like to
welcome the development of designated protection of
civilians strategies by most peacekeeping missions
having a protection of civilians mandate. I would like
to underline the importance of all peacekeeping
missions with a protection of civilians mandate
developing comprehensive protection strategies,
including the necessary benchmarks and indicators,
without delay. The European Union welcomes the
framework for drafting comprehensive protection of
civilians strategies in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, jointly issued by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, as a useful tool in this regard. The European
Union looks forward to the finalization and
dissemination of the training modules for protection of
civilians to troop- and police-contributing countries.
Peacekeeping operations must be provided with the
necessary resources and capabilities to carry out their
protection tasks effectively, and force commanders
must ensure that these are implemented vigorously. In
addition, we welcome the important progress made in
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
this year on the protection of civilians.

With regard to current developments in Libya, the
European Union has welcomed the adoption of
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), which offer a
clear legal basis for the international community to
provide protection to the civilian population. We are
determined to act collectively and resolutely with all

international partners - particularly the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the African Union,
NATO, and other regional stakeholders - to

implement the adopted resolutions on Libya. The
broad-based attendance at the second meeting of the
Contact Group on Libya last Thursday in Rome was.
emblematic of the variety of actors that remain resolute
in their commitment to stopping the violent and
illegitimate repression of the Libyan people.

The European Union condemns the widespread
and systematic violations of human rights, violence
and brutal repression perpetrated by the regime against
the Libyan people. The European Union calls on all
parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and to allow humanitarian
organizations full unhindered and safe access to the
affected population. The European Union welcomes the
referral of the situation to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), and calls on all States to fully cooperate
with the ICC in compliance with resolution 1970
(2011). We express our appreciation for the swift
manner in which the ICC has acted in the situation
referred to the Court.

The European Union is taking its share of
responsibility through its continuous involvement in
the political process and its efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance. The European Union stands
ready, if requested by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, to conduct a military
operation, in the framework of the Common Foreign
and Security Policy, in order to support humanitarian
assistance in the region.

The European Union is also deeply concerned
about attacks by security forces on peaceful
demonstrators elsewhere in the Middle East region,
which constitute flagrant violations of human rights
law. The European Union is adopting targeted
measures to dissuade the Syrian authorities from such
practices.

Allow me to reflect on developments in Cote
d'Ivoire. The European Union welcomed the adoption
and implementation of resolution 1975 (2011), which
authorized the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire to use all necessary means to protect civilians,
including preventing the use of heavy weapons, which
targeted and harmed the civilian population during the
crisis. The effective implementation of resolution 1975
(2011) in C6te d'Ivoire marks an important juncture in
highlighting the role of the United Nations with regard
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The EU
also welcomes the establishment by the Human Rights
Council of a commission of inquiry to investigate
violations on the ground and calls on all sides, in
compliance with resolution 1975 (2011), to fully
cooperate with the commission.

In conclusion, the adoption by the Security
Council of recent resolutions on Libya and Cote
d'Ivoire has shown the capacity of the United Nations
to act effectively and decisively to protect civilians.
The EU very much welcomes that fact and encourages
the Security Council to be consistent with decisions
taken and to act decisively in order to make a real
11-33111
difference on the ground, as civilians are at grave risk
in armed conflicts.

