The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing and for the explanation of the recommendations
for the reconfiguration of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). I also thank
Special Envoy Haysom for his briefing. Let me take
this opportunity to express our gratitude for all of
his contributions as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan and South Sudan. We are sorry
to lose his skills and knowledge on the portfolio but
we wish him the best of luck in his next role with the
United Nations in Somalia.

The United States appreciates UNISFA's successful
work to stabilize Abyei, and specifically commends
Ethiopia for its contributions. The mission's efforts to
stabilize the Area and to work with local communities
to strengthen ties, resolve disputes and increase peace
and security have greatly contributed to the general
calm in the contested Area between the Sudan and
South Sudan. It is now time to ensure that we can
reconfigure the mission to reflect the new realities on
the ground and better address its existing security and
administrative concerns, as the Council unanimously
endorsed in the recent mandate renewal.

Our analysis of the Secretary-General's
reconfiguration recommendations is that they are
a good start to align UNISFA with realities on the
ground, but they do not go far enough. We believe that
significant security gains in recent years warrant a
reduction in the overall number of uniformed personnel
in the mission. The improved security situation in the
Abyei Area and other border areas no longer demands
the current level of military personnel. Thanks to the
firm benchmarks established by the Council, there has
been some progress in the past year to operationalize the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(J BVMM). However, the parties have not met all of the
benchmarks outlined by the Council, as other speakers
have pointed out.

More than half a decade since its creation, the
JBVMM. has still not realized its full potential. We
regret the fact that the parties have not convened a
Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting and
that progress on other benchmarks appear stalled. We
urge the parties to take steps to meet the benchmarks
laid out in resolution 2412 (2018) before the deadline of
15 October. The Security Council should not, and the
United States will not, indefinitely support a Mechanism
that remains underutilized and is not making progress
on resolving the political issues at the root of UNISFA's
JBVMM. support mandate, especially if the parties are
unwilling to fully commit to the political process and
disregard Security Council benchmarks.

We agree with the Secretary-General that a
reorientation towards a police-style mission is
necessary in order to solidify the peace and stability
that the Ethiopian peacekeepers have worked so hard
to secure. The establishment of the Abyei police
service and the provision of a full-spectrum police
service remain essential steps in maintaining stability,
while also enabling UNISFA's eventual withdrawal.
We agree with the Secretary-General that a strong
civilian component is necessary for UNISFA to operate
effectively and create the space to resolve underlying
political issues. The civilian component would assist
both sides and all communities in maintaining stability,
preventing intercommunal conflict and implementing
past agreements. We appreciate the role of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel in facilitating
the settlement of the Abyei dispute. We urge the Panel
to continue its mediation efforts to reach an agreement
on Abyei's final status and to continue encouraging the
parties to implement past agreements.

In missions that generally work well, such as
UNISFA, we must give credit where it is due. Therefore,
I thank Ethiopia and others that provide personnel
and resources to the mission. However, we must
think critically about efficiently managing our scarce
resources and applying them appropriately to the tasks
at hand. We must also question whether or not all ofthose
tasks remain appropriate and necessary. Peacekeeping
missions, even ones that generally work well, must have
exit strategies and adapt to the changing circumstances
and realities of the situation on the ground. For
UNISFA, it means a reconfiguration towards realistic
police and troop allocations, a strong civilian presence
and renewed commitment by the parties to finding a
permanent solution to the outstanding issues.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

