I would like to make four remarks - on the security situation, the political process, detainees and accountability. On the security situation, we remain concerned about the fragile security situation throughout the country. In particular, we are worried that a new military offensive in or around Idlib would result only in more mass displacements and a humanitarian catastrophe. This should be avoided at all costs. We therefore continue to fully support the call of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for a complete, immediate and nationwide ceasefire. On the political process, there is a clear way out. That view has been expressed by many delegations, and it is also the position of Germany. Under the auspices of the United Nations, we must pursue a political process that is in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). In that context, I would like to make it very clear that only after a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition is firmly under way will Germany and the European Union (EU) assist in reconstruction. In that connection, when the Syrian regime changes its brutal behaviour and ends its grave violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law, there will also come a point for EU sanctions to be lifted. The issue of sanctions has been touched upon by previous speakers. I would like to make it very clear that the sanctions imposed by the European Union contain clear humanitarian exemptions, and we work very hard to make sure that such exemptions are implemented faithfully in a way that does not create humanitarian damage. In that context, let me add that much more humanitarian damage is done by closing border crossings into Syria. To allow for progress on the political process, the third round of the Constitutional Committee, starting on 24 August, will be an important step. That will be another occasion for the Syrian regime to demonstrate that it is serious about the political process. We urge Russia to use its influence over Damascus in order to create the right spirit. We agree with Special Envoy Geir Pedersen that the Constitutional Committee alone will not suffice. We also need to see progress in the broader political process and the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). My third point is on detainees. Resolution 2254 (2015) calls for the immediate release of arbitrarily detained persons, particularly women and children. But since its adoption, in December 2015, almost five years ago, there has been no progress. Three concrete points are crucial in that regard. First, we urge all parties, in particular the Syrian regime, which holds the overwhelming majority of detainees, to immediately release all arbitrarily detained persons, starting with the most vulnerable - women, children, the sick, wounded and elderly. Secondly, the Syrian regime must also allow immediate, unconditional and unhindered access for relevant humanitarian organizations to all its prisons and detention facilities. Thirdly, the Syrian regime must inform families of the fate and whereabouts of the tens of thousands missing and disappeared persons. My fourth and last point is on accountability. We remain convinced that national reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria will be possible only once truth, justice and accountability are established for all crimes and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict. In its latest report (A/HRC/45/31), the United Nations Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic details human rights violations and war crimes in Idlib. This report, as well as the findings of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations board of inquiry, demonstrate that the Syrian regime and its allies are responsible for indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure in north-west Syria. There has not yet been appropriate follow-up to those findings. We must not tolerate impunity. Russia and China have blocked the referral of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court (ICC). It is their responsibility that those who have committed and are still committing the most serious crimes in Syria cannot be brought to justice before the ICC. National jurisdictions are starting to at least fill some of the void in Germany and elsewhere. The message is clear: whoever commits crimes against humanity or war crimes cannot feel safe anywhere and will eventually be held accountable. We therefore call on all States to use all legal means at their disposal to prosecute the perpetrators and to initiate criminal proceedings under the principle of international universal jurisdiction. We call on the Council to finally live up to its responsibility, join the fight against impunity and ensure that those who commit the most serious crimes under international law are held accountable.
