Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom aligns itself fully with the statement just
delivered by the representative of Spain. We are pleased
to make two further points on the United Nations-
African Union partnership - a partnership that will
remain critical for peace and security on the African
continent. I will focus my comments on the United
Nations-African Union partnership in respect of United
Nations peacekeeping and African Union (AU) peace
support operations.

At the London 2016 defence ministerial meeting,
the United Kingdom launched its focus on the "three
Ps" of peacekeeping. That framework for improving
peacekeeping is equally important in thinking about
how we continue to approach the United Nations-AU
partnership in terms of peace operations.

We need clear planning based on sharing of
information and common threat assessments. We need
consultative analysis and joint planning that reflects
our respective roles and which extends throughout the
life cycle of missions. In terms of pledges, AU member
States are already significant troop contributors.
The United Kingdom and Spain pay tribute to their
service. AU member States bring unique and diverse
capabilities, and we need to move to the next phase
of better matching the experience of troops and
police to the areas where they are deployed. In terms
of performance, it is vital to have the right sort of
mission to face each challenge, which brings me to
the very heart of the issue we discussed last week on
how peacekeeping can evolve to work in high-threat
environments (see S/PV.7802). In that debate, many of
us commented on the unique comparative advantage
of the AU in tackling such threats and taking on more
direct peace-enforcement activity.

The AU and its member States are in many cases
the ones that can respond to kinetic environments in a
different way, as the African Union Mission in Somalia
is designed to do in that country. For that very reason,
we need the United Nations-AU partnership to continue
to grow and be strengthened so that we are more than
the sum of our parts.

That leads me to my second point. AU member
States have made a welcome commitment to offering
a significantly increased financial contribution to
AU peace-support operations. That development has
the potential to open up new opportunities for the
partnership with the United Nations in the coming
years. We need to have more detailed discussions on
how we can collective enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for AU-led
peace-support operations that are authorized by the
Security Council. Mr. Kaberuka's work is an important
contribution to this debate.

There will be a number of challenges for the United
Nations and the AU to meet. At the top of that list
are the strengthening of joint analysis and planning
and compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We must also ensure accountability
and oversight of missions' performance and financing.
If we get this right, there are significant opportunities
for the both the United Nations and the AU to improve
oversight mechanisms and ensure high standards of
performance and effective delivery of our mandates.

Put simply, we will be better placed to rise to
the challenge of delivering peace and security on the
African continent. The United Kingdom and Spain look
forward to continuing this important discussion.

