The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the Council, to express grief
and sorrow at the passing away of His Majesty King
Birendra and Her Majesty Queen Aishwarya of Nepal,
and of other members of the royal family. His Majesty
King Birendra contributed greatly to the social and
economic development of Nepal, promoted peace in
the region and was deeply loved by his people. I should
like also to express our heartfelt sorrow at the passing
away of King Dipendra.

On behalf of the Council, I should like to extend
our profound condolences to the bereaved family and
to the Government and the people of Nepal.

I invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
His Majesty King Birendra, Her Majesty Queen
Aishwarya and His Majesty King Dipendra of Nepal.

The members ofthe Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Afghanistan

Letter dated 21 May 2001 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (8/2001/511)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Pakistan and Uzbekistan, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhddi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan) and Mr. Vohidov
(Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Haile Menkerios, Chairman of the Committee of
Experts on Afghanistan appointed pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1333 (2000), and to his fellow
members of that Committee.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Menkerios and his fellow members of
the Committee to take the designated seats at the
Council table.

Also in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ambassador Alfonso
Valdivieso of Colombia, Chairman of the relevant
sanctions Committee.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Valdivieso to take the designated seat
at the Council table to enable him to present the report.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 21 May 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 18 May 2001 from the
Chairman of the Committee of Experts on Afghanistan
appointed pursuant to Security Council resolution 1333
(2000) addressed to the Secretary-General, enclosing
the report of the Committee regarding monitoring of
the arms embargo against the Taliban and the closure
of terrorist training camps in the Taliban-held areas of
Afghanistan, document S/200l/511.

The first speaker is Ambassador Valdivieso, who
will speak in his capacity as Chairman of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Afghanistan. He will present the
report contained in document S/2001/511.

Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia), Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Afghanistan, I warmly welcome the members of the
Committee of Experts on Afghanistan appointed
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1333 (2000),
who prepared the report submitted to the Council
several days ago. That report was prepared in
accordance with paragraph 15 (a) of resolution 1333
(2000) and appears in document S/2001/511.

The sanctions Committee met yesterday with the
members of the Committee of Experts for a preliminary
presentation. I should like to highlight some of the
elements aimed essentially at emphasizing the primary
purpose of proposing a sanctions monitoring
mechanism, as provided for by this Council in
resolution 1333 (2000) of 19 December 2000. At the
same time, I should like to stress at this public meeting
that, as established in the text of the report, the
participation and commitment of Afghanistan's
neighbouring countries are essential to the efficacy of
the sanctions.

At the outset, I wish to say that the Committee of
Experts had the very concrete mission of presenting its
recommendations on the best ways of monitoring
effectively, first, the arms embargo and, secondly, the
closure of terrorist training camps. In its report, the
Committee of Experts has made recommendations as to
the best way to monitor compliance with the sanctions,
but I must say that members of the Council will find
express reference to other, related matters, such as
sources of funding - drug trafficking in particular-
trafficking in goods and illegal flights. The experts feel
that these are directly connected with the traffic in
arms and, undoubtedly, with the existence of the
terrorist training camps. The Committee of Experts was
not called upon to undertake an investigation or to
establish responsibilities or facts. I reiterate that its
mandate was very concrete and specific.

The Committee met several times here at
Headquarters in New York and in the various countries
that it visited. It analysed the information made
available by those countries and in official and
unofficial documents referred to in the report. It also
assessed various alternatives in drafting some of the
recommendations now before the Council.

The sanctions Committee and the Committee of
Experts have met three times: once at the beginning of
the work of the Committee of Experts; once upon its
return from its field trip, before the final draft of the
report was prepared; and at the meeting yesterday, to
which I have already referred.

From an operational point of View, the
recommendation of the Committee of Experts for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism is innovative
and interesting. I wish to point this out because it has
also been discussed in the sanctions Committee,
without, of course, any country's taking a definitive
position. The mechanism, I repeat, is a novel one that
has two parts.

First, it would involve the establishment of small
Support Teams designed to strengthen existing
mechanisms, as set out in the report, in each of the
neighbouring countries of Afghanistan. The Support
Teams would be entrusted with verifying allegations of
sanctions-busting. The other element would be the
establishment of an Office staffed with specialists in
arms-embargo issues, counter-terrorist activities, the
investigation of other international crimes - such as
drug trafficking - and legislative and legal support.
This Office would be headed by a Director and staffed
with those specialists, who would advise the
Committee of Experts and support the work of the
Teams responsible for activities in the field.

The Committee of Experts has also highlighted
the need to monitor movement of acetic anhydride, the
indispensable chemical precursor in refining heroin.
The Committee recommends closer scrutiny of the
granting of export permits for that chemical precursor.
It has also recommended that aircraft turbine fuel and
lubricants needed for use in armoured troop-transport
vehicles be specified in the embargo.

It is clear from the report that the six
neighbouring countries are committed to implementing
the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333
(2000). In every country we visited, it was stressed that
stability in Afghanistan is necessary and that there can
be no military solution to the conflict. These
considerations are set out in the report, which also
states that no monitoring mechanism will be effective
without the cooperation and commitment of the six
neighbouring countries. Moreover, it will be extremely
desirable to establish coordinating mechanisms among
the six countries. Compliance with sanctions must be
enforced in order for them to be effective and in order
to preserve the credibility of the United Nations. The
report also says that sanctions must be seen as a way of
encouraging the Taliban, primarily, to participate in
negotiations to find a political solution to the conflict.

The Council will therefore have to take a decision
on the proposal made by the Committee of Experts. I
would like to stress that the Council should do so as
expeditiously as possible, for almost six months have
already passed since sanctions were adopted through
resolution 1333 (2000). As everyone knows, those
sanctions are in force for a period of 12 months, and
we are still at this stage. There are various reasons for
that delay, but unfortunately I feel that there was an
excessive delay in appointing the Committee. With
regard to the Committee's work, I would like to make it
quite clear that once the Experts were finally appointed
they met as quickly as possible, carried out their work
and provided their report within the deadline.

It is now up to us to work in a more speedy
manner. That is why this public meeting is important,
as it will enable us to hear the views of the countries
that are key elements of the proposed mechanism, as
the report clearly states. It is hoped that this will help
give impetus to all the actions required to take a
decision regarding the monitoring mechanism called
for in the report and envisaged in resolution 1333
(2000).


The President: I thank Ambassador Valdivieso
for his presentation of the report.

Before giving the floor to the members of the
Council, let me mention that, in addition to the
Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Menkerios, we also
have at the table Mr. Reynaldo Arcilla, Mr. Michael
Chandler, Mr. Mahmoud Kassem and Mr. Atilio
Molteni, who are here as members of the Committee of
Experts to join in the Council's deliberations today.


