Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Burkina Faso for taking the
initiative to hold an open debate in the Security
Council on the question of drug trafficking under the
agenda item "Peace and security in Africa".
Mr. President, I welcome your presence here in New
York today to preside over our meeting in person. I
would also like to welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and Mr. Costa, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), to our meeting.

The Outcome Document adopted at the 2005
World Summit emphasizes that drugs, transnational
crime and terrorism have negative effects on global
development, peace, security and human rights. The
international community should take collective action
to tackle those problems. That fully demonstrates the
great importance the international community attaches
to resolving the issue of drugs.

Currently, drug trafficking is still spreading
unabated in some parts of the world. It is an acute issue
that threatens peace and security in some regions,
particularly in West Africa. In recent years, the
Security Council has been repeatedly briefed by United
Nations West African regional offices and UNODC.
Today's open debate in the Council on the question of
drug trafficking in West Africa under the agenda item
on peace and security in Africa is of particular realistic
significance.

Drug trafficking is the main cause of the spread
of drugs in today's world. Cracking down on drug
trafficking requires that all countries strengthen
international cooperation. As indicated in the briefings
to the Council over time by the Secretariat and the
UNODC, a trafficking route from Latin America to
Western Europe and North America via West Africa has
developed through international drug trafficking
activities. Taking advantage of weak government
control in some West African countries, international
drug traffickers use that region for transit for drug
trafficking activities, and the countries in the region
fall victim as a result. That situation not only gives rise
to organized crime activities but also affects social
stability and security in those countries.

In today's world, with any consumer good,
consumption gives rise to demand, and demand
generates a market and stimulates production. As a
special consumer good, narcotic drugs are no
exception. Due to the existence of a relatively stable
consumer market for drugs in some developed
countries, international drug trafficking cartels,
prompted by the huge profits to be made, go to any
lengths to organize drug production and trafficking.
The areas where drugs are produced or that serve as
transit routes are often economically underdeveloped.
Therefore the fight for international drug control pivots
on international cooperation and must adhere to the
principle of shared responsibility.

It is incumbent upon West African countries to
strengthen legislation and law enforcement to strictly
crack down on international drug trafficking activities.
Developed countries - where drug consumption
mainly takes place - have strong capacity and
government control and are duty bound to shoulder the
moral responsibility to eliminate consumption of drugs,
thus doing their part to advance the international fight
for drug control.
In international cooperation on drugs control, the
role of regional organizations, which are at the
forefront, should be brought into full play. In recent
years the Security Council has on many occasions
heard Mr. Costa's briefings on the drug problem in
West Africa, and we are deeply concerned about that
grave situation. Some West African countries have just
extricated themselves from conflict. They face
difficulties in economic development, youth
employment and rule of law capacity-building, and
they are susceptible to inroads by international drug
traffickers. In some situations, drug trafficking has
even enflamed conflicts in the countries concerned and
posed a grave threat to the peace and stability of the
West African region.

The concern of the international community over
the peace and security situation in that region should
be translated into concrete measures to help West
African countries and regional organizations such as
the Economic Community of West African States to
strengthen their anti-drugs capacity and enhance
government monitoring and control capacities and
judicial and military capacities against drug-related
crimes. At the same time, the international community
has the duty to help underdeveloped countries to
gradually develop their economies, create job
opportunities and improve the livelihood of their
peoples, so as to raise the awareness and capacity of
young people to say "no" to the temptation of drugs.
That is the fundamental way - and the only way -
that international drug control can make a real
difference.

International drug control calls for an even
stronger United Nations role in communication and
coordination. The General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the UNODC have done a great
deal in fighting global drug trafficking and have made
much progress. However, given the grave situation
stemming from the spread of drugs, international
efforts are far from adequate. Drug crimes are a
malignant tumour on the body of human society. The
fight against drugs is therefore a noble lifesaving
cause.

As a major forum for promoting international
cooperation and safeguarding world peace, the United
Nations should play a bigger role in this fight. We
support the relevant functional bodies of the United
Nations in continuing the discussions on this subject
and hope that the Security Council will continue to
give its attention to the work in this area.

