As one of the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security, I have the honour today to make a statement on behalf of this 51-member group. I thank Foreign Minister Maas for organizing today's open debate and for his strong leadership on this crucial issue. The Secretary-General has described the climate crisis as the defining issue of our time. Sea levels continue to rise in tandem with temperatures. Severe flooding and droughts are increasingly common in many places. The number of people facing persistent food and water insecurity is rising, causing displacements. And climate change is contributing to a collapse in the world's biodiversity, the full consequences of which we are only beginning to understand. Indeed, climate change constitutes an existential threat to societies across the globe. Its impacts are already disrupting the lives and livelihoods of people around the world, destabilizing local economies, social relations and political systems and exacerbating violent conflicts. Poor and vulnerable communities may be the most affected now, but there is no shortage of examples of even the most wealthy and resilient places in the world being overwhelmed. Achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change will be difficult, but it is necessary. It will require dramatically scaling up financial and technical resources for adaptation and mitigation actions. At the same time, we must deal with the consequences of the climate crisis that are already affecting us today. We are deeply concerned at the global implications of climate change for peace and security, which will increasingly unfold in the years to come. Vulnerable groups, including women and children, will be disproportionately affected. Our citizens expect us to act, and they expect the Security Council, as the organ responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, to act now. While we recognize and support other efforts and processes taking place within different parts of the United Nations family - not least the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, with the Paris Agreement adopted under the Convention as the key international instrument for addressing climate change - we believe the Security Council must do more. Our meeting today follows on several previous initiatives by Council members since the issue was first brought to the Security Council's table in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). Thirteen years later, some progress has been made. Twelve Security Council resolutions refer to climate-related security risks as a result of the engagement of a large number of States Members of the United Nations, both inside and outside the Council, including members of the Group of Friends of Climate and Security. However, there is still ample room for making the Council's approach more robust and systematic. The Secretary-General famously said ahead of the 2019 Climate Action Summit: "don't bring a speech - bring a plan". We have brought both. We believe it is necessary for the whole United Nations system, including the Security Council, to step up its ambitions and follow up on words with concrete deeds. We call for a regular comprehensive report by the Secretary-General on the peace and security implications of the adverse effects of climate change in country- or region-specific contexts that may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security. Such reports should include an assessment of early-warning indicators and forecasts of climate-related security risks, as well as concrete recommendations for action by United Nations organs to address these risks. This would bolster the Security Council's ability to detect, address and prevent looming crises and conflicts before they become a reality, which is one of the most important tasks of the United Nations. We encourage the Security Council to continue mandating peacekeeping operations and special political missions to consider climate-related risks in their activities. We sometimes hear that peacekeeping missions have more pressing issues to focus on than climate change. While this may seem true at first glance, in many ways the effects of climate change make it harder to keep the peace. It is hardly a coincidence that eight out of the 10 countries hosting the largest multilateral peace operations are located in areas highly exposed to the impact of climate change. We strongly support the Climate Security Mechanism led by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme. Its work, including information- sharing and the development of tools to promote a common understanding of the interlinkages between climate change and peace and security, is crucial to mainstreaming this topic across the United Nations system. More information means better understanding and more adequate responses. We also support the appointment of a special envoy or a special representative for climate and security who could strengthen coordination among relevant United Nations entities in addressing climate-related security risks. We need to integrate a climate lens into mediation efforts and preventive diplomacy. Climate-related security risks are at the core of the conflict-prevention agenda. Member States, the Secretariat, the Security Council and United Nations missions must factor climate-related security risks into all conflict-prevention and peacebuilding activities. We expect them to do so with a gender-responsive approach. Research shows that the adverse effects of climate change could reverse the peacebuilding and development gains of countries in fragile contexts most affected by climate change. It is therefore imperative that we strengthen the nexus between peace and security, humanitarian assistance, human rights and development. We also need to reinforce partnerships with national and regional actors on climate-related security risks, including with civil society organizations and national weather services. They have invaluable direct knowledge of the security risks facing populations due to climate change. We welcome the initiatives taken by the African Union to both strengthen its own work on climate and security and to advance the partnership with the United Nations. To conclude, climate change is not just another risk to consider alongside many others; as both science and experience have shown, it is an existential issue, with the potential to threaten peace and security. As such, I once again reiterate the Security Council's responsibility and obligation to do everything in its power to address it and act accordingly. While climate change entails risks, it also opens possibilities for cooperation. To address it, we need to work together, and we stand more ready than ever to do so.
