Mr. Ndong Mangue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for scheduling this important
meeting during the month of your presidency. I would
also like to thank all this afternoon's briefers for
their informative and comprehensive reports, which
have given us a detailed overview of current events
in Somalia.

Our delegation has been following very closely
developments in the friendly and sisterly Federal
Republic of Somalia. We are aware of the political
impasse between the Federal Government and the
federal member states, a situation that is reflected
both in the previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1149) and in that which we are considering
today (S/2019/393). Somali politicians should make the
effort necessary to overcome this situation, which is
unworthy ofa country in a process that is as delicate as
this one. We therefore encourage the Somali political
leaders to implement the reconciliation measures
adopted in Garowe on 26 January.

Similarly, we call on the members of the two
chambers of the Federal Parliament who stopped
cooperating on 1 January this year to fulfil their
obligations and resume cooperation in order to
implement the parliamentary agenda and enact the laws
urgently needed by the Somali people and various areas
of Somali society.

We welcome the comprehensive reform programme
presented by the Federal Government in its effort to
build a functional federal State structured around four
road maps aimed at making further progress in the areas
of inclusive politics, security and justice, economic
recovery and social and human development. We urge
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union and other international partners to support this
important programme.

We hope that in the new phase in which the
Federal Government is entering, the limited political
participation of women and their reduced role in
decision-making areas will not continue as they are
today. In that regard, we urge the federal and regional
authorities, as well as civil society and the international
community, to seek the more visible participation
of women.

With regard to the issue of security, we deplore the
ongoing bomb attacks and killings that the extremist
group Al-Shabaab carries out regularly in Somalia,
posing a potential threat that could sow chaos in Somalia
and the Horn of Africa. We hope that the security reform
provisions negotiated with international partners will
be useful in diminishing that threat.

We regret the deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Somalia and hope that the reforms under
way will pay more attention to those priorities.

We welcome the strengthened relations between
Somalia and the other countries of the Horn of Africa,
and we hope that those relations will be developed to
promote sectors that are mutually beneficial for all
countries in the region, such as the security sector, which
is very important at this time of terrorist threats. We
also encourage the efforts of the Presidents of Somalia
and Kenya, who have begun the process of normalizing
their relations. We hope that their Ambassadors will
be able to return to their respective diplomatic posts,
as stated by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of both
States in Nairobi on 3 April.

Finally, I would like to thank the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) for its
willingness to continue providing strategic support
and advice to Somalia and the African Union Mission
in Somalia on peacebuilding and State-building in
the areas of governance, security sector reform and
constitutional review.

Given the fragile and unstable situation that
the country is still experiencing, such support from
UNSOM. is crucial and will continue to be so in order
to consolidate the results being achieved in a lasting
and irreversible way.

