Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): We appreciate this
opportunity to discuss, in open Chamber, the work
of the Security Council in August. Since Ukraine
presided over the Security Council during the month of
February, this is only the second time this year that the
Security Council has held such a briefing. We welcome
the return of formal wrap-up sessions and hope that
future presidencies will revive this practice, which is
in keeping with the implementation presidential note
(S/20lO/507).

We also thank you personally, Mr. President,
and commend the Egyptian delegation for fulfilling
the responsibilities of the presidency throughout
the month in a transparent and professional manner.
Despite the fact that August is usually a rather slow
month, this year it was quite packed. We had several
important discussions and adopted a number of truly
landmark resolutions.

At the outset of the Egyptian presidency, the
Council adopted resolution 2370 (2017), on preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons. Considering the
spread of terrorism around the world today, as well as the
significant involvement of certain States in supporting
terrorist activities abroad, we commend the Egyptian
delegation for coming forward with that initiative, which
was very timely. We expect that, having unanimously
adopted the resolution, all Council members have
already begun to respect their obligation not to support
and supply terrorists with weapons. Failure to do so will
undoubtedly have grave consequences, and violators
will pay a price for their transgressions. In that regard,
it is critical that the Council follow closely how the
resolution is being implemented, thereby making yet
another tangible contribution to international efforts to
combat that scourge.

Another subject that we discussed in early August
was sanctions. It is no secret that there is a plethora of
views on the subject - from rejecting the legitimacy
of such a tool to overblown expectations that through
sanctions anything can be achieved. The truth probably
lies somewhere in the middle. Ukraine is convinced that
sanctions can and do work, when and if implemented
in good faith by all members of the international
community. We have to remember that sanctions'
effectiveness depends on their thorough implementation
by all stakeholders without exception. The chain is only
as strong as its weakest link. Therefore, it is ajoint moral
duty of all responsible members of the United Nations
family to work towards preventing the obstruction and
evasion of existing sanctions regimes. Otherwise, the
whole international endeavour will be undermined, and
the very idea of sanctions will be gradually discredited.
In that regard, specialized and regional international
organizations can play an important role in ensuring
the proper implementation of sanctions. The use of
additional measures and organizations' own specific
instruments to better respond to breaches of the peace
and other grave violations of international law is an
essential part of the international toolbox in that area.

In August, the Council adopted resolution 2371
(2017), an important resolution that introduced
additional sanctions against the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. It was a difficult, but nonetheless
unavoidable step, since the Council has a duty to ensure
accountability for actions that violate established
international norms and principles. North Korea's
behaviour in advancing its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes is nothing other than one of the most
vivid examples of blatant violations of the international
law. Besides engaging in misguided and reckless
efforts to establish its own nuclear arsenal instead
of improving the living conditions of its people, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea spares no effort
to find new ways to circumvent established restrictions
and prohibitions. The gravity of the situation was
highlighted by the recent ballistic missile launch by
North Korea, and we welcomed yesterday's unanimous
and firm reaction of the Council, which culminated in
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/ 16.

The international community must work diligently
to thwart and penalize any attempt to undermine the
existing legally binding arrangements in the nuclear
sphere. Without a resolute stance on that issue, there
is little hope for the eventual eradication of the global
threat of weapons of mass destruction. As one of the
champions of the global non-proliferation regime,
Ukraine will continue to contribute to international
efforts to achieve the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula, which is essential to removing the risk of
unnecessary provocations and curbing the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's misguided nuclear and
missile ambitions.

Returning to the agenda item of our meeting
today, I welcome the agreement of Council members
on the revised and updated version of presidential note
(S/2010/507) on working methods. Our congratulations
go to the delegation of Japan and all the members of the
Council for their constructive efforts in preparing and
negotiating the text. The presidential note adopted today
will serve as an important guideline for the Council to
make its work more efficient and transparent.

In conclusion, I congratulate you, Sir, on your
successful presidency. To to our Ethiopian colleagues,
who have a rare privilege and responsibility of the
greatest importance in directing the Council's work
in September, with Heads of State and Government
meeting in New York, I would like to convey our
full support.

