The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Netherlands.

With its adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) on the
Lake Chad basin a year ago, the Council recognized
that security, development and human rights are
interlinked. It also recognized that such links are vital
to achieving an effective and comprehensive approach
to stabilization, reconciliation and counter-terrorism.
However, we must also strengthen preventive action.

The current crisis in the Lake Chad basin is the
result of our collective inaction in addressing the root
causes of the problem 15 years ago. Let me highlight
that fact by focusing on three root causes about which
we are particularly concerned in this context. The first
is water and climate change; the second, socioeconomic
challenges; and the third is a lack of inclusion and
empowerment of women.

With regard to the first of these, water and climate,
Secretary-General Guterres has said that water, peace
and security are inextricably linked. He is absolutely
right. As others have said, today is World Water Day.
That is another reason that I want to highlight the
example of the availability of water and the challenges
posed by the increased variability of the climate
around Lake Chad. Those two factors have real effects
on livelihoods, farming, fishing and food security,
as Mr. Bila so eloquently said earlier today. Building
resilience, with a view to preventing further tensions,
requires investment in sustainable, integrated water
management, all while taking into account the effects
of climate change.

This month, the High-level Panel on Water, of
which the Prime Minister of the Netherlands is an
active member, presented its report, Making Every
Drop Count. I would like to highlight some of its
recommendations. We should address, first, the adverse
impacts and challenges that water can cause; secondly,
the need for adequate risk assessment and management
solutions; thirdly, water-related root causes; and
fourthly, we should take pre-emptive action. Those
recommendations are crucial to both water scarcity and
climate change.

The second root cause that we want to highlight is
the lack of socioeconomic opportunities, which makes
the population vulnerable to recruitment by violent
extremists, as Ms. Nagarajan made clear earlier. The
region itself has risen to address that challenge, and
we commend it for that. The Multinational Joint Task
Force, which brings together Benin, Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria, has pushed back Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. I pay
tribute to their efforts, and I welcome the presence
of our colleagues from those countries with us today.
However, more must be done to address the underlying
factors that drive people towards violent extremism. The
recent joint United Nations mission is a good first step
in developing conflict-sensitive programming across
the United Nations system to improve socioeconomic
opportunities. We call on the United Nations to
strengthen that approach and to improve reporting on
such efforts to the Security Council.

That brings me to the third root cause that I would
like to address, the lack of inclusion and empowerment
of women. Women and girls in the Lake Chad region
are disproportionately affected as targets of terrorism
and by lost livelihoods. As Ms. Nagarajan made clear,
in such challenging situations, the most vulnerable
become even more vulnerable. But women are also
strong actors in building resilience and in advancing
sustainable development in the region. We need an
integrated response that ensures the full inclusion and
participation of women and girls as stewards of their
own futures.

Let me continue with the following call to action.
To ensure a more integrated long-term approach to
sustaining peace in the Lake Chad region, we are asking
the United Nations for the following efforts. First, we
need integrated risk assessment, conflict analysis and
early warning. Secondly, we need more capacity for
joint risk assessments and management by all United
Nations organizations. Thirdly, we need to take climate
change into account. Fourthly, we need to ensure
conflict-, gender- and climate-sensitive planning and
programming, such as stabilization plans that take into
account the availability of resources around Lake Chad.
Fifthly, we need comprehensive evaluations and reports
in order to thoroughly analyse the many risks to peace
and security and their effects on other programmes in
the region. The upcoming report of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel will provide a
good opportunity for putting that into practice. Lastly,
we need to apply the lessons of the Lake Chad basin and
the need for preventive action to other regions.

In conclusion, with its adoption of resolution 2349
(2017) the Security Council showed its ability to call
for early action in the Lake Chad region. However,
the Lake Chad basin is not unique. The root causes
of conflict are visible in many places in the world.
We want resolution 2349 (2017) to be the rule, not
an exception, so that the Council can take preventive
action for future generations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I would like to once again encourage all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.

I now give the floor to the representative of Nigeria.

