Ms. Coomaraswamy: I thank the Council for
convening this open debate of the Security Council on
children and armed conflict. Madam President, your
presence here today testifies to the commitment of the
Council to this issue and the crucial leadership of
Mexico as the new chair of the Security Council
Working Group, following the exemplary leadership of
France.

Before the Council is the eighth report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(8/2009/158). I am glad to convey to Council members
today that progress has been made, especially in
addressing the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
and I would like to start here with these positive and
encouraging developments. Thanks to the continuing
efforts of the Security Council and its Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, five action plans have
been secured to date, in cote d'Ivoire, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan and Uganda, and four others are in the process
of being finalized in the Philippines, the Central
African Republic and Burundi. As a result, six parties
have already been removed from the "list of shame".
These developments demonstrate the power of the
Council's focused attention and continuing
engagement, and serves as a testament that it should
continue to maintain pressure on violators to enter into
a protection dialogue with the United Nations.

I am also encouraged that some Governments,
including that of Myanmar, have recently approached
my Office and their respective United Nations country
teams to deepen their engagement with the
recommendations of the Security Council Working
Group. In Nepal, discussions are continuing and
planning is under way for the release of 3,000 minors
in Maoist cantonments. However, the recent crisis
between the Maoists and the Nepalese Army may
impede the progress hoped for. I strongly urge that the
Government release the children as a matter of
urgency. Just this morning, I was informed that the
Justice and Equality Movement in the Sudan is in final
discussions with the United Nations country team on
finalizing an action plan.
09-31649
This hope must be tempered, however, as the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2009/158) continues to present a disturbing
picture of grave violations committed against children
around the globe. This year, the report identifies 20
situations of concern, where children remain
vulnerable to abuse. The report chronicles 56 parties
that continue to recruit and use children as child
soldiers. A number of these groups simply refuse to
enter into dialogue on action plans, while others,
though willing to enter into dialogue, are prevented
from doing so because the Member State concerned has
prevented the United Nations from approaching
non-State actors to devise action plans.

In this report, the Secretary-General has named
19 persistent violators who have been listed in the
annexes for four years or more. The Council must now
ensure that its words are not empty threats. Much
depends on the Council taking measures against those
who have repeatedly flouted its resolutions and who
continue to recruit and use children. It is now crucial
for the Council to move forward by beginning a
discussion about the process by which targeted
measures might be applied against repeat offenders.

In situations where sanctions committees already
exist it is easier to envision such action. More
systematic communications between the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the
relevant sanctions committees and expert groups is
critical in this regard. In other cases where sanctions
infrastructure does not exist, innovative solutions are
necessary to ensure that violators are held accountable.

This open debate on children and armed conflict
must be an occasion for the Council to reinforce its
commitment to children and advance its protection
agenda even further. The Council has already created
powerful and unprecedented tools for enhancing the
capabilities of child-protection actors on the ground,
particularly as they deal with the issue of child
soldiers. The decision of the Council to demand that
annexes of the report of the Secretary-General contain
lists of parties to conflict that recruit and use children
and to consider possible targeted measures against
them has led to thousands of children being identified
and released. Armed actor after armed actor has told
me that they are determined to be removed from the
Secretary-General's annexes. This list of shame has
been a rallying point for all those who want to increase
the protection of children in conflict areas. In this
sense, the power of the Council can make and has
made a tangible difference in protecting children from
being recruited and used by armed forces and groups.

However, these successes have also created an
imbalance in the focus of the Council, especially with
regard to all other grave violations. The moment is now
ripe for the Council to extend its focus beyond child
soldiers to deal more effectively with other violations.
Not to do so threatens to silence the suffering of
thousands of children who are subjected to
unspeakable crimes. Ideally, the list of the Secretary-
General should include all grave violations against
children to ensure that the framework for protecting
children in situations of armed conflict is
comprehensive. However, since expectations do not
always match realities, the United Nations and its
partners have chosen to call upon the Council to take a
gradualist path towards the expansion of the protection
framework for children.

That is why the child-protection community is
unanimously calling on the Council to begin, at a
minimum, with expanding the listing criteria to include
those who commit rape and other grave sexual violence
against children, as a first step in this incremental
approach. The inclusion of intentional killing and
maiming of children in line with international
humanitarian law would also be an important
contribution to protecting children. That would be a
critical step forward, recognizing that sexual violence
and intentional killing and maiming are heinous crimes
on a par with the recruitment and use of children.

In my travels to conflict affected areas around the
globe I have had the chance to meet dozens of
courageous and talented people who are working for
the protection of conflict-affected children. These staff
members come from funds, programmes and agencies
like UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
International Labour Organization (ILO), Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNIFEM
and our non-governmental organization partners,
reflecting the ever more mainstreamed nature of child
protection throughout the United Nations system, as
called for by the Security Council and our Secretary-
General himself. I would like to thank UNICEF in
particular for assisting me in my field visits.
5

I am pleased to see that the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has just
finalized its child protection policy, which I fully
endorse and which, I am sure, my colleague
Mr. Le Roy will elaborate upon. I cannot stress enough
the centrality of United Nations peacekeeping and
child-protection advisers to the monitoring and
reporting mechanism that is called for in resolution
1612 (2005). That is why it is also critical for the
Security Council to ensure that its investment in
protecting children is more systematically reflected in
country-specific resolutions, with the inclusion on a
more consistent basis of child-protection provisions,
including child-protection advisers, in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and political missions.

The Security Council and the General Assembly
have repeatedly urged me to undertake field missions
in order to monitor country situations, to be an
independent moral voice for the sake of children and to
advocate for their needs. My most recent trips have
been to Gaza and southern Israel and to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In Dungu, in the northeast of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where I
recently visited, 990 people have been killed and 300
children abducted by the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) since September 2008, and people are now just
hiding in the bush to escape. In North Kivu, the rapid
integration of Congres national pour la defense du
peuple (CNDP) and other armed groups into the
Congolese Armed Forces has resulted in children being
incorporated into the ranks of the national army.
Although 1,300 have been released to child-protection
partners, many more remain as child soldiers.

In South Kivu, impending Operation Kimia II, a
joint military operation by the Forces Armees de la
Republique Democratique du Congo (FARDC) and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) against
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR), raises serious concerns about large-scale
displacement, the use of children as soldiers and the
possibility of exactions committed by uncontrolled
armed units against civilian populations. With the
United Nations taking part in offensive military
operations, it is crucial that the Council follow those
developments carefully in order to ensure that children
are protected to the maximum extent possible.
In February, I visited Gaza and southern Israel
after weeks of war. As it was just days after the

fighting had ended, the children, their teachers and
parents in Gaza were still in a state of shock and they
had horror in their eyes. The children demand
accountability, and the international community must
respond. The crossings must be opened, and
reconstruction must begin in haste. Everyone hopes for
peace, and in southern Israel, where children also live
in fear, girls and boys speak freely of reaching out to
their Palestinian brothers and sisters.

In Sri Lanka, the situation remains deplorable for
children in the north and the east. In the near future, I
intend to send a special envoy to begin consultations
with the Government. The Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam continue to recruit children to fight on the front
lines, and they use force to keep many of the civilians,
including children, in harm's way. The United Nations
has urged the Government to practice military
forbearance and to maintain a prolonged pause in the
fighting, so that humanitarian workers can help
negotiate safe passage for the remaining civilians. It is
incumbent upon the Government to protect its citizens
to the maximum extent possible and to refrain from
using heavy artillery.

Humanitarian actors have urged that the
internally displaced person camps set up by the
Government meet international standards. We hope
short-term military gain will not blind the authorities to
the long-term demands of reconciliation. People
stripped of their dignity are unlikely to forget,
especially the children.

My field visits and the information contained in
this report must be supplemented by the harrowing
experience of children on the ground. Later this
morning, you will hear from Grace, a former girl
soldier, who will describe to the Council what she went
through and what she and other children like her hope
to receive from this body. While visiting North Kivu
province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
met a 12-year-old girl named Adila. She told me that
she had joined the Mai Mai militia because her parents
could no longer pay for school and because she thought
carrying a gun would protect her from being raped.
However, like thousands of other children in the Congo
and despite her gun, Adila was sexually violated and
abused by her commanders. In the camp she was
always near starvation but had to fetch water, cook and
clean in addition to her combatant activities.

Recently, Mai Mai groups have entered into the
peace process, and Adila was identified and released by
MONUC child protection. She is now in a non-
governmental organization transit centre supported by
UNICEF and has just gone back to school. Her eyes lit
up when she told me that she plans to be a school
teacher.

What am I to say to Adila, Grace and the
hundreds of other girl and boy victims of sexual
violence whom I meet on my missions to conflict-
affected countries? Is it fair to say that those children
suffer second-class violation and that the Council does
not wish to apply the same focus and engagement to
them? In my heart of hearts, I believe that that is not
the intention of the international community and that
this day will mark a new age in what my predecessor
called the era of application.

