Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):

Argentina thanks the Kuwaiti presidency for convening
this open debate on a subject in which Argentina has
always been particularly interested. We also thank
Mr. Ian Martin for his valuable briefing, as well as the
Japanese delegation for the excellent work carried out
during its recent chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, which led to the adoption of the very
comprehensive note by the President S/2017/507, on the
working methods of the Council.

In that regard, we agree with those who maintain that
the new agreed note is both a valuable tool for increasing
the transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency of the
Council and a balanced text that can serve as a useful
guide for the working methods of agreed measures or
best practices. Among its new elements, we highlight
its reference to the intention of Council members to
request, examine and regularly take advantage of
specific advice from the Peacebuilding Commission.

Argentina has historically advocated the need for
constant efforts to improve transparency, inclusiveness,
openness, democratization and efficiency in the work of
the Security Council. In that vein, we are guided by the
conviction that, without impairing the effectiveness of
decision-making, the Council can, and should, be more
transparent and democratic in its relationship with the
broader membership of the United Nations.

It is worth remembering that, during its presidency
of the Security Council in February 2000, it was
Argentina that pushed for the adoption of a note by
the President of the Security Council, whereby newly
elected members were invited to participate in informal
consultations as observers during the month prior
to the start of their term as elected members of this
organ. During its 2005-2006 mandate, Argentina also
promoted and supported various initiatives aimed at
achieving greater transparency and access of Member
States to the Council.

During Argentina's last chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions - a position that Argentina
occupied in 2013-2014 - numerous presidential notes
were adopted, on topics such as consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries, dialogue with
non-member countries of the Council and other bodies,
the participation of Council members in drafting
Council products and their broader responsibility for
drafting and the continuity of the work of its subsidiary
bodies, among others.

Argentina deems it essential to periodically
examine the implementation of note S/2017/507 and
other relevant notes, identify successful practices and
possible deficiencies and consider making necessary
adjustments. In that regard, Argentina urges the
Informal Working Group to continue working towards
a single, comprehensive document, so as to consolidate
and streamline all decisions on working methods.

The Council's dialogue with bodies, be they inside
or outside the United Nations system, is essential for the
fulfilment of its functions. Among the bodies mentioned
in note S/2013/515, adopted under the Argentine
presidency, are the Peacebuilding Commission,
the International Criminal Court and humanitarian
assistance agencies. The Security Council has myriad
responsibilities and, to fulfil them, a certain amount
of coordination with other stakeholders is necessary.
However, Argentina discourages the Security Council,
whose function is to maintain international peace and
security, from absorbing the functions of other bodies.

Among the issues on which the Council has not
made substantive progress is the matter ofdue process in
the Council's sanctions committees. Argentina favours
expanding the establishment of an Ombudsman in each
of the Council's sanctions committees. The other issue
in that regar is the follow-up of referrals made by the
Security Council to the International Criminal Court.
The Council periodically receives the requisite reports
from the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, in accordance with its own resolutions, but
takes no action accordingly, even in cases where the
Court reports that the cooperation required by Council
resolutions has not been provided. What both issues
have in common is their ability to affect the credibility
of the Council if they are not promptly addressed.

Finally, we reiterate that what is at stake in
improving the working methods of the Council is
the culture of decision-making in this organ and the
effectiveness of its performance. The task of reviewing
and updating, in response to the demands made by the
international community for democratization, greater
inclusion, accountability and transparency in the
Council, continues to be an important objective that my
country endorses. Argentina reaffirms and pledges its
best efforts to continue contributing to that process.

