Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I extend my appreciation to your
country, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate.
I also welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General; the Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Lieutenant General Elias
Rodriguez Martins Filho; and Mr. Bjorn Holmberg,
Director of the International Forum for the Challenges
of Peacekeeping Operations, of which Argentina is
honoured to be a member.

I wish to highlight the importance of this space to
discuss the vital need to achieve quality training and
capacity-building in order to improve the performance
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We already
have various commitments and initiatives in many
United Nations forums, such as the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations; the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations; and
the Peacekeeping Ministerial.

This debate is yet another opportunity to identify
ways and means of enhancing and strengthening the
capacities of peacekeeping operations to improve the
performance of troops on the ground and to ensure
the successful implementation of the mandates of
these operations, as well as the shared commitments
expressed in the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

Argentina once again reiterates its firm
commitment to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, which began 62 years ago. We also reiterate
our dedication to quality training and capacity-building
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Through the Argentine Joint Peace Operations Training
Centre (CAECOPAZ), Argentina is providing training
and capacity-building par excellence to contingents
and individuals to be deployed in United Nations peace
operations. Thousands of officers, non-commissioned
officers, men and women soldiers and civilian personnel
from Argentina and friendly countries have been
trained by CAECOPAZ in its 23 years of existence.

Similarly, Argentine personnel returning from
missions must submit a report on their completed
mission, in which they share their experiences
and lessons learned so that we can make relevant
improvements in the future. Furthermore, Argentina
has conducted numerous intersectional training
courses regarding the prevention of sexual exploitation
and abuse; international humanitarian law; the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development Sustainable
Development Goals; and peacebuilding. The aim of
these courses is to raise awareness of the roles of other
actors within the United Nations system, especially the
Peacebuilding Commission, in the implementation of
successful mandates.

Troop- and police-contributing countries must
also receive technical and financial support in order to
improve their performance on the ground. Moreover,
peacekeeping missions must also be able to count
on the necessary financial resources for the proper
implementation of the tasks entrusted to them. In that
connection, and given that the budget for peacekeeping
operations is currently being discussed within the
Fifth Committee, Argentina stresses the importance
of avoiding further cuts in the financing of posts
and programmes on development, human rights,
gender and the protection of women and children.
These posts and programmes play a key role in
communicating the particular vulnerabilities of various
populations. Fresh cuts would seriously undermine the
ability of peacekeeping operations to protect these
vulnerable populations.

With regard to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, emphasis must be placed on the training of
peacekeeping operations personnel to evaluate threats
to international peace and security, taking into account
the risk factors that could lead to possible crimes
against humanity.

Given that a key global commitment is to increase
the number of women in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, we must spare no effort in achieving broader
general confidence - through training and not just by
upgrading mission infrastructures - so that more and
more women become peacekeepers. More women Blue
Helmets would greatly improve communication and
relationships between peacekeeping operations and
local communities, especially with women and girls.

In many ways, United Nations peacekeepers are
being required to do more and more. The challenges
they face are increasing in size and complexity. Member
States and the Secretariat must find ways to maintain
the best possible training in order to fulfil increasingly
diverse mandates, identify gaps in capacity and work
together to ensure that our peacekeeping operations are
indeed fit for purpose.

Argentina considers it a priority to continue the
debate on how to strengthen training and capacity-
building for peacekeeping personnel. We encourage
further efforts to promote constructive, transparent and
inclusive dialogue among States and other stakeholders,
thereby giving our best to those societies and nations
where our troops are deployed.

