Mr. Shahid (Maldives): For the Maldives,

"a mean sea-level rise of 2 metres would suffice
virtually to submerge the entire country of
small islands, most of which barely rise over
2 metres above mean sea level. That would be the
death of a nation.

"We in the Maldives have seen and lived
through grim experiences which could be
indicators of the dire consequences of global
environmental change provoked and exacerbated
by man." (A/42/PV.41, p. 23)

That is what my President, His Excellency
Mr. Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, said in his address to
the General Assembly during its special debate on
environment and development in October 1987. Almost
20 years on from that address and as we begin another
vital debate - this time in the Security Council - I
think it is important to recall the efforts made by small
countries like the Maldives to draw the world's
attention to the urgency of climate change and its
consequences.

The tsunami of December 2004 was a wake-up
call for Asia and for the rest of the world. The tsunami
provided a snapshot of what the long-term impact of
climate change and sea-level rise will be for small,
vulnerable countries like the Maldives.

For the people of the Maldives, dealing with
climate change and its consequences is already an
everyday fact of life. Over the past two decades we
have seen, first-hand, the real, practical reality of
climate change and sea-level rise. The Maldives is
made up of about 1,200 small coral islands, of which
about 200 are inhabited. Today, over 60 per cent of
those inhabited islands are facing varying degrees of
coastal erosion, which is physically threatening the
human settlements on them.

We are heartened by the increased attention that
has recently been given to the issue of environmental
degradation and climate change. We are also
encouraged by the increasing awareness of the issue
and are optimistic that those positive developments
will lead to a greater commitment from the
international community to deal with the matter.

I wish to thank the United Kingdom, in its
capacity as president of the Security Council, for
promoting today's debate. I wish also to pay a special
tribute to you, Madam President. Your presence here
attests to the importance attached by your Government
to this issue.

This debate in the Security Council should stress
that close cooperation and coordination among all
principal organs is indispensable in order to enable the
United Nations to remain relevant and capable of
meeting existing, new and emerging threats and
challenges. The issues of the environment, energy and
climate change have been addressed in various United

Nations entities such as the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, their relevant subsidiary
bodies, such as the Commission on Social
Development, and the United Nations Environment
Programme. Moreover, climate change is the subject of
a binding multilateral agreement: the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and its
supportive protocol, the Kyoto Protocol.

Maldives joins the Group of 77 and China in
supporting the View that it is vital for all Members to
promote sustainable development - but by adhering to
the Rio principles, especially the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities, and by fully
implementing Agenda 21. Furthermore, Maldives
stresses the urgent need to fulfil all other commitments
related to the provision of financial resources and the
transfer of available technologies to developing
countries without delay. Capacity-building is essential
in order to enable developing countries to form and
implement adaptation strategies. I would also like to
take this opportunity to call on the States that have not
already done so to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.

My country reaffirms the key role of energy in
achieving the goals of sustainable development,
poverty eradication and achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. Maldives has already attained a
number of the Goals and is clearly on track to achieve
many of the rest. However, ensuring environmental
sustainability is a challenge that we cannot meet on our
own. Next year we will embark on a three-year
transition period, after which we will graduate from the
list of least developed countries. Despite that
achievement, however, our inherent vulnerabilities will
remain. It is ironic that the tsunami of 2004 washed
away 20 years of development work only six days after
the General Assembly adopted its resolution 59/210, on
the graduation of Maldives from the list of least
developed countries.

Climate change is now a fact. It is not an issue
surrounded by scientific uncertainties. The best
scientific knowledge has clearly and decisively stated
the magnitude of the threat faced by humankind. The
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change is sufficient in that respect,
and the review undertaken by Sir Nicholas Stern has
shown the economic challenges of climate change and
its threat to world output. The consequences of inaction
would be enormous for the developing world.

Maldives has recently developed its first
adaptation programme of action in the context of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and has incorporated climate change
adaptation into its national development plans and the
Government's annual budgets. Substantial financial
resources are urgently required for speedy
implementation of adaptation projects by countries,
such as Maldives, that are among the most vulnerable.

Maldives favours and calls for a meaningful
commitment on emissions reductions for a post-2012
regime. Negotiations in that regard should be
accelerated, with a tangible commitment to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions to pre-industrial-era levels.
Not only is it imperative that the rich nations
demonstrate leadership; it is also moral to safeguard
from harm the vulnerable poor countries which are
confronting aggravated climate change.

In the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) world leaders
agreed on the need to act with resolve and urgency in
facing the serious and multiple challenges in tackling
climate change, promoting clean energy, meeting
energy needs and achieving sustainable development.

I shall conclude my brief remarks by echoing the
sentiments expressed at the 2005 World Summit and by
quoting from the address of my President, His
Excellency Mr. Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, at the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, held in
Johannesburg in 2002.

"What we need to do is simple: put our
words into deeds. The only question that has to be
answered is, 'Do we have the will?' I put the
question to you once again: Do we have the
will?"

