Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): Let me, first of
all, Sir, start by praising your presidential efforts over
the past three days to bring us together, as well as those
of the President of France for all that he has been
attempting to do to bring forward the goals that we
seek together.

We have been brought together over the past
three days first by the gravity of the situation that
currently exists in Gaza. Statistics do not do justice to
the situation there, but the word "crisis", which is
sometimes overused, is wholly appropriate, in my
view, in that context. However, we have also been
brought together, I believe, by Clarity of vision for the
future. The only way to secure dignity and security for
Israelis and Palestinians alike is for that dignity and
security to be for both of them.

The heart of this resolution, I believe, shows a
genuine consensus on a clear set of objectives. The
first is an immediate, durable and fully respected
ceasefire. The wording of the resolution is clear on that
point. The second is the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people in Gaza - in the short-term through
increased aid and then through the opening of
crossings, as per the 2005 Agreement. The third, the
security needs of Israelis, needs to be tackled through
the new measures on the illegal trafficking of arms.
The fourth is the political needs of Israelis and
Palestinians alike for a strong Palestinian Authority,
speaking for all Palestinians and negotiating in good
faith with Israel for the only solution to the conflict in
the Middle East: the two-State solution.

I believe that, tonight, the United Nations has
served its purpose of speaking loudly, clearly,
authoritatively and unequivocally. But we all have
further responsibilities: responsibilities for the parties
on the ground, responsibilities for regional States -
some of which, such as Egypt, are working so hard on
the practical measures that are now essential - and
responsibilities, too, for the whole international
community, because this crisis in the Middle East
affects us all and that is why it belongs in the Security
Council.

I said on Tuesday that our responsibility was to
chart a course back to resolution 1850 (2008). Today, I
believe we can do so with the route map set out in
resolution 1860 (2009) - not as a substitute for the
decisions that need to be made on the ground, but as a
complement to them. Our job is to turn the words of
the resolution into reality, and that is a task to which
the United Kingdom will remain wholly committed. To
that extent, our work does not finish; it must carry on
with renewed vigour.

