Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this briefing today and to welcome the Prosecutor,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and thank her for her report and
her briefing on the status of the investigations and
procedures led by her Office in Darfur pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).

In a world where the need for justice and
reparations for the wrongs endured by millions of
victims is imperative, the role and the importance of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) have become
indisputable. That is why the universal combat
against impunity and to uphold the rule of law is vital
everywhere, including in Africa, where it was reiterated
in the Constitutive Act of the African Union.

Senegal has great faith in these unshakable
principles, and that is why we are endeavouring to
promote dialogue on matters relating to the relationship
between the African Union and the ICC. Indeed, we
are firmly of the belief that changing the negative
perception of the Court, as well as the effective handling
ofthe concerns ofvictims of serious crimes, necessarily
requires open dialogue and close cooperation as the
only way to ensure their synergy in the combat against
impunity that Africa has consistently waged.

Indeed, through their mass ratification of the Rome
Statute, African countries expressed their commitment
to combating impunity across the world, which makes
Africa the largest regional group among the Assembly
of States Parties, whose presidency my country
currently holds.

I turn now to the situation in Darfur. My country
remains convinced that there can be no military
solution there and that the only way to achieve a
comprehensive and lasting peace is through dialogue
and reconciliation. While welcoming the efforts of the
Sudanese Government in the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, which prioritizes
a political settlement of the situation, we would
nonetheless appeal to all parties to end the hostilities.
Furthermore, it is imperative that the international
community take into account the issue of the crimes
committed so as to find a solution to the question of
impunity, as called for by the African Union in its appeal
for the re-establishment of peace and justice in Darfur,
which should be heeded. That is why we continue to
condemn most firmly all forms of violence against
civilians, in particular against women and children,
in Darfur. Similarly, the attacks against humanitarian
workers and the staff of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur are unacceptable,
and the perpetrators must be held accountable.

We believe that the time has come to heal the
wounds inflicted and to work for reconciliation in order
to establish a lasting and definitive peace in Darfur. It
is my belief that thanks to the openness and cooperation
that parties must demonstrate to resolve common issues
in the interests of peace, discussions could lead to a
positive contribution to the shoring up of the principles
and ideals that unite us all here in this Chamber.

