Mr. Dhanapala (Sri Lanka): Ijoin other speakers
in commending you, Sir, for having convened this
important debate. The Sri Lankan delegation associates
itself with the statement made by representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

According to statistics recently released by the
United Nations country team in the occupied Palestinian
territory, immediate measures are required to assuage
the human suffering in the area. If unethical practices
continue, the likelihood of a two-State solution could
be diminished.

The continued construction of settlements is one
of the reasons for the disruption of the peace process.
Settlement activities are a factor in the recurrence of
violence in the region. The international community
has repeatedly called for a freeze on settlement activity.

Restrictions on imports and exports due to the
blockade on Gaza are stifling economic growth. Those
restrictions need to be lifted within the framework
of resolution 1860 (2009), as that would contribute
significantly to the economic advancement of Gaza and
the well-being of its people.

Sri Lanka also supports the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
keep the majority of the people in Gaza supplied with
the basic necessities. However, the positive results of
their efforts will be stymied as long as the blockade
remains in place. For sustainable development to
take place in the Gaza Strip, the blockade needs to be
dismantled.

Both parties to the conflict must create the
environment necessary to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent need for mutual confidence-building measures
in support of efforts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations. Israel must protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories from actions that
are contrary to the established rules of international
law and practice. Settlement freezes should not be
seen as preconditions to negotiations, considering that
they have been accepted in previous agreements. The
security needs of the Israeli people must be respected.
We encourage both parties to exercise the utmost
restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians and for
the greater goal of peace.

It is important that the international community
remain engaged in the quest for a just and durable
solution to the situation in the Middle East. Recently
the Government of China hosted the United Nations
International Meeting in Support of Israeli-Palestinian
Peace, under the auspices of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. Sri Lanka supports the implementation of the
General Assembly resolutions regarding the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to statehood and the
attainment of a two-State solution.

We are heartened by the efforts of the United
States Secretary of State, John Kerry, in recent
months to revive the peace process, and we call upon
both parties to demonstrate goodwill and engage
in confidence-building measures to pave the way
for renewed negotiations. We also recognize that
the viability of the two-State solution will depend
on the political unity and economic advancement
of the Palestinian people, and we are confident that
Palestinian internal reconciliation efforts will continue.
The progress made by the Palestinian Authority is
commendable.

Sri Lanka supports Palestine's application for
admission to full membership in the United Nations,
and it is our hope that the Security Council will play a
more constructive role in making that a reality.

