Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): About two weeks ago, in
the midst of a difficult setting, the Security Council
managed to find convergence and unanimity to
endorse the evacuation operation out of eastern Aleppo
(resolution 2328 (2016)). As a result of the Council's
action, the swift deployment of United Nations
personnel to oversee and monitor the evacuation
alongside International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, a successful
evacuation with minimal reported instances of human
rights violations and abuses, was undertaken.

Under a similarly difficult and dynamic situation on
the ground, the Council is meeting today to discharge
its responsibility to effectively address the Syrian
conflict. We appreciate the efforts of both the Russian
Federation and Turkey in brokering the nationwide
ceasefire that commenced two days ago and is currently
holding. We are convinced that the Council's backing
of the ceasefire will only add to its legitimacy. Our
support ofa ceasefire and an end to the fighting signals
to ordinary Syrian civilian men, women and children
that we are not oblivious to their prolonged suffering.

We have collectively on many occasions
pronounced, first, undivided support for Special
Envoy De Mistura's effort to bring together conflicting
parties to the negotiating table, and secondly, that the
only resolution to the conflict is through a political
process. It is our belief that the Council's support for
the ceasefire and the subsequent Astana process will
lead to a more substantive political dialogue among the
conflicting parties, hence our support for resolution
2336 (2016) just adopted.

As Malaysia will be vacating its seat on the
Council in a few hours' time, my delegation hopes that
the positive momentum of the Council's action on the
situation in Syria over the past few weeks continues
to gather strength for the sake of the long-suffering
Syrians, especially civilians, non-combatants, women
and children.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
you and the Spanish delegation for the productive
and excellent stewardship of the Council this month.
I would also like to wish all colleagues a happy and
prosperous new year.

