Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to begin
by stating that the Government and the people of Brazil
received with deep emotion and great sadness the
announcement of the passing away of President Yasser
Arafat, a historic leader in the struggle of the
Palestinian people for self-determination and
independence.

I would like to thank Lord Ashdown for his
comprehensive briefing and update on recent
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
delegation of Brazil acknowledges the quality and
intensity of his work in leading the implementation of
the peace agreement. We also note with satisfaction the
presence at this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Mladen
Ivanic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Office of the High Representative
has provided important assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's effort to build and develop the State
structures for functional governance. The rule of law,
economic reform, institutional strengthening and
defence reform have all been significantly advanced in
the period covered by the latest report. The drafting of
new legislation has been a decisive element of that
advance.

Brazil encourages the country's authorities to
redouble their efforts to eliminate bottlenecks that still
hinder the drafting, adoption and implementation of
much-needed reform legislation. The implementation
of a number of laws establishing a true State-level
defence system, an operative and cohesive police force
and indirect taxation structures is crucial to set the
country on the path to the next stage of the peace
process. We note with satisfaction that the Bosnia and
Herzegovina tripartite Presidency has confirmed its
support for tax law reform and for the wider reform
process aimed at preparing the country for meeting the
European Union (EU) benchmarks.

Nevertheless, progress in some areas remains
slow and difficult. In that connection, I would mention
the problem of refugees. Only a small number of the
persons displaced by the 1992-1995 war have returned
permanently to their homes. Republika Srpska should
stop obstructing the necessary harmonization of
legislation on refugees and displaced persons and other
needed measures. In spite of the laudable efforts that
have furthered the goal of unifying the city of Mostar,
Croats and Muslims living there still remain segregated
in practice.

Against that backdrop, though, the recent
initiative of the Republika Srpska authorities,
apologizing for the first time for the massacre of
Muslims in Srebrenica nine years ago, may be an
important step towards more engaged cooperation on
the part of the Serb authorities in efforts towards
healing the deep wounds left by war and bringing to
justice the perpetrators of those hideous crimes.

The handing over of the mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina from the Stabilization Force to an EU-led
force (EUFOR) is backed by significant improvement
in the security situation on the ground and may yield
positive dividends. EUFOR must continue to fulfil
important tasks, such as arresting war criminals,
monitoring and securing weapons and helping with
armed forces reform. We note that NATO will remain
engaged in tasks relating to defence system reform,
among other matters, and will maintain its presence at
Sarajevo headquarters.

With the committed assistance and supervision of
the international community, Bosnia and Herzegovina
must remain firmly on the path towards the
implementation of structural reforms. The success of
the Council's endeavours in that country is an
important element in the delicate political equation of
the Balkans. It will not only help further the fight
against instability and crime; it will also advance the
broader effort to promote the flourishing of multi-
ethnic, tolerant and democratic societies in the whole
region.

