Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis for presenting
the report of the Security Council on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2014/420). I also thank the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan, for their briefings.

While Afghanistan awaits the results of the
presidential elections, Argentina would like to express
to the people and the Government of Afghanistan its
desire that the elections allow them to consolidate their
political transition and that they become the basis for
strengthening their stability, reinforcing their national
unity and promoting their sustainable development with
equality. The high turnout by the people of Afghanistan,
including the unprecedented number of women who
participated in the electoral process, demonstrates the
commitment of the people of Afghanistan to building
their own future and their determination to fight for
their rights in the face of threats and attacks from the
Taliban. For the political transition to be legitimate, it
is important that the presidential election effectively
reflect the popular will demonstrated at the ballot box.
It is vital that the allegations of fraud be investigated,
the disputes be resolved through the proper legal
framework and all candidates accept the outcome of the
elections.

The challenges that await the new authorities are
as well-known as they are overwhelming. The new
authorities will also have to address the Afghan people's
desire for peace. In that context, a peace process that
includes direct consultations between the Government
and the main opposition forces is essential to put an
end to the cycle of violence that continues to afflict
Afghanistan.

A democratic and prosperous Afghanistan will
depend on the success of the reconciliation process
in the framework of a comprehensive strategy for
protecting and promoting human rights and access
to education, health services and work for all Afghan
people. The Government of Afghanistan has a
responsibility that it cannot put off or ignore to ensure
the full implementation of the law on the elimination
of violence against women so that perpetrators are
held accountable. In that context, we note the change
in the criminal code allowing women to testify against
family members and thus facilitating trials for domestic
violence cases. In addition, it is encouraging to see
the progress that the Government of Afghanistan has
achieved in implementing its plan of action on children
in armed conflict.

It is worrying that Afghanistan is one of the least
developed countries and that the security sector absorbs
almost half of its national budget. Implementing the
Kabul process and coordinating development assistance
continues to be vital, but no less important than the fact
that humanitarian assistance and development should
respect the priorities and programmes established by
the Government of Afghanistan itself.

Argentina supports efforts to prevent the production
and trafficking of drugs in Afghanistan. Regional
cooperation is crucial, both in terms of applying the
law and criminal justice processes and in terms of
seeking to reduce the demand for drugs. It is of concern
that, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, Afghanistan is facing one of the highest
levels of drug addiction in the entire world. In that
context, we believe that it is appropriate that special
attention be given to young people in the programmes
being implemented in Afghanistan. We highlight the
important role being played by the United Nations
in support of national efforts and the importance of
coordinating between the various agencies in the
system to implement a comprehensive approach in that
regard.
This year, as Afghanistan is preparing to assume
new and growing responsibilities, the role of the
United Nations continues to be crucial in assisting
the Government to meet its security and development
obligations and supporting the coordination of
international aid, among other things. The Afghan
people should not be abandoned.

