Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Greece fully associates
itself with the statement to be delivered later by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union. My statement will therefore be brief.
Recent tragic events in the occupied Palestinian
territories made today's meeting of the Security
Council imperative. Over the past few months, we have
witnessed an alarming deterioration in the situation in
Gaza and the West Bank. The abhorrent events in Beit
Hanoun are the latest in a vicious circle of spiralling
violence, which has - as is unfortunately too often the
case in these circumstances - cost the lives of many
innocent civilians, including women and children.

While recognizing Israel's duty to protect its
citizens, we nevertheless wish to underline that its
actions in this regard must not be disproportionate or
contrary to international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We are all observing the gradual return of the Middle
East to a time that we had all hoped had been left
behind; we had hoped that the progress that had been
made was irreversible. By all accounts, it appears that
this is, unfortunately, not the case.

Lasting peace in the Middle East seems to be
based on the most delicate and fragile of premises,
namely, the behaviour of the parties themselves. The
respective responsibilities of the parties are clear; so,
too, are the respective responsibilities of the
international community. It is up to all of us to find an
appropriate and effective way to fulfil those
responsibilities.

I wish to reiterate the comments of my Foreign
Minister when she addressed the Council in September:
we should spare no effort, we should leave no option
unexplored and we should exhaust all possibilities in
pursuing and, ultimately, in achieving, a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Tragedies such as the one in Beit Hanoun make this
responsibility painfully apparent. We must urgently
seek to examine in depth what options are available to
us, what steps we must take in order to put the peace
process back on track so that those in the region who
genuinely aspire to peace are given a tangible, practical
and, not least, credible advantage over those who seek
to obstruct all prospects for peace.

