The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Albania, Australia, Austria,
Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta,
Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members ofthe Council have before them document
S/2015/333, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria, Barbados,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Costa Rica,
Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Georgia, Greece,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Malta, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
the Republic of Moldova, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, Samoa, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and
Tobago, Ukraine, the United States of America and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2015/289, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on small arms and light
weapons.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Lithuania.

The draft resolution before colleagues today is the
product of months of work by our Permanent Mission,
which culminated in week-long intensive negotiations
among the 15 members of the Security Council, as
well as multiple bilateral exchanges. I thank all those
who helped and guided us along the way, and the
Council members for their cooperation in producing
this far-reaching text. We appreciate the comments and
criticisms received, which we View as an important part
of the broader debate on small arms and light weapons.
Critical thinking and good-faith engagement are in
order to be able to advance in our common efforts aimed
at reducing and limiting the horrendous human cost of
the uncontrolled illegal spread of small arms and light
weapons around the world. We value the strong support
for the draft resolution that many delegations expressed
during the open debate last week (see S/PV.7442), and
we appreciate having so many co-sponsors to the draft
resolution.

As we submit the draft resolution to the vote, we bear
in mind the passionate call from Karamoko Diakite, an
arms control activist from West Africa, not to let down
the Victims of armed conflicts and to adopt the draft
resolution. He spoke from the depth of his personal
experience and spoke of the personal experiences and
suffering of countless others for whom the impact of
illicit arms flows on their faiths and hopes, as well as
the faiths and hopes of their kin, is not just a matter
of wording, but of the very real harm, the crippling
injuries and the deaths that they have suffered, which
will continue to haunt them as long as they live.

The draft resolution is not ideal, but the world
we live in is not ideal either. In the real world, we
work painstakingly to achieve the desired results,
with perseverance, patience, laborious efforts and
compromise, one step at a time, bit by bit, piece by
piece, block by block. For all our posturing, the illicit
transfer of arms will continue, as arms trade is one
of the most lucrative businesses in the world; but we
can, and we must, do all within our power to limit the
damaging, even mortal effect of such illicit flows on
civilian populations.

We have the responsibility to protect as best we can.
That is what we sought to do, to build on the excellent
Australian resolution adopted in 2013 (resolution 2117 (2013)) by adding new operational impact-oriented
elements. Those much-needed bits and pieces were the
foundation on which the small arms and light weapons
discourse and action can, and, I hope, will continue to
be built in the Council. Let me go through some of the
new elements in the text before the Council.

The draft resolution contains important new
language on the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), that
landmark instrument we have so painstakingly and
passionately negotiated over an extensive period of
time. Had we taken an all-or-nothing approach, we
would not have the ATT today, and the world would be
worse off because of that.

The draft resolution has a very strong focus on the
human costs of the illicit spread of small arms and light
weapons and on the need to protect the victims, women,
children and other vulnerable groups. It also speaks
clearly on the critical role of women in tackling the
problem of small arms and light weapons. It requests
more specific reporting by the Secretary-General on
the impact on specific vulnerable groups, including
children, with recommendations for action to be taken
to counter the impact of the illicit spread of small arms.

The draft resolution includes extensive new
provisions on assistance to affected countries and
calls on new entities to identify capacities that
could contribute to countering the illicit transfer,
destabilizing accumulation and misuse of small arms
and light weapons. It encourages the United Nations
system to act in a more coherent fashion in helping those
States, including through assisting weapons collection,
enhancing physical security and stockpile management
practices; safe and effective management, storage,
marking, record-keeping and tracing of stockpiles of
small arms and light weapons; as well as the collection
and destruction of surplus seized, unmarked or illicitly
held weapons and ammunition; and the development
of national export and import control systems. It
emphasizes the need to strengthen border security,
judicial institutions and law enforcement capacity,
and calls for examining and facilitating the transfer
of technologies that would improve the tracing and
detection of illicit transfers in small arms and light
weapons, as well as for greater transparency in small
arms transfers.

As Boko Haram, Da'esh and their likes burn, kill,
enslave and rape with the help of small arms, the draft
resolution contains concrete language on the threat of
terrorist groups and calls on the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, its monitoring team, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to engage on the threat of weapons in the
hands of terrorists and to develop plans of assistance to
countries in need. All of these and other new elements
could have a tangible impact on tackling the illicit
small arms problem, and if implemented, could make
a difference to countless people trapped in conflicts.

Let me be very clear: contrary to some allegations,
none of these elements in the draft impinge upon or
Violate State sovereignty. My own country has fought
hard and long for sovereignty and would do everything
to protect it again and again, and we know very well
that all of us around this table and at the United Nations
feel strongly about sovereignty as well. The real threat
to national sovereignty and all the core rules and norms
that govern nations and human lives comes from the
action by terrorists, illegal armed groups, militant
mercenaries, transborder organized crime, traffickers
and smugglers of all stripes, who slaughter, burn, rape
and destroy without borders - and definitely not from
the language of this draft resolution, which is aimed
at seeking greater coherence within the United Nations
system in order to better help countries to counter the
problem of illicit arms. The draft text clearly stipulates
that all measures would be implemented only as
appropriate, within existing mandates and as requested
by affected countries.

Every minute, as we speak, a life is lost because
of the illicit trade or misuse of small arms and light
weapons. Besides causing deaths and injuries, such
illicit flows facilitate the commission of hideous human
rights abuses and atrocities and indirectly impede
development and growth. The all-too-free access to
small arms strikes at the core of the human rights of
women and girls. Every day, whether in war-ravaged
Villages or in displacement and refugee camps, women
in conflict situations are faced with impossible choices
that none of us would ever want to make - to let their
children starve or to venture out in the streets, camps
or fields in search of whatever meager edibles they can
find and other necessities, all of this at the risk of being
caught in the crossfire, hit by a stray bullet, beaten,
robbed or raped at gunpoint.

For many women and girls, even attending to their
basic bodily needs on the edge ofa camp can be literally
a matter of life and death. As members prepare to vote,
I ask that they think of the mothers who would live in
continuous fear that rebels, terrorists or militant gangs
will attack their homes and steal, rape or kidnap their
children, or sell into slavery their daughters. Think of
the displaced, of religious minorities running for their
lives, of the elderly and the disabled who simply cannot
run. Think of the children as young as six or eight,
barely able to hold a gun, scared, brainwashed and
forced to maim, torture and kill in order to live.

We have heard the heartrending testimonies of
former child soldiers in the Council. We cannot be so
callous as to ignore them. Think of the humanitarian
workers and doctors who risk and lose their own lives in
order to help those in need. Think of the journalists who
brave the worst crises to keep us informed. Think of the
peacekeepers being attacked and shot as they perform
a much-needed protection mission. Think of all those
human beings - fellow human beings - about to be
killed, abused, injured, reduced to slavery, treated like
animals in captivity by warlords, terrorists and militant

gangs.

This draft resolution has been drafted not to resolve
all the underlying disputes on the arms trade, but to
make a difference to those desperately in need, to
enable specific and concrete actions aimed at limiting
the damage and reducing the human costs caused by
the illicit spread of small arms and light weapons. The
victims cannot defend themselves, but we can. The
choice to take the side of the Victims is ours to make,
and I hope we all do.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it. I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Chile, France, Jordan, Lithuania, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

Abstaining:
Angola, Chad, China, Nigeria, Russian Federation,
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

The President: There were nine votes in favour,
none against and six abstentions. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 2220 (2015).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council Who wish to make statements following the
voting.


