Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): Let me
first thank the Jordanian presidency for organizing
this necessary debate. I also thank all of the
briefers - Ms. Valerie Amos, Mr. Antonio Guterres,
Ms. Ertharin Cousin and Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt - for
their poignant statements. There is no doubt: the Syrian
tragedy is like a black hole that relentlessly obliterates
human life and sets back all of our values. The civilian
population is the primary victim of the conflict, which
each day reveals new horrors, fuels extremism and
marks the return of barbarity. The numbers speak
volumes: since the conflict began, 220,000 people have
been killed, 12.2 million are in need of humanitarian
assistance, half of the Syrian population have fled
their homes and at least 3.9 million people have sought
refuge in neighbouring countries.

I commend the considerable efforts made by
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey - as well as by Iraq and
Egypt - to host Syrian refugees. Those countries
have been directly affected by the conflict. For them,
the ongoing flow of refugees is a veritable tidal
wave - socially and economically * and very often
places additional pressure on their social services and
natural resources. That is why we have an obligation
to act.

France welcomes the success of the Kuwait
conference, where donors mobilized $3.6 billion. But
the humanitarian response plan for 2015 is currently
covered only up to 16 per cent. It is therefore important
that the pledges made be promptly disbursed, which will
help in tackling the urgent needs of the United Nations
agencies in Syria and in the neighbouring countries.

Beyond the financial means, however, which
we must meet collectively, there is the crucial issue
of access to people in need, which continues to
deteriorate in Syria. The Syrian regime has the primary
responsibility in that regard. It continues to deliberately
target civilians, to pursue a deliberate siege strategy
and to impose all types of obstacles on the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, in direct violation of
international humanitarian law.

In its national capacity, France has fully mobilized
to support Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries.
Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis, French
humanitarian aid amounted to €18 million for Lebanon,
€l8.5 million for Jordan, €3.8 million for Turkey and
€2 million for Iraq. The aid is intended for Syrian
refugees as well as for host communities, which bear the
brunt of the massive increase in population. For example,
in Lebanon, France's support to host communities
amounts to more than €12 million, primarily via the
trust fund of the World Bank. A significant part of
our assistance will also support the work of the World
Food Programme in the region. Faced with the growing
challenge of educating millions of Syrian children,
France will also contribute to scholastic programmes of
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in Lebanon, and those of UNICEF
in Jordan. Finally, we will continue to host Syrians on
our territory, as we have done since the beginning of
the crisis, in response to the appeal of UNHCR.

Moreover, it is essential to bolster the link between
humanitarian aid and development policies. France
responds to that challenge by funding development
projects aimed at supporting host communities and
enabling refugees to not only survive, but to live
in decent socioeconomic conditions. All countries
and development actors must mobilize to meet this
challenge.

As mentioned by French Foreign Minister Laurent
Fabius at the ministerial meeting of the Security Council
on 27 March (see S/PV.7419), our collective efforts must

also allow those exiled, especially victims of ethnic and
religious violence, to return home in safety and dignity.

However, all efforts come up against the absence
of a political solution to the conflict. As long as the
conflict persists, along with its burden of barbarities,
our efforts are simply a drop in the bucket. That is the
reason that the best assistance we can provide to the
Syrian people is to put an end to this heinous conflict. It
is a difficult path, but a familiar one, with an inclusive
political solution based on the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). Only a transition that safeguards
the Syrian State and protects its minorities - without
Bashar Al-Assad - will generate a solution capable of
halting the conflict and quelling extremism in the long
term. For many months, France has spared no effort
in appealing for a renewed political process under the
aegis of the United Nations. Only the United Nations has
the legitimacy to restart a dialogue on the basis of the
Geneva communique, which is the only internationally
agreed basis defining the crucial parameters of a
lasting political solution. France welcomes Staffan de
Mistura's initiative to hold consultations in that regard,
and is ready to lend its full support. Let us collectively
rise to meet our responsibilities. We simply cannot fail.

