Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Sweden has begun its two years of labour
on the Security Council by taking the Chair of the
presidency at the very start. We wish it every success.
We are sure that in the conduct of our work the land of
Dag Hammarskjold, Olof Palme and Jan Eliasson will
exemplify the excellent foreign policy traditions that
we know of old.

We welcome the participation of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres in his first Security Council open
debate. It is significant that the new Secretary-General
began his work with the appeal for peace that he voiced
on 1 January. We share the basic premise of his brief,
which is that the pursuit of peace should permeate
every area of our Organization's activities, from
ending hostilities to concluding negotiations designed
to achieve political solutions to conflicts. He made
important observations in his impressive statement
today, and we should all vigorously support his message
that 2017 must be a year for peace, not just in words but
in our practical actions.

The United Nations and its Security Council play a
significant role in preventing conflicts. We agree that
their successful, timely prevention depends to a large
degree on combining all the tools in the United Nations
arsenal - Chapters I and VI of the Charter, along with
a number of additional decisions, including resolution
2171 (2014), on conflict prevention. The time has come
for a dispassionate look at what has not worked and why,
and to draw the appropriate conclusions. Right now, at
the beginning ofa new Secretary-General's term, is the
perfect moment for that.

However, we should not forget that every situation
requires a delicate, unbiased approach and patient
efforts to arrive at a settlement that is unique to it.
A one-size-fits-all model does not work. We believe
firmly that we cannot base early prevention on some
randomly chosen combination of various indicators of
conflict, which can leave the door open for potential
misuse. An artificial emphasis on separate mechanisms

available to the United Nations - even in such
important areas as the protection of human rights or
the Sustainable Development Goals - is even less

appropriate. The non-transparent assessment methods
of specific separate entities should not be used as a
basis for general preventive action.

With regard to the concept of sustaining peace,
we see it as the acknowledgement by all national
participants of the processes for sharing responsibility
for peace, tackling the underlying causes ofconflict and
reconstructing and developing their own Governments
as well as preventing potential crisis situations. The
term was first used in resolution 2282 (2016), on
reforming our peacebuilding architecture, which
aimed to adapt foundational documents to modern
realities. At the same time, the mandates of the various
bodies and the fundamentals of their work remained
unchanged - that is, the primary responsibility both
for preventing and dealing with the consequences of
conflict is borne by the States themselves, and the
parameters of international support, should it prove
necessary, depend on the States' decisions.

Conflict prevention is sometimes presented as if
it were some kind of new, all-inclusive priority for the
United Nations. But the fact remains that this task was
established by the Charter 70 years ago. Why it has not
been implemented as it should have is a good question.
Perhaps it is about political will, or the lack of it. We
all agree that prevention is cheaper and more effective
than cure, but deciding on a diagnosis is another matter
altogether. It is worth recalling here that Member States
still disagree about the former Secretary-General's
proposed possible indicators for the inevitability of
a crisis. History has often shown, for instance, that
crises can arise in countries where there are no human
rights violations or lack of development. And yet for
some reason external interference in the affairs of other
States and in support of coups has not been mentioned
as a cause of crises, although it is the consequences of
just such issues that we are currently dealing with in a
whole slew of cases.

We should also take a fresh look at the coordination
of international efforts at conflict prevention. It is
essential to ensure that we make more active use of
the potential for prevention offered by regional and
subregional organizations. Of course, Member States
also expect constructive support from the United
Nations Secretariat. We hope that in their preparation
of relevant reports, its staff, while not forgetting the
Security Council's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
can analyse the issues intelligently and share their
experience in resolving them. Those reports can be
useful if they are put together professionally and
impartially. It is also important to ensure that they
focus on the practical impact of the measures proposed.

We are ready to take into account any initiatives
from the Secretariat in the area of conflict prevention
or raising awareness of potential threats, but they
must add value, taking into account the approaches of
Member States and the main parties to a conflict. That
applies particularly to the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, which does not take full account
of the real causes of that dangerous phenomenon and
ignores the primary role of States in combating it. And
that issue should not overshadow the more urgent global
problem of an unprecedentedly serious terrorist threat,
which we need a genuinely collective effort to fight.

That is why we propose coming together and acting
in genuine unity within the framework of a broad
anti-terrorist coalition, as Russia's President Vladimir
Putin discussed in his address to the General Assembly
at its seventieth session (see A/70/PV.13). We all need
to be guided not by ambitions but by our shared values
and interests, based on the Charter of the United Nations
and other applicable norms of international law, as
well as our international partnership agreements, the
most important of which is the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. For our part, we affirm our
commitment to strengthen the preventive potential of
the United Nations for combating crises, as reflected
in the Russian Federation's foreign policy concept,
updated in November.

In conclusion, I would like to draw attention to the
fact that we can speculate as long as we want as to how
many conflicts could be avoided if the United Nations
intervened in time, but the fact remains that a significant
number of them have been the result of irresponsible
external interference in the affairs of other States,
including the overthrow of legitimate regimes. We
have no right to squander the credibility of the United
Nations on such adventurism. All our actions should
be carefully verified and, most importantly, enjoy the
support of all parties to a conflict.

I cannot omit to comment briefly on two statements
made today, the first being that of the United States.
We are already accustomed to the fact that the notion
of American exceptionalism extends to procedural
issues, as evidenced by a contempt for time limits that
shows disrespect for others. It has been harder to get
used to the random citations of history. Speaking of
sovereignty, one cannot help recalling that it has been
the gross violation of such by the United States that
has put a number of countries in difficult situations
that we have had to deal with over and over again. The
United States invasion of Iraq not only destabilized
the Middle East but gave birth to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. Its gross violations of Syria's
sovereignty have resulted in the further spread of the
terrorist threat. The overthrow of the Government in
Libya has had terrible consequences not only in Libya
itself but for the entire African continent. The flood of
refugees into Europe from Syria and Libya has been a
direct result of Washington's adventurist policies. The
deplorable situation in South Sudan has a great deal to
do with Washington's years of attempts to overthrow
the regime in Khartoum. The crisis in Ukraine would
not have happened if the United States and its allies
had not begun telling Kyiv which agreements it could
subscribe to and when. The outgoing administration of
Barack Obama is desperately seeking people to blame
for its failures in both domestic and foreign policy. It is
regrettable that even the Security Council has become
a forum for such futile efforts.

Very briefly, the statement of the representative of
Ukraine contained obvious legal and political errors.
Kyiv should stop firing on the civilian residents of the
Donbas region and should fulfil the Minsk agreements,
which will soon be two years old. First and foremost,
it must launch a direct dialogue with the citizens of
Donetsk and Luhansk.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to once again wish Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
every success.

