Mr. Lee See-Young (Republic of Korea): Mr.
President, allow me at the outset to express my
delegation's appreciation to you for your initiative to
organize the Security Council's open meeting today on
the important issue before us. We also welcome today's
meeting as yet another meaningful step forward in
restoring the transparency of the work of the Security
Council.

In many conflict situations these days, it has become
increasingly hard to define a clear boundary between
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building operations.
More often than not, maintaining peace is as difficult as
restoring peace. It is therefore imperative for the
international community to take a holistic approach to
ensure not only the restoration of peace but also its
consolidation in conflict areas.

When the Security Council considers authorizing
peacekeeping operations which would involve
post-conflict peace-building activities, the Council, in our
view, should provide clear, realistic and appropriate
mandates for such activities, backed by sufficient
resources. It is equally important to respect the distinct
mandates of other United Nations organs, bodies or
agencies which cover post-conflict peace-building
measures.
Having said that, I would like to comment on the
following four points to which my Government attaches
particular importance.

 

My first point concerns the need for more effective
coordination among all actors as well as local capacity-
building. The multifaceted nature of post-conflict
peace-building inevitably brings together a number of
different bodies and actors. First and foremost, it is
important to maintain close coordination between the two
major organs of the United Nations, namely the General
Assembly and the Security Council, which have the main
political responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter.

My delegation supports the coordinating role of the
Department of Political Affairs as the focal point at
Headquarters and that of special or other representatives of
Secretary-General in the field, as set out in the
Secretary-General's report of 18 November 1998.

In this connection, we look forward to further
elaboration of the Secretary-General's suggestion in favour
of the strategic framework approach for response to and
recovery from crisis. My delegation hopes that such a
strategic framework would be formulated as soon as
possible, drawing on the various lessons learned from past
experiences. In this process, special attention should be paid
to the need to ensure the smooth transition from the
peacekeeping phase to peace-building activities.

We are of the view that one of the main focuses
should be on exploring the practical ways and means to
cultivate the local capacity to sustain peace in the fragile
conditions of the post-conflict period. It is not only more
effective but also more economical to help local
communities to build their own capacities to sustain peace
in the long run. In this connection, the involvement of
regional or subregional organizations in the process would
be very useful, given their geographical proximity and
comparative advantage in terms of local information.
Moreover, in view of the financial burdens of various
peace-building activities, it is also necessary to explore the
possibility of engaging international financial institutions in
this process at an early date.

Secondly, we believe that measures towards
disarmament and demobilization, including the collection
and dismantling of small arms and the rehabilitation of
militias, are keys to avoiding the recurrence of violence and
to building peace in post-conflict situations. With this in
mind, my Government contributed $250,000 last year,
when we served on the Council, to the programmes for the
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants in
Angola.

We welcome the ongoing efforts of the Council to
enhance the effective implementation of the arms
embargoes already imposed by the Council. With cross-
border arms flows well in place, however, country-
specific arms embargoes do not suffice to stem the illicit
trafficking of arms. In this regard, we look forward to the
Secretary-Generals playing a positive role in
implementing the Security Council recommendations on
the regional approach to the illicit flow of arms to and in
Africa, as contained in Council resolution 1209 (1998) of
19 November this year. We believe that the establishment
of appropriate regional and subregional registers of
conventional arms should not be limited to Africa but
should be expanded to other continents as well. More
efforts should also be made to deal with the supply side
of the arms flow.

Thirdly, I wish to stress the importance of demining
as one of the essential components of post-conflict peace-
building. Given the sheer number of landmines strewn
over the globe and the formidable costs of their clearance,
the impact of anti-personnel landmines extends beyond
the immediate danger to lives and property to a wide
array of socio-economic and developmental aspects in the
mine-affected countries.

Mine clearance is now a global agenda requiring
global action. We therefore welcome the establishment of
the United Nations Mine Action Service as the focal point
for mine action within the United Nations system. We
hope that the Service will strengthen its cooperation with
various regional and subregional organizations.

Since 1996, my country has actively participated in
the Mine Action Support Group as a donor and made
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund to help
with mine clearance in Cambodia, Tajikistan and
Ethiopia.

Last but not least, we would like to invite the
Council, once again, to give special attention to the need
for ensuring the security and safety of United Nations and
other personnel, as well as the security and safety of all
innocent civilians in conflict situations. We believe that
the Council should continue to give high priority to this
issue.

In this connection, my delegation welcomes the
specific recommendation contained in Council resolution
1208 (1998) to include, in the United Nations Stand-by
Arrangements, military and police units and personnel
trained for humanitarian operations, together with related

 
equipment. We support this recommendation's early
translation into action. We wish to request Council
members to continue to look at other options to enhance the
security and safety of all those in need of protection as well
as of their protectors.

Post-conflict peace-building is indeed a very
challenging task for the international community today, as
the number of conflict situations grows in the post-cold-war
era. In particular, it takes even greater time and energy to
build peace and socio-economic infrastructure in cases
where States fail or societies collapse. The international
community should avoid wasting the valuable resources it
has spent to restore peace by leaving that peace vulnerable
to renewed conflicts.

We welcome today's open meeting as an opportunity
to increase international awareness of this important issue.
We sincerely hope that the views and suggestions presented
here today will help Council members and the United
Nations system as a whole to better address this important
and urgent issue and to take relevant actions as necessary
sooner rather than later.

