The President: After consultation among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the results
of the Berlin conference on Afghanistan, held on
31 March and 1 April 2004, co-chaired by the
United Nations, Afghanistan, Germany and
Japan. The Council thanks Afghanistan and
Germany for jointly hosting this event, an
important milestone on the way to a secure,
stable, free, prosperous and democratic
Afghanistan.

"The Council expresses its full support for
the commitment of Afghanistan and the
international community to successfully complete
the implementation of the Bonn Agreement and
to continue the transition process in Afghanistan
through a lasting partnership, thus reflecting a
model for a common endeavor of the
international community in its fight against
terrorism.

"The Security Council endorses the Berlin
declaration and stresses the relevance of the work
plan of the Afghan Government, the progress
report and the Berlin declaration on Counter-
Narcotics, annexed to the Berlin Declaration, and
welcomes the significant financial multiyear
commitments made by the international donor
community.

"The Security Council in particular
expresses full support for the commitment by the
Government of Afghanistan to pursue the
necessary reform steps and actions as outlined in
the work plan.

"The Security Council welcomes the
announcement of President Karzai to hold direct
presidential and parliamentary elections by
September of this year. The Council stresses the
importance of a secure environment for free, fair
and credible democratic elections, and that to this
end further efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan and of the international community
are needed.

"The Security Council welcomes in this
regard the decision taken by the President of
Afghanistan to implement vigorously the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, in particular to intensify it ahead of
the 2004 elections, and to continue the formation
of the Afghan national army and the national
police.

"The Council also acknowledges the
commitment by NATO to expand the mission of
the International Security Assistance Force

(ISAF) by establishing five additional provincial
reconstruction teams (PRTs) by summer 2004 and
further PRTs thereafter, as well as the readiness of
ISAF and the Operation Enduring Freedom to
assist in securing the conduct of elections.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitments totalling $8.2 billion for the fiscal
years March 2004 to March 2007 made by
participants at the Berlin conference for the
reconstruction and development of Afghanistan
and stresses the importance, with increasing
absorption capacity, for a growing share of this
assistance to be channeled through the Afghan
budget as direct budget support or as
contributions to the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund and to the Law and Order Trust Fund.

"The Security Council stresses that opium
poppy cultivation, drug production and
trafficking pose a serious threat to the rule of law
and development in Afghanistan as well as to
international security, and that therefore
Afghanistan and the international community
shall endeavor to reduce and eventually eliminate
this threat, including through the development of
economic alternatives. The Council reiterates the
importance of increased cooperation among
neighbouring States and countries along
trafficking routes to strengthen anti-narcotic
controls.

"The Security Council takes note of the
appeal of President Karzai at the Berlin
Conference for additionally needed international
support in countering narcotics. The Council
refers in this context to the necessary
implementation of the Afghan National Drug
Control Strategy and the counter-narcotics action
plans in the areas of law enforcement, judicial
reform, alternative livelihoods, demand reduction
and public awareness. The Security Council calls
upon Member States to support the
implementation of these action plans.
Afghanistan needs both human and financial
resources to tackle this problem.

"The Security Council welcomes in
particular the Berlin Declaration on Counter-
Narcotics within the framework of the Kabul
Good-neighbourly Relations Declaration, signed
by Afghanistan and its neighbours, as well as the

planned Conference on Regional Police
Cooperation to be held in Doha on 18 and 19
May.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to include in his future reports to the
Security Council and the General Assembly on
the situation in Afghanistan, in addition to the
information on implementation of the Bonn
Agreement, chapters on progress achieved in the
implementation of the Berlin declaration, the
work plan of the Afghan Government and in the
promotion of regional and international
cooperation with Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the actions taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and reiterates the central and
impartial role of the United Nations in the
international efforts to assist the Afghan people in
consolidating peace in Afghanistan and
rebuilding their country.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/9.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.
