Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, let me
express my thanks to you very much for convening
today's open meeting.

The general debate of the fifty-seventh session of
the General Assembly last month proved to be a
notable opportunity to renew international momentum
to address the issue of Iraq. In their statements, many
leaders said that they saw the Government of Iraq's
non-compliance with Security Council resolutions as a
matter of grave concern to the entire world. They
emphasized the importance of maintaining the unity of
the international community and of resolving this issue
through the United Nations.

In his statement before the General Assembly,
Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi stressed that Iraq
must comply with all the relevant Security Council
resolutions; that the international community should
continue to work together and engage more strenuously
in diplomatic efforts through the United Nations; and
that it must pursue the adoption of necessary and
appropriate Security Council resolutions as soon as
possible.

In response to international appeals, including
those made at the United Nations, the Government of
Iraq announced that it would allow the return of United
Nations weapons inspectors without conditions. Also,
in their consultations in Vienna earlier this month, the
Government of Iraq, the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
basically agreed upon the practical arrangements for
implementing the inspections based on the existing
resolutions. These developments could be regarded as
the first steps towards resolving the issue of weapons
of mass destruction in Iraq. However, I have to
emphasize that what is most important is that
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted inspections
actually be conducted in Iraq; that Iraq comply with all
the relevant Security Council resolutions; and that
there be no doubt whatsoever about the elimination of
its weapons of mass destruction.

I would like to take this opportunity to comment
on a number of points which the Government of Japan
regards as important in the international community's
efforts to address this issue.

First, in view of past experience regarding Iraq's
acceptance of inspections, it is essential that the
international community remain resolute and put
maximum pressure on the Iraqi Government in order to
make it comply with the resolutions.

Secondly, this should be considered not as an
issue of Iraq versus certain countries, but as one facing
the international community as a whole. Preserving
international solidarity is thus key to resolving this
issue.

Thirdly, the ability of the United Nations to act
effectively has implications for the very credibility of
this Organization and could have a decisive effect on
international solidarity. Member States should
therefore pursue ways to address this issue through the
United Nations, and it is essential that the United
Nations, in turn, function effectively.

Fourthly, any doubts regarding the existence of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq should be
completely dispelled, and to that end effective and
credible inspections must be guaranteed. This is also
important from the viewpoint of maintaining
confidence in the international non-proliferation
regime with regard to weapons of mass destruction.
The Government of Japan supports the strengthening of
the inspection regime necessary to ensure effective and
credible inspections, including unfettered access to the
presidential sites. We also support Mr. Hans Blix's
steady and correct approach, and we will continue to
cooperate with the activities of UNMOVIC under his
leadership.

Last but not least, in dealing with this issue, it is
indispensable to bear in mind the importance of paying
serious attention to the interests and concerns of
surrounding countries and of ensuring the stability of
the region.

The attention of the international community with
regard to this issue is now focused on the discussion of
a new Security Council resolution. The Government of
Japan hopes that the Security Council, which is
entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, will
bear in mind the points I have just made, conduct its
consultations seriously and expeditiously, and adopt a
resolution that is both necessary and appropriate.

