Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to convey our
deepest condolences to the Government and people of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on the passing of His
Royal Highness Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Defence and Aviation. We also extend our condolences
to Turkey in the wake of the recent earthquake, which
exacted a heavy toll.

In his regular briefing this morning, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe
underscored the growing suffering that the Palestinian
people continue to endure as a result of the Israeli
authorities' ongoing policies of aggression and
occupation. The most serious issue is the Israeli
Government's continued campaign to expand its illegal
settlements in the heart of Palestinian cities and
villages; its demolition, destruction and confiscation of
Palestinian homes, properties and land; and its
continued siege of the Gaza Strip. We condemn all of
those dangerous Israeli practices, which have
exacerbated the deteriorating humanitarian plight of
the Palestinian people and caused them to hit rock
bottom. Those practices have also been a direct reason
for the failure of the peace negotiations thus far and the
growing state of tension, frustration and instability in
the region.

We warn that the continued disregard of the
international community for such Israeli actions and
unilateral measures will only encourage Israel to
pursue its practices aimed at entrenching its occupation
of Palestinian land and property. That is especially true
of its actions in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, whereby it aims to
change the city's demographic, historical and religious
nature.

The United Arab Emirates demands that the
international community, and especially the Security
Council, fully assume their responsibilities now more
than ever before. Those include the adoption of all
necessary, serious and effective measures to compel
Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately cease all
settlement activities in the Palestinian territories,
nullify all illegal decisions and measures it has taken
unilaterally in that regard, and urgently lift its siege of
Gaza.

We hope that the international community will
enhance the scope of the humanitarian, economic and
financial aid offered to the Palestinian people and their
National Authority so that they can overcome the great
challenges they continue to face.

Today's meeting of the Security Council is of
special political significance, as it is follows the
Palestinian Authority's request for the admission of the
State of Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations. The United Arab Emirates supports that
historic request and entitlement of the Palestinian
people, especially in view of the fact that the
Palestinian Authority has fulfilled its obligations in
establishing the institutions of Palestinian statehood, as
recognized by the Quartet and other relevant
international organizations.

The United Arab Emirates also hopes that the
Council's deliberations will lead it to take the
unanimous decision to recommend to the General
Assembly the acceptance of the Palestinian application
as soon as possible, and in a manner consistent with the
positions of the vast majority of the world's countries,
which have officially recognized an independent State
of Palestine based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and on the basis of the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the Madrid
Peace Conference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
vision of the two-State solution, as stipulated by the
General Assembly in its resolution 181 (II) partitioning
Palestine into two States, as well as the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Accepting Palestine's
request for admission as a full Member of the United
Nations does not at all mean closing the door to the
continuation of the Israeli-Palestinian peace
negotiations; rather, it would mean a positive step
towards supporting efforts to soon resume peace
negotiations.

The halt in the negotiations led by the Quartet is
due primarily to Israel's failure to abide by the
Quartet's work plan. Therefore, the urgent and
unconditional resumption of those negotiations is
contingent above all on making Israel fully and
immediately cease all illegal settlement activity
throughout the Palestinian territories, especially East
Jerusalem. It will also require a commitment to a clear
and specific time frame for those negotiations so as to
reach a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement
based on the two-State solution.

We closely followed the most recent prisoner
exchange between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. We
welcome the efforts made by the sisterly Arab Republic
of Egypt in that regard. We demand that Israel
immediately and unconditionally release the thousands
of prisoners who continue to be held under dire and
illegal conditions in Israeli prisons and detention

centres. We also stress the importance of the adoption
by the international community of the concrete
measures necessary to guarantee the protection of
Palestinian civilians and ensure accountability for all
illegal measures and flagrant violations committed by
the occupying Power, in contravention of international
humanitarian law and the rights of the Palestinian
people.

In closing, we hope that the Security Council will
not again hesitate to take the necessary firm measures,
under its mandate and responsibilities, to support the
efforts to revive a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

