Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to welcome you, Sir, as the President of
today's meeting. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Mr. Kofi Annan for his presence and remarks.

Like peacekeeping, peace-building is of great
significance for lasting peace and order in countries
and regions afflicted by conflict. Currently, battered
social order, shattered rule of law and the absence of
protection for the rights of civilians, women and
children in particular, are commonplace in areas of
conflicts. Guaranteeing an early restoration of the
judicial system and the rule of law in order to uphold
justice and protect human rights has thus become a
necessary condition for post-conflict stability and
development. Helping the parties concerned establish
and safeguard justice and the rule of law should
therefore be given earnest attention in the course of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and post-
conflict reconstruction. China supports the United
Nations in playing an active role in accordance with
the needs and actual conditions of the countries
concerned.

Achieving peace and stability for post-conflict
countries is a systemic endeavour involving many
aspects of work. In addition to justice and the rule of
law, a broadly representative Government should be
established as soon as possible to help bring about
national reconciliation and ensure the harmonious
coexistence of all ethnic groups. A sound security
environment should be created expeditiously to ensure
the orderly progress of reconstruction, and the
programme of disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration should be
carried out without delay to keep arms out of the hands
of ex-combatants.

The end of a conflict does not necessarily mean
the arrival of peace. Causes of conflicts differ, but
more often than not they have a great deal to do with
poverty and backwardness. Without development,
justice and the rule of law are merely a mirage. There
is quite a long way to travel from war to stability and
from anarchy to rule of law. Unless people in conflict
areas can see hope for a better life and can enjoy real
benefits from peace, they might once again be plunged
into turbulence and even war. It is a source of concern
that some countries and regions, having freed
themselves from conflicts, have been bogged down
once again in a state of helplessness in the face of
economic globalization due to a lack of funds,
technology and other conditions required for economic
development. The United Nations and the international
community need to provide effective assistance to help
them take on the challenges of globalization and
achieve sustainable development. We strongly urge the
international community to give development the key
position it deserves in peace-building.

Governing a country requires the rule of law, as
does managing international relations. To uphold what
is right, defend what is just and observe international
obligations is the solemn commitment made by the
United Nations to the world's people and is the essence
of the United Nations Charter. The answer to bringing
about a world of peace, stability, justice and the rule of
law lies solely in closer international cooperation, a
multilateral approach and democracy and the rule of
law in international relations.

The United Nations Charter and other norms
governing international relations must be respected and
maintained in earnest. As responsible members of the
great international family, all countries should take on
the challenges they face by acting within the
framework of international institutions and in
accordance with international law. Of course, we also
need to keep pace with the times and further improve
and enrich the existing international laws and norms in
accordance with changes and developments.

Our goal is to build a better global village where
there are no wars or conflicts as all countries live in
peace and stability; where there is no poverty or hunger
as all the inhabitants enjoy development and dignity;
and where there is no discrimination or prejudice and
all peoples and civilizations coexist in harmony,
complementing and enriching one other. To achieve all
that, we the peoples need a world of democracy and the
rule of law, and we need a stronger United Nations. Let
us work hand in hand towards that end.

