Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by congratulating the Argentine presidency
for its initiative to hold a debate on the situation in
Haiti, an issue accorded the greatest importance by
my country. I also wish to acknowledge your presence
here in New York, Sir, to preside over the debate, an
effort that, as you said in your statement, demonstrates
Argentina's support for Haiti, the same support that the
entire Latin American and Caribbean community gives
to Haiti.

I welcome the new Permanent Representative of
Haiti, Mr. Denis Regis, and extend to him our full
cooperation. I also congratulate and thank Ms. Sandra
Honore' for the report she has presented to the Council
(S/2013/493).

I would also like to associate myself with the
statement made by the representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

When we see the progress in Haiti, we note that
the country is moving along the right path, although a
lot of issues and challenges in different spheres need
to be addressed. The consolidation of the physical and
political reconstruction of the country will depend upon
institutional stability, the strengthening of the State and
the increased entrenchment of democracy in Haiti. We
therefore respectfully call on the Government and all
political institutions to guarantee the holding of partial
local and legislative elections. Haiti cannot backtrack
on its process ofpolitical and institutional stabilization.

Colombia takes this opportunity to welcome
Ambassador Sandra Honore, whose excellent
credentials make her an outstanding person for the work
being conducted in Haiti, especially at this defining
moment for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). We wish her much success in her
role and reiterate to her our full support.

Our country supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General, in particular with regard to
the extension of the Mission's mandate until October
2014. We also support the initiative for the Mission's
possible downsizing in the near future, with a focus on
a gradual and orderly transfer of responsibilities that
serves to strengthen institutions and security in Haiti.
We welcome the establishment of the joint task force
between the Government and the Mission, a mechanism
for establishing criteria and determining the best timing
and ways to transfer responsibilities.

The Government of Colombia has emphasized that
the solution of the problems in Haiti must come from
the Haitians themselves. As their friends, we must
contribute to that process. We have therefore focused
on strengthening national capacity.

My Government has supported MINUSTAH since
September 2006. We currently have a police contingent
in Haiti that includes experts in various areas, including
community policing and the fight against drugs and
transnational organized crime. On the bilateral level,
with the cooperation of the Government of the United
States, Colombia has trained 100 personnel in specific
areas such as extortion and kidnapping, sniffer dog
handlers in the detection of illicit substances, criminal
intelligence and strategic analysis and management.

The Government of Colombia, in accordance
with appeals by the Security Council to increase the
role of women in peacekeeping, is training 10 women
from the Haitian National Police as part of a year-
long programme whose curriculum includes learning
Spanish. The programme will continue to grow in order
to fulfil two objectives, namely, training staffto ensure
that the Haitian National Police can continue to assume
responsibility for the country's security and providing
better tools for confronting security challenges from a
gender perspective.

I should like to point out that, at this very moment,
the MINUSTAH Police Commissioner, Mr. Luis
Carrilho, and the Director-General of the Haitian
National Police, General Godson Orelus, are on a Visit
to Colombia's national police to gain field experience
on good practices and lessons learned from Colombia's
programme on strengthening institutions that could be
adapted for the work being done by the Haitian National
Police.

It is important to mention that Colombia is also
developing an agenda for bilateral cooperation with
Haiti that includes projects such as strengthening the
coffee production chain, which aims to establish a
sustainable and inclusive value chain that increases the
income of small producers, strengthens the cooperative
system and increases the export of good quality
coffee; developing processes for integrated solid waste
management, which began the implementation of a
solid-waste plant in the Cabaret area; contributions
towards recovery and strengthening food security and
nutrition, in response to a request by the national food
security coordinator in Haiti; strengthening Haiti's
national vocational training institute by way of our
national job training service model workshop, including
developing a cooperative initiative to strengthen the
institute; and, lastly, a community, neighbourhood and
housing recovery initiative that aims to contribute to
the organizational plan carried out by Haiti, mainly in
Port-au-Prince.

Colombia reiterates its commitment to fully
supporting Haiti and to the process of strengthening its
institutions and promoting development.

