Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania
for convening this meeting and participating in it this
morning. I congratulate Lithuania on its successful
presidency of the Council this month. I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his participation
and Mr. Christophe Deloire, Director-General of
Reporters Without Borders for his statement. I also
thank Ms. Mariane Pearl, who enriched the debate
this morning with an account of her experience and
personal suffering.

On the third of this month, we commemorated
World Press Freedom Day. This reminds us that freedom
of the press is a basic human right, as stipulated in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is also
a day to pay tribute to journalists who lost their lives
while abiding by the noble principles of this profession.
Protecting freedom of the press, freedom of expression
and access to information is not only crucial for the
protection and promotion of human rights, it is also a
basic element for maintaining peace and security and
for preventing and settling conflicts. Freedom to collect
and disseminate information is essential for enhancing
the rule of law, democracy, socialjustice, human rights,
economic development and social prosperity. Knowing
the background of issues is essential in order to deal
with and solve them. Providing a space for freedom of
opinion is basic in dealing with the roots of conflict.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians, issued in 2013 (S/2013/689),
reflects the extent of attacks on journalists. Hundreds
have been killed. Journalists also face abductions,
harassment, intimidation, arbitrary detention, rape
and murder. It is unfortunate that there is almost no
accountability for the perpetrators of such actions.
Here, we would like to refer to examples of the
suffering ofjournalists in the Middle East. Regarding
Syria, the Secretary-General states in the report, basing
himself on the report of the commission of inquiry, that
84 journalists had been killed in Syria since March
2011. Journalists continue to face murder and forced
disappearance in Syria at the hands of the barbaric
regime and terrorist groups, which have a common
aim: to silence the voices that expose crimes against
the Syrian people.

I would like to mention the heroic work of
journalists, be they Syrians or non-Syrians, in showing
us the truth ofwhat is happening in Syria. Here we speak
of those who gave their lives for this noble mission. We
also refer to media activists andjournalists behind bars
in the Syrian regime or abducted by terrorist groups.

We take note of the Secretary-General's report on
the protection of civilians and of the recommendations
it contains pertaining to the protection of journalists
in conflict situations. Furthermore, we emphasize the
need for accountability for crimes perpetrated against
journalists and the need to fight impunity. Accordingly,
we support the recommendations in the report with
regard to impunity and the safety of journalists.

We welcome the Security Council's adoption this
morning of resolution 2222 (2015), which addresses
these issues and underscores the importance that the
Council attaches to the protection of journalists. Nine
years ago, the adoption of resolution 1738 (2006) was a
milestone that all the members of the Council supported,
including Qatar during its presidency in December of
2006. In the context of protecting journalists and the
media, the State of Qatar's support of resolution 1738
(2006) has been reflected in several ways, including the
establishment of the Doha Centre for Media Freedom
in 2007. The Centre has undertaken a key role in
reinforcing freedom of the press and of expression over
the Internet.

To that end, Qatar has also hosted a number of
conferences, including the celebration of UNESCO
World Press Freedom Day in 2009, which resulted
in the Doha declaration that guarantees freedom of
expression and protection of journalists. In 2012,
Qatar hosted the International Conference to Protect
Journalists in Dangerous Situations, organized by the
Qatari National Committee for Human Rights. The
final recommendations called for the appointment of a
special rapporteur on the protection ofjournalists.

In conclusion, the obligation of States and parties
to conflicts to protectjournalists must not be obviated.
They must abide by their commitments in accordance
with international instruments, and Qatar will continue
in its commitment to the provisions of such instruments.

