Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under- Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for his briefing. Russia is deeply concerned about the deteriorating security situation in many parts of Mali in recent months. Tragic reports of deaths of military personneland civilians at the hands of jihadists demonstrate the magnitude and severity of the threats facing the country and its vulnerability to the destabilizing forces of terrorists, organized crime and extremist ideology. A central factor to normalize the situation in Mali remains the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We note that progress has been achieved in implementing some of its provisions. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process for former combatants is yielding positive results. We trust that units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism will be deployed as expeditiously as possible to the north of the country. We call on the Malian authorities to consistently strengthen the capacities of the regular armed forces and to reclaim the positions lost in Menaka and Gao. We view the inclusive national dialogue launched in the fall as a unifying platform for determining the future of the country. However, within the framework of the obligations that have been undertaken by the parties to the Algiers peace agreement, the inclusive participation of all stakeholders is of paramount importance. We note that factors such as the high levels of inter-ethnic tensions, persistent attacks by terrorists and extremists and delays in the restoration of State governance institutions in the central and northern parts of the country could significantly slow or even undermine the positive changes that have been observed. We are very concerned about the humanitarian situation. The victims of violence remain the most vulnerable groups - women, children and the elderly. We welcome the steps taken by the authorities and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to resolve intercommunal disputes and to disarm the local self- defence forces. The Libyan dimension continues to have a very negative impact on the situation in Mali and in the region as a whole. The so-called Liptako-Gourma triangle, located on the borders of Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso, where we see the juncture of the greatest challenges facing the region, has become all too familiar. We also regret to note that the "malignant tumour" of terrorism extends to other West African countries. In that regard, we support the concrete steps taken by the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel to establish the Joint Force in order to combat terrorism and organized crime, as well as the counter-terrorism operations that they are conducting. We would particularly like to note the commitment of the countries of the Economic Community of West African States to investing significant resources in overcoming the increasing security challenges. The principle of African solutions to African problems is the cornerstone for the nation-building of sovereign States on the continent. We continue to provide bilateral support to the Sahara- Sahel countries. We would like to highlight in particular the role of the United Nations Multidimensional Stabilization Mission in Mali in facilitating the settlement process. We firmly believe that the Mission needs comprehensive support, especially in an environment where it essentially has to implement its mandate on two fronts at the same time, in central and northern Mali. At the present time, we are not prepared to consider options for a significant adjustment in the scope of its operations or a drawdown. In conclusion, we would like to convey our gratitude to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for his effective leadership of MINUSMA.
