Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to start by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his briefing and
comprehensive report on the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and for
his analysis of the current situation in Afghanistan.
I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his informative
statement. I express my thanks to the Secretary-General
for the report contained in document S/2014/163. I
would like briefly to touch upon a few points regarding
the prevailing situation in Afghanistan.

First, this year Afghanistan is approaching a critical
moment in its history. The upcoming elections, the
security and political issues associated with the transfer
of power and the end of the presence of the international
forces will all culminate during the coming months.
We hope that the combined efforts of the Afghan
Government and the United Nations will lead the
process to improved durability and the strengthening
of peace, stability and security in Afghanistan and the
region.

Secondly, as a neighbouring country ofAfghanistan,
we share a critical interest in Afghanistan's security and
long-term stability and its socioeconomic development.
Afghanistan's continuing engagements with its
neighbours and regional partners in the areas of trade,
economic exchange and development projects must be
supported and strengthened. Such economic ties work
to cement stability in Afghanistan and in the region.
In that regard, our continuing bilateral cooperation
is particularly focused on security matters, counter-
narcotics efforts, development projects and economic
cooperation aimed at infrastructure areas involving
roads, railroads, energy, mining and minerals and
agriculture, among others.

Thirdly, as the drawdown of the international
military forces is on this year's agenda, there are some
security concerns involved. As indicated in the report
of the Secretary-General, the United Nations recorded
20,093 security incidents in Afghanistan in 2013 - a

14 per cent increase in casualties inflicted upon Afghan
civilians and a reversal of the decline recorded in
2012. A portion of those were caused by the military
operations of the international forces in Afghanistan.
Attacks on civilians under any pretext and by whomever
is condemnable and must be halted.

Fourthly, regarding the return of refugees, we
look forward to the full implementation of the relevant
agreements between the Government of Afghanistan
and the United Nations of 31 March 2013, aimed at
setting up a team to seek joint solutions and integrated
approaches to refugees. We urge the international
community to strengthen and expedite efforts to
create the conditions conducive for the sustainable
repatriation of refugees and their full rehabilitation and
reintegration into their homeland.

Fifthly, with respect to the counter-narcotics efforts,
we are concerned about the possible increase in opium
poppy cultivation, particularly in the north and north-
east areas of Afghanistan. We welcome the initiative
taken by the Afghan Minister of Counter Narcotics to
organize a Good Neighbourly Relations Declaration
conference in Kabul on 28 and 29 January, with the
participation of ministers or heads of counter-narcotics
institutions from China, Iran, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. We hope that, with the
strong support and commitment of international donors,
Afghan authorities and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the menace of drug cultivation and
drug trafficking, a main source of income for extremist
and terrorist groups, will be curtailed to a great extent.

Sixthly, we support UNAMA, as well as United
Nations agencies, in fulfilling their mission to provide
assistance to the peace, stability and reconstruction of
Afghanistan through a robust regional engagement on
issues such as border security, immigration, the return
of refugees and drug control measures. The role of
UNAMA should be further strengthened in the light
of the developments expected in Afghanistan this year.
The future role of the United Nations in Afghanistan
is going to grow and become more multifaceted, and
sometimes much more complicated. We therefore regret
the recent decision ofthe General Assembly to reduce its
2013 budget for UNAMA by $4.9 million. As indicated
during recent visits of Mr. Kubis to Tehran, we are, as
always, ready to support UNAMA and steadfast in our
support for the Mission and its activities.

Iwould like tojoin other speakers who congratulated
Afghanistan and the Afghan people on the occasion
of Nowruz, the day that has been recognized by the
General Assembly as the International Day of Nowruz
since 2009. I wish Afghanistan a New Year filled with
peace and prosperity.

