Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): The
Kingdom of Morocco appreciates the efforts of the
Security Council and its adoption by consensus today
of its first resolution on the crisis in the sisterly
country of Syria (resolution 2042 (2012)). The
resolution is a practical translation of the hard work
and intentions of the Security Council to further the
success of the good-faith efforts of Joint Special Envoy
Kofi Annan on behalf of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States to end the violence, achieve a
political and peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria,
and implement resolution 66/253, the declarations of
5 April 2012 and the relevant resolutions of the League
of Arab States.

Since becoming a member of the Security
Council, Morocco has worked with the other members
in all efforts to enable the Council to speak with one
voice, as that was the only way to influence events in
Syria. We have also emphasized the positive and
effective influence that all relevant parties have had on
the country. We believe that today's resolution is an
important milestone. We hope that it will be a decisive
basis for the Security Council to address the situation
in Syria.

The League of Arab States, which, since the
beginning of the crisis, has played out an effective and
constructive role in order to end the bloodshed and
12-29516
resolve the situation in Syria in a wise manner and
without resort to violence, expressed at its most recent
summit, held in Baghdad, its strong support for the
mission of Mr. Kofi Annan as it sought to achieve a
rapid and comprehensive end to all acts of violence in
Syria, while emphasizing the complete and immediate
implementation of the six-point proposal presented by
the Joint Special Envoy and accepted by all parties, so
that a political solution for the crisis in Syria could be
found and a response provided for the legitimate
aspirations of the brotherly people of Syria.

The resolution adopted by the Security Council
today is a quick response to the beginning of the
implementation of the ceasefire in Syria as of
yesterday morning. It has come into being after one
year of violence and a period of international efforts
that required swift action to call upon the Government
of Syria and the opposition to end violence in all its
forms and in a manner corresponding to their
responsibilities, for the purpose of the allowing the full
implementation of Mr. Annan's six-point proposal.

In today's resolution, the Security Council
decided to deploy an advance team to Syria. We hope
that its deployment and actual work will start as soon
as possible in order to verify the end of all acts of
violence and create appropriate conditions for the
deployment of an observer mission.

In adopting all those measures, the Security
Council has reaffirmed its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
unity of Syria, as well as to the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter. We very much hope that
our brothers in Syria, both in the Government and in
the opposition, and according to their respective
positions and responsibilities, will work with
Mr. Annan in order to enable the success of his good-
faith efforts and empower the people of Syria to heal
their wounds, unify their ranks and achieve their
legitimate aspirations to stability and dignity.

