Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express our deep appreciation to
you, Sir, for presiding over today's meeting. I thank
Ms. Ameerah Haq for her briefing and for her work as
Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). I also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste and
thank him for his briefing. I further welcome
Mrs. Crivano Machado, Vice-Minister for Political
Affairs of the Ministry of External Relations of Brazil.

The positive developments in Timor-Leste in the
areas of political stability, security and socio-economic
development have arisen as a result of the genuine
desire of all political parties within the Government
and the opposition to restore stability and prosperity to
their country. UNMIT has undoubtedly proved to be a
success story for the international community, having
contributed alongside other United Nations agencies to
the consolidation of stability, the exercise of
democracy and the building of State institutions. In that
regard, I wish to make the following four observations.

First, Lebanon reaffirms its full support for
UNMIT as it strives to complete its work before its
mandate ends in late 2012. We welcome the joint
transition plan signed by the President of Timor-Leste
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, which will guarantee the Mission's smooth
exit.

Secondly, building security institutions will be
key to consolidating sustainable security and the rule
of law. In that context, we commend the role of
UNMIT police in training and supporting the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) to assume its security
responsibilities throughout the country. We also stress
the importance of building and consolidating judicial
authority and institutions in order to ensure
accountability and prevent impunity.

Thirdly, we believe that the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for 2012 will be
milestones in the democratic progress of the
Government of Timor-Leste. We urge all political
parties to contribute constructively to the preparations
for the elections, and stress the importance that the
PNTL be prepared to maintain security and stability
during and after the electoral process.

Fourthly, we congratulate the authorities and
people of Timor-Leste on the approval of the Strategic
Development Plan for 2011-2030, aimed at the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and at raising the country to the rank of middle-income
State. We call on the younger generation of Timor-
Leste, which represents the overwhelming majority of
society, to participate actively in the process of
rebuilding and developing its country. We welcome the
effective and outstanding participation of women in the
political life and State institution-building of Timor-
Leste.

In conclusion, I thank the authorities of Timor-
Leste for the participation of their citizens in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. 1 take this
opportunity to express my gratitude to friendly
Portugal, which has provided training to those
elements to undertake their tasks.
