Mr. Beasley: It is great, Madam President, to be
with you in the digital world. It is always good to see
you, Madam, and it is great to be speaking before the
Security Council. It is good to hear from my friend
Mark Lowcock, who is doing a greatjob. I have really
come to respect him and the spirit he has in building the
teams and coalitions that are necessary to confront the
conflicts, the wars, the hunger and the other problems
that we are facing on a day-to-day basis.

When I took this role about a year ago, I visited over
36 countries, some of them multiple times, and what I
have seen is good news and bad news. What we are
reporting as of yesterday is extremely bad news, and as
Mark was saying, there is no reason that there should
ever be famine in the world today. There is actually
no reason there should be hunger in the world today,
when we have $300 trillion of available wealth. But
wars and conflicts are driving hunger in a way we have
never seen before. In fact, the hunger rate went up from
777 million people to 815 million people, as Council
members are well aware. But what is very disturbing
is that, even though we have been able to avert famine
in countries like South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and
Nigeria, particularly its north-east, we now have three
countries that are again on the brink of famine, and it is
absolutely horrific that we were in this place.

But what we have seen for the past three
years is that the number of those who are severely
hungry - those who are literally marching to the brink
of starvation - has gone from 80 million people to
108 million people, 108 million people to 124 million
people. We do not have enough money to feed full
rations to 80 million people. The moneys of the World
Food Programme are about $6 billion; we need $9 to
$10 billion just to reach the 108 million people, much
less the 124 million people. The question we have to
ask ourselves today is, what is driving this extreme
hunger rate? The answer is, as Mark clearly stipulated,
human-made conflict. I speak here on behalf of the
Rome-based agencies, understanding that we can in
fact end world hunger by 2030, but we cannot do it as
long as there is conflict.
Let me paint a couple pictures of what I see as a
worst-case scenario if we do not get ahead of the curve.
This is what I said to the security conference in Munich
just a few weeks ago, where I saw many members of the
Council in the Chamber today. When we take a country
the size of Syria, for example, with approximately
20 million people, with destabilization and conflict, we
know from our studies and surveys that for every 1 per
cent increase in hunger there is a 2 per cent increase
in migration. What is also very clear is that a Syrian,
like any other internally displaced person, will move
two, three or four times inside his or her country before
he or she will leave the country. The cost of feeding a
Syrian inside Syria, for example, is about 50 cents per
day, which is almost double the normal cost, because
the cost of war creates additional transportation and
logistics costs. By the way, because of conflict, we
incur an additional $1 billion in extra costs in terms of
just delivering food. But back to the point: 50 cents per
day for feeding a Syrian in Syria, €50 per day for the
total humanitarian support and costs, whether it is in
Switzerland or Germany or anywhere else in Europe.

As I tell my friends, if leaders today - wherever it
is in the world, but particularly in Europe - think they
had a problem with the migration issue, having been
infiltrated by a few elements from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), from a nation of 20 million
people, with ISIS moving down into the greater
Sahel region - an area of 500 million people - and
partnering with Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab and
Al-Qaida, then they should consider that we cannot
stand and continue to take the old approach to address
the issues in this arena. We have got to rethink how to
use humanitarian dollars more effectively, how to use
development dollars more effectively to address hunger
in conflict, because humanitarian aid and development
are clearly related to one another. What we are seeing,
therefore, is that we have to get ahead of the curve
and work together as a team with better collaboration
and coordination.

For example, we feed almost 80 million people on
any given day, and we are feeding millions of people
on any given day in the greater Sahel region. We know
that last year alone, out of our 80 some odd million,
more than 10 million were involved with the food-for-
asset programme. What does that mean? When you
feed 80-something million people a day, as Mark can
tell you, you learn a lot. You listen to people; they
hear things, they tell you things. They know what is
going on.
ISIS and terrorist groups want to use food as a
weapon of recruitment, a weapon of war - as Mark
was saying, a weapon of destruction. We think that the
Security Council, the United Nations in general and our
donors around the world, our Member States, should
use food as a weapon of reconstruction, a weapon of
peace, a weapon for bringing people together.

Let me just give some results in connection with
the 10 million people that we had engaged in a food-
for-asset programme. This shows what happens when
sustainability and resilience are created in areas that are
dramatically impacted for a variety of reasons - yes,
terrorism, but also climate impact. We see drought-
stricken areas in the greater Sahel region and what
happens there; not just in the greater Sahel, but in
Ethiopia, in Kenya, in Somalia and other places.

I have yet to meet a single beneficiary who did not
want to improve his or her community and life position.
They do not want support only in terms of saving lives
but also in terms of changing lives. We reforested more
than 8,000 hectares of land just last year. More than
137,000 hectares of land were rehabilitated, as well
as more than 5,000 water ponds and shallow wells.
More than 11,000 kilometres of roads were rebuilt and
repaired, as well as feeder roads for markets and access.

The point is, it is not just about feeding people, it is
giving them resilience. The mothers will explain that they
did not want to see their husbands join ISIS, Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram or Al-Shabaab. But they will tell you also
that after their little girl or their little boy had not eaten
in two weeks, the husband had no choice but to join. So
they yield because of conditions of vulnerability, where
they do not have resilience or sustainable development.
But when we carry out the programmes effectively,
sustainable development and resilience are created,
giving families opportunities - not just saving lives
but changing livelihoods and giving opportunities.
Great things happen, and this minimizes the impact of
extremist groups in these very fragile areas.

Let me just give an example. When I was speaking
just two weeks with the Minister of Agriculture - we
all understand that there is a climate impact with regard
to the greater Sahel region - I was told that the Sahara
is moving down at the rate of 1.5 kilometres per year
into the pasturelands, the greenlands, the croplands.
What does that mean? On the surface, it may not seem
that big of a deal. But the herders and the pastoralists

are having to move down 1.5 kilometres with it to have
vegetation for their cattle, their goats, their sheep, and
that means more conflict with farmers. We are seeing
that conflict continuing to destabilize the situation, and
the extremist groups are trying to take advantage of it.

I therefore plead with the Security Council to
help us first and foremost in the wars. The Council, I
believe, has a chance to do more to impact the world
than in any time period in our history, because we are
facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the history of
the United Nations. I believe that the men and women
in this Chamber, who are from various nations, may
have differences on some issues, but should not have
difference on all issues. Let us work together to end
conflict. Let us work together to make certain that we
have the access we need to provide humanitarian and
development support. Until we do so, we will never
solve world hunger, because hunger is directly related
to conflict, and conflict is directly related to hunger.

I think that Mark and I could probably answer
questions for hours upon hours and speak to this issue
from the heart all day long, but I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for allowing us this opportunity
to speak briefly and let the Council know what we
are seeing out there on any given day. The Council's
support is vital and critical to our continued success.

