The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala,
Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Portugal, Qatar,
Slovakia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan and Yemen to participate
in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth; Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author of the
progress study on youth, peace and security; Ms. Sophia
Pierre-Antoine, Member of the Advisory Council of
the World Young Women Christian Association; and
Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet, Executive Director of the
Organisation URU, Central African Republic.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Dan Neculaescu, State Secretary for Regional
Affairs and Multilateral Global Affairs in the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Romania, in his capacity as Chair
of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission; His
Excellency Mr. Christian Leffler, Deputy Secretary
General for Economic and Social Issues, European
External Action Service of the European Union; Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and His Excellency Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser,
High Representative for the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2018/86, which contains the text ofidentical
letters dated 2 March 2018 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and
the President of the Security Council.

I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document 8/2018/324, which contains the
text of a letter dated 6 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to Ms. Wickramanayake.

