Mr. Waslekar: I want to compliment the
Government of Senegal and Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye for
convening this debate on water and peace and security,
which I understand to be happening for the first time in
the history of the Security Council.

I would like to take the opportunity to address
three questions. First, why should the Security Council
address the linkage between water and peace and
security? Secondly, what can the Security Council do to
create a positive relationship between water and peace?
Thirdly, what can the United Nations system and the
international community do?
Regarding the first question, the Secretary-General
pointed out in his briefing how water can be a source
of crisis. He also pointed out how water can be a source
of cooperation. One of the greatest challenges of our
time is how to transform water from a potential source
of crisis into a potential instrument of cooperation. If
the political and intellectual capital of the world can be
applied to that question, then I am sure that we will able
to find an answer.

What are we talking about? Currently there about
2 billion people living in shared river basins in the
developing world, so the future of 2 billion people
is what this meeting hopes to address. Often we feel
that water is a local or provisional issue that can be
managed or addressed through good governance at
the local level or good transboundary cooperation at
the regional level. We are increasingly finding out that
water is also a global security issue. In the past six
years, we have seen that when the mismanagement of
water is combined with the mismanagement of climate
change and the mismanagement of politics, which has
happened in some parts of the world, it has led to the
displacement of a large number of people. Refugees
have fled from one part of the world to another, which
has had severe political consequences in different parts
of the world.

Whatever we do regarding the management of
water in combination with the management of the social
contract and political relationships in any one region
can have implications on other regions of the world.
That is what we have seen, particularly in the past three
years. If we look ahead and take into account the rate
at which humankind is depleting water resources, there
is a risk that the innate amount of fresh water could
decrease by 25 to 30 per cent in the next 20 years.
That could lead to a decline in the production of whole
grains. That means that by 2030 or 2035, some countries
that are self-sufficient today would have to enter the
international whole grains market as importers. If there
were an additional demand of 100 to 200 million tons
of whole grains, then we would certainly find that the
price of whole grains would skyrocket across the world.
Even though those importing countries would be only
in some parts of the world, their impact would be felt
by poor people across the world. Therefore, we must
recognize the global nature of the relationship between
water and peace and security.

Regarding the second question, the Strategic
Foresight Group - with which I have the privilege of
being associated - has undertaken a number of studies.
By assessing situations in 148 countries that share river
basins - more than 220 shared river basins total - we
have found that any two countries that are engaged in
active water cooperation with political support do not
go to war for any reason, whether related to water or
not. Thus, there is a direct correlation between water
cooperation and reduced risk of war, which we can see
through the water cooperation quotient. Therefore, it is
in the interest of the international community to further
examine and explore that relationship.

We have also found that there is a continuum of the
management of water relations. Water managers can
manage day-to-day relations in river basins. However,
when it comes to introducing large infrastructure
projects and addressing the question of large public
goods and priorities between water and other public
goods, such as large investments and security, then the
involvement of managers of political systems and the
managers of security establishments is very necessary.
At the routine level, water managers can manage water
relations. At a more complex level, the involvement of
national, regional and global security establishments
and the mainstream political leaders is absolutely
necessary.

Therefore, water is not just a subject relevant to
Sustainable Development Goal 6. It can also be positively
used as a tool to achieve Sustainable Development Goal
16, which is geared towards peaceful and inclusive
coexistence. Therefore, water is a subject that is very
much owned by the Security Council. I would urge the
members ofthe Security Council to consider something
unconventional and unprecedented. Considering that
the impact of the management of water is not always
confined to one region - there is always a risk that it can
have implications across the world - and considering
that there is a positive relationship between water
cooperation and comprehensive peace and security and
considering that water can make a useful contribution
Sustainable Development Goal 16, I urge the members
ofthe Security Council to apply their minds to see ifthey
can come up with an unconventional, unprecedented
way to proclaim water as a strategic asset of humanity.
The members of the Council are the best judges as to
how the Council might best achieve that. They know the
rules and procedures of the Security Council, whereas
I am an outsider.

I was touched by the briefing by Ms. Christine
Beerli of the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC). The work that ICRC staff are doing in some
conflict zones is amazing and highly commendable, but
we need to support them and we need to support similar
organizations. How can we do that? Earlier this year,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2286 (2016), on
protecting medical installations and personnel. Would
the Security Council consider adopting a follow-up
draft resolution inspired by resolution 2286 (2016),
in the same spirit, to protect water installations and
the personnel guarding them? I urge the Council to
consider that proposal.

I would also like to go further and ask Security
Council members, in particular the permanent members,
once in a while to consider negotiating a ceasefire in
protracted conflicts in order to repair and restore water
systems. Such a ceasefire could last a week, or at least
three or four days. Let me explain my logic for that
request. Many members of the United Nations system,
particularly some of the permanent members of the
Security Council, are investing huge resources and
wasting their talent and scientific minds to find water
on Mars, the moon of Jupiter or some other part of the
universe so that human civilization can continue to
exist. If we can invest human, intellectual and political
capital to find water on another planet, why can we not
find some way and some means to negotiate a ceasefire
just for a few days from time to time to protect the
water resources and water installations on this planet?
I strongly urge the members of the Security Council to
consider that proposal as well.

It is also important to explore how we can better
protect water resources. The Secretary-General and
Ms. Beerli mentioned how water resources are being
increasingly targeted. The Department of Political
Affairs has a Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. Perhaps the mandate of the Task Force can be
specifically expanded or sharpened to include the
protection of water resources from terrorist actions.
The Department of Political Affairs will be a better
judge as to how that could be done.

Finally, there is also a role for the international
community - beyond and inspired by the Security
Council - to incentivize water cooperation. We must
not only look at the protection of water infrastructure,
but also at how we can bolster preventive diplomacy and
take preventive measures to promote water cooperation.
In that regard, the role of financial incentives is very
important. The Secretary-General and the President
of the World Bank launched a very important panel
on water as a sustainable development goal. My friend
Danilo Turk is sharing a panel on water and peace and
security. The objectives of those two panels can be
linked through a very innovative measure. The world
should consider creating a blue fund exclusively to
take care of interests, insurance and other related costs
of collaborative water infrastructure - not within
countries but rather infrastructure through cooperation
between the countries. If we can do that, and if we
allocate only $1 billion annually - which can be easily
carved out from the Green Climate Fund's $100 billion
annual budget i then that $1 billion annual investment
can create $30 billion of collaborative infrastructure
worldwide. The mathematics of that idea can be
explained later.

The question, therefore, is that we have to look at
water as an instrument of cooperation. We have to bear
in mind that it is a potential source of crisis, but we
have to find a way to convert it from potential source
of crisis to potential instrument of cooperation. In
order to do that, we have to look ahead. We have to
be unconventional. We have to look at things we have
not thought of. I would urge the Council to consider all
options to help shape our future. It is a philosophical
matter of how we look at time. We often think that first
there is a past, then there is a present and then there is
a future. In reality, first there is a future. What today
is the future will become the present tomorrow, and
what is present today will become past tomorrow. In
truth, first there is a future, then there is a present and
then there is a past. If we looked at the flow of time in
that direction, we would take it upon ourselves to share
the future and, instead of looking at the past, we would
look at the future. We would look at prevention. We
would look at the next generation and, once we start
looking at the future in a creative way, I am sure that the
talent, political will and capacity worldwide will help
find solutions to our problems. The Security Council
and your presidency, Mr. President, can provide some
guidance and inspiration.

