Mr. Sumaida'ie (Iraq): I should like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to commend your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Greece, for his able
stewardship last month. I wish also to congratulate
Ambassador John Bolton on assuming his role at the
United Nations. I look forward to working closely
together with him.

I must thank the Security Council for giving me
the opportunity to speak before it again on this
occasion.

Today, the Security Council has spoken with one
voice on an issue that is at the very core of its
functions, powers and responsibility as specified in
Article 24 of the United Nations Charter, namely,
peace and security. In doing so, it is acting, as the
Article states, on behalf of all Member States - that
is, on behalf of the world.

Terrorism has emerged as one of the greatest
challenges to world peace and security. We have seen
that challenge mounted to deadly effect in Beirut, New
York, Washington, DC, Nairobi, Beslan, Madrid, Bali,
Aden, Karachi, Riyadh, New Delhi, Casablanca,
Istanbul, London, Sharm el-Sheikh and other places.
But nowhere is it as virulent and persistent as it is in
Iraq today.

Iraq is paying in blood and treasure: the blood of
its innocent citizens and the wealth it badly needs for
reconstruction and healing in a fight against this
multiheaded modern-day monster that stalks the world
and that, after Afghanistan, has nested in its land. Iraq
is bearing the burden for the world, and now the world
must stand with it. I wish to thank the Security
Council, as the guardian of world peace and security,
for taking this honourable stand.

The Iraqi people, like the people of London but
with immeasurably greater risk and hardship, are
facing down the terrorists and going ahead, as they
must, with building their lives, their new democratic
institutions and their country. They can take comfort
today in the fact that that they are far from being alone.

There are those who say that terrorism has been
unleashed in Iraq because of the occupation of Iraq;
that it would have been better not to take military
action to remove Saddam Hussein and his regime,
odious though it was; that it would have been better to
let sleeping dogs lie. That is nonsense. That is the kind
of inverted logic that appeals to those who, for reasons
of their own, do not want to see. It is the logic which
blames the doctor for the disease and the victim for the
assault.

However, I do not want to dwell on the past or go
over the arguments and counter-arguments in favour of
or against military action in Iraq - although I am quite
willing, if anyone is ready to listen, to passionately
defend the action that delivered the Iraqi people from
bondage and allowed them for the first time to express
their free will and contemplate a future with the pride
and dignity that they deserve.

We are not talking here about ordinary dissent.
The new Iraq is wide open to all its citizens and their
opinions and attitudes. We hear them expressing such
opinions freely every day, as they did in their millions
on election day in January. Lively debates are taking
place as we speak about the constitution and the future
shape of the country. All viewpoints are actively
sought and encouraged, not just welcomed - even
from those who have strong misgivings about the
current political climate in Iraq. But that is not what
terrorism is about. It is about forcing and coercing
people. It is about limiting choices and trampling
underfoot human rights, dignity and all the values that
we hold dear.

The Secretary-General was quite right when he
said, in paragraph 87 of his report "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005),

"Terrorism is a threat to all that the United
Nations stands for: respect for human rights, the
rule of law, the protection of civilians, tolerance
among peoples and nations, and the peaceful
resolution of conflict."

Faced with such a threat, what must we do? The
operative word here is "do". It is not enough to
condemn terrorism, although that is an essential first
step. We must go beyond that to understand its nature,
confront it at every level and defeat it. That is a task
that is easier said than done, we know, but it must be
done, because there is no acceptable alternative.

The relevant questions now are: what is
terrorism? What lies at the roots of terrorism? What do
terrorists want? Do they offer an alternative that can be
considered? And can anything be done - or undone -
to assuage their vindictiveness and violence?

I know that a comprehensive definition of
terrorism has eluded this Organization so far. Some
tend to confuse struggles for self-determination with
terrorism and to blur the borders between them. Yet we
know that no struggle for independence and self-
determination targets its own people, its own water and
electricity supply systems, its own hospitals, its oil
pipelines, the humanitarian aid workers who are
risking their lives to help their people, neutral United
Nations personnel, foreign diplomats, children, barbers
for shaving beards, women for not covering their
heads, contractors and engineers repairing schools and
bridges, and restaurant-goers for simply being out with
their families for a meal. It should not be so hard to
define terrorism, at least its core segment. A
determined effort to agree on such a definition should
be made.

At a fundamental level, terrorists are people who
want to change the world and believe that Violence
against civilians - and sometimes against
themselves - is the most effective way to do so. We
must resolutely and collectively reject any notion that
legitimizes such violence, no matter in what direction
they seek to change the world. Because if we accept
any such notion, there can be no peace or security
anywhere.

In the case of Iraq, terrorists and their apologists
often declare that they are seeking to remove the
foreign forces from its territories. Yet everything they
do leads exactly in the opposite direction. They
continue, through their actions, to provide the main
justification for the prolonged presence of foreign
forces.

Terrorism has its own structures: a superficially
attractive ideology, financial support, recruits, lines of
communication, lines of supply, safe houses, means of
intimidation and coercion, disinformation, propaganda,
apologists and individual, institutional and State allies
who see themselves benefiting from their activities. It
tends to grow like bacteria in a suitable environment
and entails a combination of ignorance, a hopelessly
skewed world view, a sense of grievance and a culture
of violence, criminality and death.

More resources must be allocated for the study
and analysis of terrorism, and in particular the
phenomenon of suicide bombers. These are being
produced in unprecedented numbers. We must get at
the sources of their proliferation, the structure that
supports them, and dismantle it systematically. We
must also take practical steps to prevent any media
from promoting or glamorizing terrorists. This effort is
clearly bigger than any single country can undertake
and requires international cooperation; hence the
importance of this resolution.

Coming back to my country, there is hardly a
family in Baghdad which has not been affected directly
or indirectly by acts of terrorism. On a personal level, I
have lost several dear friends, including my colleagues,
members of the Governing Council, Aqila Al-Hashimi,
who participated in the work of the Security Council in
2003; Izzuddin Saleem, who was Chairman of the
Governing Council at the time; women's rights activist
Amal Ma'malchi; and Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs Bassam Kubbah. Those and others - all fine
individuals - were patriots serving their people and
their country. In each case two thoughts passed through
my mind as I struggled with the agony of loss: there
but for the grace of God go I; and, no matter what, we
must not give in to the murderers. We must not
weaken.

We shall not weaken. With your collective help,
we shall beat these merchants of death and destruction
and build a country to be proud of.

