Mr. Oshima: I wish to thank the Security
Council for providing me with this opportunity and in
particular to thank you, Mr. President, for having taken
the initiative to convene a meeting on the humanitarian
situation in Angola.

While the world's attention has been focused on
the situation in Afghanistan, other emergencies, such as
the protracted one in Angola, are badly in need of our
attention. Under-Secretary-General Gambari, as the
Council will recall, touched upon the disheartening
humanitarian conditions in Angola in December, when
he briefed the Council following his mission there.
Sadly, not much has changed since then. Today I hope
to give the Council a full account of the humanitarian
situation, and I am also pleased to inform the Council
that the Humanitarian Coordinator for Angola,
Mr. Erick de Mul, is also present and is available to
answer questions.

First, let me begin with an update on the
humanitarian conditions in Angola, which remain
among the worst in the world. The statistics for the
country are truly shocking. Angola ranks one hundred
and forty-sixth in the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) human development index, out of
162 countries. Life expectancy is 44 years, and 63 per
cent of all households live below the poverty line.

The status of children is catastrophic. Thirty per
cent of all children die before reaching the age of 5. An
estimated 100,000 children have been separated from
their families, and evidence indicates that child soldiers
are once again being forced to fight in the country's
ruinous civil war. In addition, new cases of polio have
been confirmed in eastern Angola.

The Angolan war has also created one of the
largest displaced populations in the world. Since 1999,
the total number of displaced persons has doubled,
from 2 million to over 4 million now. This means that
almost one third of the country's entire population of
12 million is displaced.

Despite being weakened by the sanctions imposed
by the Council, UNITA continues to destabilize large
parts of the countryside and to disrupt normal
economic and social activities in all areas, except
Luanda and certain coastal and western zones. Over the
last two years, UNITA has shifted to guerrilla warfare,
with random attacks on the civilian population and key
infrastructure.

The primary victims are civilians, who
increasingly are finding themselves caught up in the
middle of UNITA attacks and the Government's
counter-insurgency strategy. The net result has been a
rapid increase in displacement and human deprivation.

The map now on the screen shows the areas of the
country where displaced populations are concentrated.
Insecurity and military action have forced populations
to flee from rural areas into mainly provincial capitals.
As the map indicates, all of Angola's 18 provinces
have internally displaced persons.

In a worrisome trend, the past six months have
seen an increase in the number of security incidents
affecting humanitarian personnel and assets. Since
July, more than 40 separate incidents involving
harassment by security forces or looting of
humanitarian assets have occurred.

Almost all humanitarian agencies in the country
are working at full capacity. In some locations,
agencies are overwhelmed by the emergency needs of
the internally displaced persons, with neither the means
nor the personnel to meet them. In Kuito and
Camacupa, more than 62,000 displaced persons have
poured into the area during the last five months. An
additional 12,000 entered during the first two weeks of
January alone. There is almost no space to
accommodate these people, and resources have run out.

Despite the difficult situation, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations have
been striving to meet the humanitarian needs of
displaced and other vulnerable people. The
humanitarian operation in Angola is one of the largest
in the world; it includes more than 400 national and
international non-governmental organizations.
Approximately 1 million Angolans receive food aid.
An even larger number receive health care and benefits
from programmes in the areas of water and sanitation,
nutritional support, education and mine action. Despite
the magnitude of this assistance, only a fraction of the
overall needs of the country are being met.

As the map on the screen indicates, humanitarian
agencies operate in about 60 per cent of the 272
locations where internally displaced persons are
concentrated.

Humanitarian coverage is limited by a number of
factors, including insecurity, mine infestation, poor
infrastructure, lack of capacity and lack of funding.
The map now on the screen shows the areas where
international agencies have unrestricted access. As
members can clearly see, most of the country's interior
is too insecure for agencies to launch operations.

Amid all these problems and difficulties, it is
heartening to note that the Government of Angola has
taken several positive steps in recent years to increase
its involvement in the provision of humanitarian
assistance, and this must be noted. For example, the
Government has allocated more than $50 million to the
national emergency programme and has created a Fund
for Peace and Reconciliation during the past two years.
Working closely with the United Nations, Angolan
authorities have helped close more than 35 transit
centres where people were living in inhumane
conditions.

I am also pleased to note that Angola is the
leading country in incorporating the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement developed by Mr. Francis
Deng, the Representative of the Secretary-General on
Internally Displaced Persons, into its national legal
framework. These Guiding Principles became an
important basis for establishing minimum standards for
the resettlement of internally displaced persons,
developed by the Government in cooperation with
United Nations agencies.

Another positive development in the Angola
operation is the increasing cooperation between the
Government of Angola and the humanitarian
community. A protection strategy for internally
displaced persons was recently developed and is being
implemented in partnership with the Government. This
has resulted in a number of important achievements,
including joint monitoring of violations by the
Government and the United Nations. In addition to
this, the 2002 United Nations Consolidated Appeal for
assistance was developed, for the first time, jointly by
the Government and the humanitarian community. It
includes an innovative rights-based humanitarian
strategy that is based on core principles in the Angolan
Constitution. The Government has shown its
commitment to this strategy by setting out 40 "point
partnership targets" that it intends to meet this year.

While these positive achievements by the
Government should be acknowledged, it is clear that
much more needs to be done, and quickly, for that
matter. This must also be noted and emphasized. For
example, one of the major constraints to delivering
humanitarian aid is the appalling state of the country's
infrastructure. Four of the airstrips used by
humanitarian agencies are currently under repair,
limiting the number of humanitarian flights, and in
some cases putting humanitarian personnel at risk.
Repairs on the Kuito airstrip, located in one of the
hardest-hit areas in the country, have been delayed for
more than 22 months. Damaged bridges also severely
limit the use of surface routes. The combination of
widespread insecurity and damaged infrastructure
forces the World Food Programme, which manages the
logistics network in the country, to deliver up to 60 per
cent of all humanitarian assistance by air. This is one of
the reasons why the Angolan humanitarian operation is
one of the most expensive in the world, after
Afghanistan.

In addition to urgently repairing infrastructure
such as the Kuito airstrip, there are a number of steps
that the Government must take to assume greater
responsibility for helping to alleviate the suffering of
its own people. These include securing surface routes,
which would lower the cost of delivering humanitarian
assistance; establishing days of tranquillity in order to
allow access for polio and other immunization and for
the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance;
implementing partnership targets agreed to in the 2002
consolidated appeal, including the closure of the
remaining 13 transit centres; ceasing all forms of
harassment; and increasing Government funding for
humanitarian programmes. Most importantly, both
parties to the conflict must desist from using military
strategies that directly affect civilians and ensure that
humanitarian agencies have unhindered and continuous
access to all affected populations.

The war is the root cause of the humanitarian
crisis in Angola. We are working closely with the
office of Under-Secretary-General Gambari to seek
additional means of supporting the Government in its
efforts to find a solution to the crisis. In this respect, as
part of our United Nations plan for action on Angola,
in the coming weeks I will dispatch my Assistant
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Ross Mountain, to
Angola to prepare the way for my own visit later this
spring. During my visit, I intend to take up priority
issues with the Government, including, most
importantly, the implementation of the agreed goals
and strategies that the Government committed itself to
in 2001.

Another action I would like to mention in this
regard is, as members of the Council may be aware, the
recent establishment of a unit on internal displacement
within the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. I have asked this unit, which is dedicated to
strengthening the international response to internal
displacement, to address Angola as one of its top
priorities this year.

I have already mentioned that there has been a
rapid increase in internally displaced persons. Last
year, the number of internally displaced persons was
five times higher than anticipated. Despite this increase
in humanitarian needs, only 47 per cent of the
$233 million requested in last year's Consolidated
Inter-Agency Appeal was received. While
acknowledging the need for the Angolan Government
to be encouraged to implement the agreed goals and
strategies, I would also like to urge Member States to
remember Angola, and urge even more strongly that
they give generously and immediately to the 2002
Appeal. I would like to seek the support of the Council
to this end - to give generously, and to give now.

Ultimately, the solution to the humanitarian crisis
in Angola is the end of the war. We know that there
have been some positive developments on the political
front. The window of opportunity that currently
presents itself is of great importance, and every effort
must be made to arrive at a durable and just solution.
We look to the Security Council in particular for
innovative and courageous solutions to end the war,
and it is my sincere and strong hope that every possible
channel is being explored in order to assist the
Angolans in achieving peace. Only then will the tragic
and protracted humanitarian situation in Angola begin
to dissipate.

