Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me at the outset to welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner,
President of the friendly Argentine Republic, and to
congratulate her on her country's assumption of the
presidency of the Council during the month of August.
I would also like to express our appreciation of the
initiative taken by Argentina to convene this important
debate.

The Charter of the United Nations has established
a legal framework for cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Some of
those organizations have proven the important role
that they can play in many fields in the interests of
Member States, notably in the areas of mediation and
the prevention and peaceful settlement of conflicts,
in addition to defending the interests of the Member
States and promoting cooperation among them. The
complementarity of the efforts of the United Nations
and regional organizations on common issues, the
foremost of which is the preservation of international
peace and security, adds value to theirjoint work.

Success in those endeavours requires, however,
that those efforts be consistent with international
law, the objectives and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations and related propositions. That leads
us to consider what has been mentioned with regard
to the role of the League of Arab States as a regional
organization that assists in promoting and preserving
regional peace and security and in settling issues in the
Arab region, such as the situation in my country today.

As the Council is aware, the Syrian Arab Republic
is an original founder of the League of Arab States and
has played a pivotal role in the history of the cooperative
work among Arab States. It has defended the interests
of Arab Member States and has been committed to
the Joint Defence and Economic Cooperation Treaty
between the States of the Arab League. In spite of all
that, it has also been subject to pressures and aggression
that have cast a dark shadow on the life of the Syrian
people and the country's prosperity.

Syria deeply believes in its Arab roots and nature,
and welcomed the engagement of the League of Arab
States in settling the Syrian crisis, thinking that it
would play a positive role in exposing the facts of the
situation and in assisting to put a halt to violence and
in supporting the national dialogue launched by the
Syrian Government for the settlement of the crisis. In
that regard, the Syrian Government has cooperated with
the Secretary General of the League of Arab States and
has remained committed to the implementation of the
action plan agreed to by both sides. At the same time,
the Syrian Arab Republic has opened its doors to Arab
observers.

However, Arab States, in particular Qatar and

Saudi Arabia, have taken advantage of the unstable
situations in some of the States in the region to hijack
the decision-making in the League of Arab States
and to impose the will of other countries, sometimes
through threats and at other times through bribes. They
have worked at making the League of Arab States
implement or push for external agendas that are not in
the interesta of the Arab region or its people. Instead of
working for the good of all, the League of Arab States
has fallen victim to the hegemony of the petrodollar and
cooperated in committing aggression.

The deviation began when the secretariat of the
League of Arab States aborted the mission of the
Arab observers and obfuscated its results before the
Security Council early in the situation that has afflicted
my country. The mission had made it clear from the
beginning that armed groups were committing acts of
terrorism and aggression in various parts of Syria and
serving external agendas that threatened the peace,
security and stability of the country. It went even
further when it issued a number of illegal decisions
that were aimed not only at manipulating the role of
regional organizations and shirking the responsibility
of the League but also at internationalizing the Syrian
crisis and calling for external interference in its
internal affairs. The last of those decisions provided
for cooperation with one of the external opposition
parties that is financed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia
and, without any right whatsoever, recognized it as the
representative of the Syrian people in clear Violation
of its own Charter, the basics of international law and
Arab and international relations.

It went still further when those two countries,
despite the objections of another Arab country, exerted
pressure to adopt a decision that permits Arab States
Willing to do so to provide weapons to the Syrian
opposition and armed terrorist groups that are also
sponsored by the Turkish Government, which funds and
arms them and assists them in crossing the border. This
clearly undermined the mission of the United Nations
Special Envoy, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and constituted
a clear admission on the part of some States that they
stood on the side of the terrorists in their aggression
against Syria, its people, State and institutions, in
violation of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
which provided for a political settlement of the crisis
in Syria.

That decision also obviated the efforts made
by the Geneva Conference, in clear violation of the
commitments undertaken by Arab States members
of the League of Arab States and of the basics of
international law, the aims and objectives of the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly Article 2 on the
sovereignty of States, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, the peaceful settlement of conflicts
and the non-use of force. That League of Arab States
decision also encroached upon the Security Council's
role in maintaining international peace and security
under Article 24 of the Charter, and its exclusive power
under Article 53 to authorize regional organizations to
undertake enforcement actions.

All those decisions have only fanned the flames
of the Syrian crisis and hindered all efforts to find a
political solution thereto. They have harmed the Syrian
State and the Syrian people, and supported the terrorism
that all countries of the world have pledged to combat.

We call on the League of Arab States to be part
of the peaceful political solution, not a part of the
problems of the region and the crisis therein, in service
of agendas that are not in the interests of the Arab
peoples and that promote the so-called phenomenon of
the Arab Spring, which is more like a harsh winter that
has overshadowed the peace, stability and security of
the Arab people.

We call upon the League of Arab States to liberate
itself from the hegemony of the petrodollar and return
to the tenets of reason and respect for international law
and respect for its Charter and its rules ofprocedure, and
to refrain from using terminology that has been used by
others to undermine the sovereignty of Arab States and
their territorial integrity. We call on the Arab League
to work in the interests of Arab causes, foremost of
which is putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the
occupied Arab territories.

