Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Alain Le
Roy for his introduction of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/470), and we are grateful for the
analysis and recommendations it contains. We also
appreciate the presence of Under-Secretary-General
Susana Malcorra and thank Mr. Tete Antonio for his
message from the Permanent Observer Mission of the
African Union to the United Nations. We also very
much regret that no member of Mr. Prodi's delegation
has taken the trouble to remain in the Chamber to hear
the Council's debate.

Pursuant to Chapter VIII, Article 52, of the
United Nations Charter, the Security Council has
repeatedly reaffirmed the importance of building
African Union capacities in the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa in coordination and cooperation
with the United Nations. However, it is clear that the
international community should work together to
improve the situation and capacity of the African
Union, in order to create a true bridge of international
and regional cooperation and communication aimed at
optimizing collective attention to the challenges faced
by the African continent, in the light of the
proliferation of conflicts on the agenda and the fact
these constitute a good part of that agenda.

My delegation believes that to strengthen
peacebuilding and peacekeeping in Africa, four main
profoundly interrelated areas must be addressed
simultaneously: conflict resolution, which means
establishing peace; economic development and the
building of institutions; respect for human rights; and
conflict prevention, based on attention to and
eradication of the causes of conflict. None of these
tasks may substitute for the other. In many cases, the
challenge posed by the magnitude of the task lies in
addressing these four enormous tasks simultaneously.

We praise the resolve of the United Nations in
moving forward in those areas, and we recognize the
stated willingness of the African Union to rapidly
deploy mediation and peacekeeping missions, with the
support of subregional organizations, in order to
prevent the escalation of conflict. However, we also
recognize that material and logistical limitations of the
African Union have reduced the scope of these
objectives.

It is essential - and we must be honest on this
point - to promote greater coherence within the
Security Council in order to achieve greater
coordination when joint decisions are taken by the
African Union Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat. In that regard, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that relations
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council be
strengthened in the areas of mediation and
peacekeeping. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
in the context of the May 2009 Security Council trip to
Africa, representatives of both bodies made a
commitment to us that they would carry out
consultations on ways and means for strengthening
cooperation and partnership.

It is obvious that much remains to be done along
those lines. Clearly this relationship will lead to greater
understanding and clear and comprehensive approaches
in specific situations such as the crises in Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan.
Should this not occur, there is a risk that we will not
achieve better coordination and will be left with only
our good intentions.

We also welcome the recommendations for the
establishment of a structured mechanism for
consultations and information exchange on matters of
mutual interest to both bodies to examine current and
long-term strategic and operational matters. This would
also assist the implementation of the 2006 Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme as a general framework
for United Nations support for the African Union in the
area of international peace and security.

Further, my delegation awaits the proposal to be
submitted by the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly on restructuring United Nations support to
the African Union in the area of peace and security on
the ground, including further measures aimed at
bringing greater integration and streamlining of the
Secretariat presence in Addis Ababa.

Mexico agrees with the African Union-United
Nations panel chaired by Romano Prodi that the
success of any peacekeeping operation requires not
only a clear mandate but also the support and resources
needed for the fulfilment of the mandate. For that
reason, we understand that predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing mechanisms are a priority
requirement. In that regard, we recognize the efforts of
the Secretary-General to propose possible financing
options for African Union-led and United Nations-
endorsed peacekeeping operations for a period of six
months and based on concrete cases.

We believe it is relevant to analyse in depth the
five proposed financing mechanisms based on the
efficacy and experience of the African Union Mission
in Somalia, the African Union Mission in Sudan and
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. We should also consider the report that the
African Union will submit on identifying capacity-
building priorities for peacekeeping logistics,
administration and management, which would serve as
the framework for guiding assistance programmes and
financing mechanisms.

We welcome the progress made in recent years in
strengthening the role of the African Union and the
continent's subregional organizations in the
maintenance of peace and security. We also welcome
the implementation of strategies for prevention, early
warning, conflict resolution and mediation. In this
regard, we deeply appreciate the efforts of African
countries that provide contingents for peacekeeping
operations in and outside of the region, including on
other continents.

Lastly, we support the draft presidential statement
prepared by the delegation of Uganda that will be
adopted as the outcome of today's debate. We agree
that a peacekeeping operation is part of a political
solution, but not a substitute for such a solution.
Parallel actions must be undertaken to strengthen and
support preventive diplomacy, early warning,
mediation and conflict resolution. We must focus on
those areas if we are to attain peace and security in
Africa.

