Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate and for bringing to
our attention, together with Angola and Senegal, the
important topic of piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf Guinea. I also thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Zerihoun, for his
briefing. We share his concerns, as well as those set out
in the concept note (S/2016/321, annex) circulated by
the Chinese presidency.

Today's open debate provides us with an opportunity
to re-examine our past efforts to combat piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea within the context of the current
dynamics and threat of terror groups operating in the
region. It should enable us to strengthen our resolve
and to step up measures in our fight against organized
crime and terror groups that find in piracy on the high
seas a lucrative source of income with which to fund
their terror network of criminal activities.

As a whole, piracy remains a major concern due
to its disruptive impact on trade. Given their regional
network, organized crime and terror groups pose a
challenge that affects the security and economies of
countries in the region. Piracy creates regional maritime
insecurity that affects the livelihoods of the peoples in
the region. Hence, combating piracy will require better
coordination, a well-calibrated regional and national
strategy and international support. It will also require
the sharing of intelligence on terror networks operating
on land, as well as efforts to cripple their operations on
the high seas.

In today's debate, Malaysia will focus on the need
for a comprehensive integrated approach to maritime
security and the importance of enhanced coordination
among the affected States and regional organizations.
Malaysia fully supports the region-led maritime security
initiative outlined in the concept note, and encourages
the international community to actively support the
initiative. As such, we welcome the various efforts
made by the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the African Union, the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the States concerned to combat piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea and to strengthen their maritime security and
cooperation. Any regional cooperation, however, should
not impinge upon the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the States concerned, nor jeopardize their
national security. We fully support the sovereign rights
of those States to determine the best means to exploit
natural resources in their economic zones, including
fisheries, in accordance with international law.

We wishto emphasizethe importance ofapproaching
this issue in a holistic manner, focusing simultaneously
on security, the rule of law and development. In our
view, working collectively and ensuring a balanced
and coherent strategy that addresses not only the root
causes but also the symptoms of piracy and armed
robbery is fundamental to address the issue in the long
term. Lessons learned and best practices on maritime
security and combating piracy and criminal activities
at sea should be encouraged and regularly shared by
the regional organizations and the affected States with
a view to achieving the needed maritime security and
addressing constraints in resources and assets. In that
regard, we look forward to the holding of the African
Union extraordinary summit on maritime security and
safety and development in Africa in late 2016.

It is our View that, through the IMO, the United

Nations plays an important coordinating role and should
continue, and intensify, its engagement when requested
to assist the States and organizations of the region to
act and mobilize international support. Studies have
shown that piracy and armed robbery at sea are among
the criminal indicators of economic constraints. In
that regard, we believe that, in developing regional
cooperation on maritime security, it is crucial to
incorporate funding and support for homegrown
solutions such as socioeconomic programming,
the rebuilding of infrastructure and the creation of
employment opportunities, especially for youth.

Sharing Malaysia's own experience, it has stepped
up measures in line with its responsibility of ensuring
that its maritime zones, including the Strait ofMalacca,
are safe and secure for navigation. As the shortest
sea route connecting the dynamic economies of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and East Asia
region with the West, any form of disruption, including
piracy and armed robbery of shipping traffic in the Strait,
would have huge consequences on the global trade and
economy, as well as on the socioeconomic well-being of
the States concerned. In additionto physical presence and
electronic monitoring capabilities, Malaysia, together
with the States concerned, constantly undertakes
coordinated patrols in the Strait of Malacca. Malaysia,
Indonesia and Singapore launched coordinated patrols
in the Malacca Strait in 2004. With the implementation
of those patrols, comprehensive arrangements for
maritime security in the Strait of Malacca has been
achieved. All of those efforts, either unilaterally or in
cooperation with the other States concerned, contribute
to the overall improvement of the maritime security
situation in the Strait of Malacca.

Those successful efforts have been acknowledged
by reports worldwide, in particular the weekly piracy
report of the International Maritime Bureau, and annual
reports. The declassification of the Strait as a high-risk
zone by the Joint War Committee of Lloyd's Market
Association in August 2006 was another example of the
fruitful outcome of the collective efforts by Malaysia
and the other States concerned to ensure that the
security of maritime navigation in the Strait of Malacca
is successfully safeguarded.

Given that over 90 per cent of the imports and
exports of African States are conducted by sea, there
can be no doubt of the crucial need to ensure a safe
and secure maritime environment for the sustainable
development of the African States concerned. To that
end, presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, which we
have just adopted today, serves as another manifestation
of the Council's continued support in the fight against
the threat of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea.

For its part, Malaysia stands ready to assist in
sharing its experiences with the affected States to the
best of its ability.

