Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me begin by expressing my delegation's appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for your initiative in organizing
this open plenary debate on a most important issue.
The delegation of Egypt has prepared a non-paper on
the comprehensive concept of peacekeeping
operations, which will be circulated to all Council
members. In my statement before the Council, I shall
therefore confine myself to highlighting its major
points.

First, the concept of peacekeeping incorporates
temporary and transitional arrangements that should
not obscure the general, more comprehensive role of
the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security. That includes components of preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-building that are
based on the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations and within the overall framework of
the two concepts of international multilateralism and
international legality. Therefore, the proper approach to
peacekeeping operations should exceed the operational
aspects in terms of the planning, mandating,
deployment, conduct, termination and downsizing of
peacekeeping operations. All of those issues were
discussed at length and in depth by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at its most
recent session, last April.

Secondly, the experience of the past decade has
demonstrated that the partial examination of armed
conflict and multi-tiered complex crises from security
and political perspectives has failed to achieve lasting
solutions or enduring peace. Despite the fact that the
Brahimi report has underlined the need to pursue an
integrated approach to settling disputes and crises, the
practical response to that trend, in our view, is related
to reconsideration of the institutional framework and
legislative mandates that regulate the relationship
among all major organs of the United Nations system
on the basis of their respective terms of reference, as
contained in the Charter.

It is a well-established fact that the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Secretariat and concerned States that have special
interests politically and operationally related to
conflict, as well as regional and subregional
organizations and the community of international
donors, all have a major role in developing a more
comprehensive vision for dealing with the root causes
of complex and multidimensional conflicts and for the
means of their settlement. In that regard, we call for
the development of balanced institutional coordination
between the components and the mechanisms of the
international community that deal with the legislative
and operational aspects of peacekeeping operations.

In Egypt's view, the capability and the efficiency
of the United Nations in undertaking an effective role
in maintaining international peace and security is
closely linked to interaction between those components
and mechanisms and to their ability to clearly set their
respective responsibilities according to the nature and
the requirements of a given situation and of a given
conflict.

Thirdly, we believe that it is difficult to ensure
success of the operational aspect of peacekeeping
operations separate from an integrated institutional and
legislative vision that would define the parameters of
conflicts and their causes and would enable
peacekeeping operations mandates to be established on
the basis of actual and practical needs, in order to
achieve comprehensive peace and security that
encompasses the political, security, social and
economic components. Therefore, what determines the
concept of rapid deployment and effective forces and
their requirements in terms of financial, human and
logistics needs depends on the objective vision of the
ultimate goal of a peacekeeping operation.

While we place on record our appreciation for the
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
in support of other departments of the Secretariat, I
wish to stress that the dividends of the efforts and the
human, logistic and financial contributions still fall
below our expectations, as measured against the
aforementioned institutional, legislative and political
benchmarks.

The topic of today's debate is closely related to
the overall question of the reform of the multilateral
international order. That is why we underscore the
importance of reviewing the institutional and the
legislative frameworks that define the role of the
United Nations and its ability to fulfil its mission of
maintaining international peace and security and to
deal with current and future threats. All that is
undoubtedly at the core of the reform exercise.

