Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to wish you every success in discharging the task with
which you have been entrusted. We have every
confidence in your ability to fulfil your responsibilities.
I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of sisterly Syria, Ambassador Mikhail
Wehbe, for his distinguished efforts as President of the
Council during the month of June.

(spoke in English)

In the Holocaust Museum in Washington, DC,
there exist images and artefacts of a time, falling well
within the lifespan of many around this table, when the
breadth of human brutality found its full expression, a
time which showed shamefully just how primordial we
human beings still are. Almost 50 years later, the
genocide in Rwanda was searing further proof of the
resilience of this lamentable fact - a genocide
inflicted by machete and carried out virtually without
interruption over the course of several weeks, in spite
of the existence of the Security Council, its
membership and all the potential political and military
power which exists therein.

If we are ever to change all of this, to offer some
sort of permanent juridical deterrent to the most vile
criminals of the future, the only discussion we should
be having now - one week after the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has entered into
force - is on how best we can assist the Court. For the
Security Council to contemplate anything else,
anything which falls short of that, is to offer comfort to
the criminals of tomorrow. And should the Council
consider again the adoption of a draft resolution on the
ICC falling under chapter VII, it will edge itself toward
acting ultra vires - that is, beyond its authority under
the Charter. After all, how could it adopt a chapter VII
resolution on the Court when the latter cannot by any
stretch of the imagination be considered a threat to
international peace and security?

We have heard the arguments put forward by our
friend and colleague Ambassador John Negroponte,
and the point is taken. The United States enjoys a
uniqueness, a primacy, in world affairs today,
demonstrated in part by the significant contribution it
makes to global peacekeeping efforts, leaving it
vulnerable therefore to the possibility of politically
motivated charges being levelled at it by different
actors in the field.

We join others in believing that the existing
safeguards in the Rome Statute are sufficient in
reducing to an absolute minimum the likelihood the
Court will take up a dubious charge. Having heard the
concerns of the United States, we will strive together
with all States parties to ensure, through the Assembly
of States Parties, that the Court will discharge its duties
fairly and effectively, and unencumbered by political
considerations.

We are opposed, however, to any course of action
by the Security Council the effect of which would be
not only to undermine the Court, but to also deliver a
crippling blow to the manner by which the
international community negotiates multilateral treaties
in the future. Moreover, it is almost inconceivable,
given the obligations conferred upon it by Article 24 of
the Charter, that the Council could ponder putting at
risk the lives, potentially, of millions of people by
placing existing peacekeeping operations in jeopardy
because of differences of opinion over the International
Criminal Court.

The all too many memorials scattered around the
globe from Bosnia and Herzegovina to Phnom Penh,
commemorating the victims of mass murder, as well as
the images that reside in the Holocaust Museum in
Washington, DC, impel us to support the International
Criminal Court in this way, above and beyond all other
considerations. It would surprise no one here today
were we to note that more innocent people have lost
their lives violently by way of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity over the last century, than
in all previous centuries combined stretching back two
millennia. Not supporting the Court will not so much
be a matter of our failing future generations - in the
same way former generations failed the victims of
yesteryear - but of whether, by the end of this century,
there will be any generations left to fail.

