Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to express very special thanks to
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Lord Ashdown, and to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH),
Mr. Klein, for their briefings and for the outstanding
role that they have played in achieving the successes
that they have reported, which have placed Bosnia and
Herzegovina on the path to stable and lasting peace.
That is my Government's expectation.

We note with caution the results of the recent
elections.

My country is not in a position, nor does it
believe it wise, to make a judgement about the results
of the recently held elections. However, we would like
to appeal to the political parties that prevailed in the
elections held on 5 October that in assuming the
responsibilities to which they have been elected they
also shoulder the responsibilities entered into in that
political process, particularly those contained in the
Dayton Agreement. Doing so will guarantee the
existence of a multi-ethnic State, thereby no doubt
making it possible to establish and strengthen stability
in that part of the world.

My delegation has listened with great interest and
care to the High Representative's explanation of the
priority programme for justice and jobs that is being
implemented in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard,
we agree with those around the Council table who have
expressed the View that clarity and working priorities are
what render discernible the road to implementation. As
we understand them, those priorities are to establish the
rule of law, create jobs and bring about short-term
improvements in social and economic conditions. We
also believe that to achieve those goals there is also a
need to undertake a set of very thorough reforms to
define institutional life in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
line with the goals set forth here.

My delegation finds it particularly interesting to
take note of the role that must now be played by the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. In that connection, we would like to
emphasize how important it is for the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, at the national level as well
as in the various entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
extend their honest and resolute cooperation to the
Tribunal. The establishment of justice and the rule of
law depends largely on that cooperation. Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Court will therefore play an essential
role as the national institution responsible for trying the
cases referred to it by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

My delegation is also pleased to note that, as the
report of the High Representative points out, there was a
very large increase in the number of refugees returning
to Bosnia and Herzegovina in the year 2000. Given that,
as that report also indicates, the problem of refugees and
internally displaced persons has importance for both
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region as a whole, we
believe it is crucial for neighbouring Governments to
adopt legislative measures and take practical steps to
facilitate the return of refugees currently taking refuge in
Bosnia to their places of origin. In this regard, we would
like to know the status of regional understandings with
regard to ensuring that this process takes place in as
orderly and, insofar as it is desirable and attainable, as
expeditious a manner as possible.

With regard to the situation in the region, Mexico
believes that the holding, on 15 July 2002, of the
Sarajevo summit between the heads of State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Yugoslavia marked the
culmination of an effort begun in 2000. That effort has
produced discernible progress in normalizing relations
between the three countries. We view the continuation
and strengthening of that spirit of regional cooperation
as a priority of the work of the United Nations in the
region.

Finally, I would like to emphasize how important
it is for the United Nations, the Office of the High
Representative and the European Union to work in a
very coordinated manner during the last phase of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in order to ensure a smooth
transition and to guarantee that the functions currently
being carried out by UNMIBH are properly taken over
by the European Union on 1 January 2003.

