Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation believes that the
problem of the humanitarian crisis in Iraq cannot be
resolved as long as the sanctions regime remains in force.
Russia firmly supports the lifting of the sanctions in
connection with the establishment of a new monitoring
mechanism in Iraq, pursuant to the recommendations of
Ambassador Amorim's panel. We are determined to
continue to work towards that end.

With regard to the humanitarian programme, the
steps being taken within its framework are barely
sufficient to ensure the physical survival of the
population. The delivery of spare parts for the
rehabilitation of Iraq's oil infrastructure is proceeding
very slowly. The problem of moving funds from the 13
per cent to the 53 per cent Iraqi account has not been
resolved within the context of the joint procurement
calculation, and there is also an urgent need to review the
percentage of funds being moved to the compensation
fund.

We are aware of all of the flaws of the United
Nations humanitarian operation, However, we are
agreeing to extend it only because, in these circumstances,
it offers some hope of easing, to some extent, the
sufferings of the Iraqi people.

Against the backdrop of the humanitarian crisis, we
condemn in particular the continuing aerial bombing of
Iraq civilian and military facilities by the United States
and the United Kingdom under the illegal pretext of the
no-fly zones, which were created unilaterally, in
circumvention of the Security Council. As a result of this
illegal use of force, innocent people are dying. The

 

civilian population is suffering, and the oil and industrial
infrastructure of Iraq has been damaged.
We are particularly concerned at reports of strikes
against facilities used in the United Nations humanitarian
operation. On 11 May, a number of civilian facilities in the
Basra province were struck. These included three trans-
shipment warehouses from which food is distributed to Iraq
pursuant to the memorandum of understanding.

We pay tribute to the staff of the United Nations
humanitarian programme in Iraq, who are carrying out
important and noble work under difficult conditions.

Out of purely humanitarian considerations, and in a
desire to ensure the uninterrupted delivery of at least a
minimum of essential goods to Iraq, the Russian delegation
does not object to the adoption of the technical draft before
us extending resolution 986 (1995).

However, we must stress once again that it is only the
lifting of sanctions, and not these palliative measures - the
traditional extensions of resolution 986 (1995) - that will
truly help us to overcome the humanitarian and socio-
economic crisis in Iraq. That is precisely the conclusion
reached by the panels of Ambassador Amorim and also the
conclusion reached by the humanitarian organizations
working in Iraq. The job of halting sanctions is an acute
matter for the Security Council, and we will persist in
seeking to resolve it in the context of the deployment in
Iraq of a new monitoring disarmament mechanism.

