Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Like many other Members
of the Organization, Ukraine is deeply concerned over the
striking asymmetry between the great deal of attention that
the Security Council devotes to African issues and the real
achievements produced so far. Therefore, I would also like
to express my delegation's gratitude for the commendable
initiative of the United Kingdom's presidency, as well as to
thank you personally, Mr. President, for inviting us to
reflect on the situation and to discuss practical ways of
heightening the effect the Council produces on conflict
resolution in Africa.

I will limit my remarks exclusively to the questions
outlined in your very helpful informal note.

Regarding your first question, it is undeniable that
enhanced cooperation between the Security Council and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and major African
subregional organizations would greatly contribute to
achieving the objectives of peace and security on the
continent. Many practical steps have already been suggested
to improve such cooperation. Some of them have been
institutionalized by the General Assembly or the Security
Council. New creative ideas have emerged during today's
discussion.

In View of this, the members of the Council may
wish to start a process aimed at systematizing the wealth
of different ideas and suggestions on the matter in a
single document. It is of the utmost importance that such
a document contain a number of clear directives and
recommendations to various entities, both within and
outside the United Nations system, to initiate or expedite
implementation of specific proposals intended to improve
interaction between the Security Council and regional
structures in Africa. The Council should also conduct
periodic reviews of the implementation processes and, if
necessary, make relevant corrections.

In short, the Security Council should display more
leadership and creativity in both originating specific
proposals in this area and exercising efficient management
in their execution later on. The members of the Council
may wish to think about the appropriateness of creating
a special subsidiary body mandated to coordinate its
relations with the OAU and subregional organizations in
Africa. In this regard, we welcome your proposal,
Mr. President, on establishing a special mechanism to
consider different ideas for consultation between the
Security Council and the OAU.

On the issue of meeting requirements for African
peacekeeping, I do not expect that our suggested solutions
would be really original, but perhaps their prevalence
reconfirms that they really matter. In the View of my
delegation, besides the need for adequate funding, which
is undoubtedly a sine qua non condition for any success
in peacekeeping, there are two other distinct areas
deserving special collective attention.

First, it is imperative to pursue the ongoing efforts
aimed at improving existing United Nations mechanisms
intended for ensuring availability and rapid deployment of
peacekeepers upon relevant authorization by the Security
Council. In the first instance, it is related to the United
Nations standby arrangements system and rapidly
deployable mission headquarters. The United Nations
Secretariat and Member States should continue this
endeavour, placing greater emphasis on specific
requirements of peacekeeping on the African continent.

The second area relates to enhancing the
peacekeeping capabilities of African countries with a view
to enabling them to participate more actively in
peacekeeping operations within the United Nations

 

framework. We commend valuable initiatives, which have
been taken to that end in recent years. In our View, it would
be important to secure a more centralized and all-inclusive
character for efforts in this sphere.

With regard, Mr. President, to your third question -
seeking suggestions for additional instruments to be used by
the Council in conflict resolution in Africa - the current
discussion clearly demonstrates that there is no lack of
imaginative thinking in this Organization. Ukraine attaches
particular importance to greater use of appropriate
preventive instruments in respect to Africa.

In this respect, I would like to single out just one of
those instruments, namely, the Security Council missions to
the region, whose value was also underscored in your own
intervention, Mr. President. We would urge the Security
Council to explore more deeply the entire concept of such
missions. For example, it is easy to imagine that in some
situations those missions could have tremendous effects if
they were to be sent at the early stages of a conflict
situation.

We also encourage the Council to be more assertive in
strengthening the effectiveness of arms embargoes in Africa
and in addressing the problem of illicit arms flows on the
continent. We know, for example, that the Council's current
policy in this area has been largely focused on impelling
countries to establish more rigorous national export-control
procedures for arms sales in order to prevent any illicit
transaction. At the same time, global experience
convincingly demonstrates that no matter how strong the
export-control measures a sovereign State establishes, they
cannot give a total guarantee against subsequent Violations
by third parties.

In this connection, I would like to reiterate the
proposal of Ukraine to convene under the auspices of the
United Nations an international meeting of experts of major
arms-producing countries, with a view to elaborating
effective measures to prevent the reselling of arms by end
users to third parties. It would be worth recalling that this
proposal was made by the Foreign Minister of Ukraine at
the meeting of the Security Council held at the end of
September this year.

There is also one more point that has particular
pertinence to the matter at hand and cannot be avoided in
our discussion. This point relates to the problem of the
Council's political will to respond adequately to conflict
situations in Africa, as well as its willingness to share the
cost and burdens of peacemaking action in that part of the
world. One would hardly disagree that such will and such
willingness are today among the most desirable
instruments to ensure the success of the Council's
activities on the continent. For its part, as an incoming
member of the Council, Ukraine is determined to work
closely with all Member States of the Organization with
a View to achieving the success of the United Nations
partnership with Africa.

