I would like to begin by thanking Special Representative Lyons and Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani, as well as the Afghan Youth Representative to the United Nations, Ms. Shkula Zadran, for their comprehensive and insightful briefings. We commend the actions of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), particularly in promoting the role of women on the peace and security agenda, supporting transitional justice and the inclusion of civil society and protecting human rights under the challenging conditions in the country. Estonia strongly supports such efforts, and we are always open to explore ways in which the United Nations and the Security Council can further assist UNAMA in its endeavours. Speaking of challenging conditions, the security situation in Afghanistan remains deeply concerning. Armed clashes have increased by 38 per cent this year, and the conflict continues to take a heavy toll on the civilian population. There is absolutely no excuse for the deliberate attacks on health-care personnel, journalists and educational facilities. It is essential that such crimes be investigated and that the perpetrators be held accountable. We deplore the attacks on children in the strongest terms. UNAMA should have the necessary capacity to monitor and report on violations and abuses against children and should assist efforts to strengthen the protection of children. We share the Secretary-General's view that it is critically important for all parties to the conflict to recognize and address the harm caused, while incorporating victim- centred justice into the peace process. Another challenge is the humanitarian situation, with the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance having doubled to a record 18.4 million. Such circumstances are unprecedented. It is vital to support UNAMA's efforts to improve the accessibility of humanitarian aid for people in dire need. At the donors' conference held on 23 and 24 November, the international community, including Estonia, renewed its commitment to accompanying Afghanistan on its path towards peace, security, stability, democracy, prosperity and self-reliance. A global ceasefire has repeatedly been called for by the entire international community, the Secretary-General and the Council. Today we once again reiterate our call for an immediate, permanent and comprehensive ceasefire to save the Afghan people from more meaningless suffering and create a conducive environment for sustainable peace in the country, as well as stability in the region. All parties, particularly the Taliban, must fulfil their commitments and work towards ending violence to save civilian lives. This year is momentous for Afghanistan. There is a historic opportunity for peace and stability for all Afghans after decades of immense human suffering. We welcome the agreement between the parties on the code of conduct, which unlocked the discussion of the agenda items of the peace negotiations. It is essential that the parties resume the peace talks without delay on 5 January, after their mutually agreed three-week break. Human rights, particularly those of women and children, are inalienable and should be the highest priority on the agenda of the negotiations. The gains achieved over the past 19 years and guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution should be preserved and further strengthened during the course of the talks. I would like to recall the sanctions regime on the Taliban and the mandate of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team supporting the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). Estonia is convinced that the review of the measures and the sanctions lists should remain conditions-based and be strict in its consideration of whether substantial progress has been made by the Taliban to reduce violence. We are glad that the President of Afghanistan recently issued a decree establishing a high council for women, intended to support women's empowerment and the implementation of the Government's commitments regarding women's rights. We strongly support the participation of various political and social constituencies in the peace negotiations, especially the meaningful participation of women, youth and minorities. Protecting and promoting their rights throughout the peace process is imperative. I have a question for the Afghan Youth Representative, Ms. Zadran. Two thirds of the population of Afghanistan is aged 24 years or under, and they are taking on the considerable task of rebuilding their country. In what ways are the youth represented in the peace negotiations, and are their voices being heard? A sustainable political settlement is the only viable solution. We call on all sides to act swiftly, advance the peace process and fulfil their commitments to end violence and establish peace. We remain hopeful that the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban can build on the current momentum. Finally, we would like to thank Germany and Indonesia for their diligent and professional work as Council co-penholders on the Afghanistan file. Together with Norway, we hope to be their worthy successors.
