Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to commend the choice of the
extremely interesting theme of this Security Council
debate, entitled "Maintenance of international peace
and security: Inclusive development for the maintenance
of peace and security". This debate seems very timely,
as we are entering the last stage of the negotiations that
will lead to the adoption, in September 2015, of a post-
2015 development agenda.

Today, the correlation between peace, security
and development needs no further demonstration,
because the events taking place throughout the world
further demonstrate the intrinsic links between those
three dimensions. My country, which hosted the
Fourth International Conference on New or Restored
Democracies, dealt with this issue within that
framework. But the problem of exclusion as one of the
major root causes of the rupture of national consensus
on the social contract has not received the attention it
deserves.

The marginalization of important social groups,
such as youth and women, or of certain regions for
the benefit of urban areas or favouring those in power,
even certain ethnic or religious minorities, constitutes a
factor of delegitimization, not only of those who govern
but also of the State infrastructure that tolerates and
promotes the emergence of destablizing social divisions.
The decline in ethics and the fight for access to natural
resources promotes corruption and the diversion of
public funds to personal use and deprives the State of
the means to ensure vital public services. The worst of
it is that such ill-gotten gains are used to buy public
awareness in order to maintain a remuneration system
that undermines national institutions and makes
them even less capable of undertaking their statutory
functions. Such evils are without doubt catalysts for
potential conflicts, with devastating consequences.

Not prosecuting financial crimes serves to promote
a culture of impunity and lawlessness and favours the
existence oftax havens and the practice ofsecret banking
that makes it possible to off-shore illegally obtained
gains and to provide the perpetrators of economic
crimes a golden retirement abroad. Sometimes the
State's structural weakness has reached such a level
that those persons suspected of financial crimes may
also enjoy the benefits from that lapse and, despite
everyone being aware of their crimes, they can enjoy
an opulent lifestyle and the benefits of their crimes
without any restrictions. The illicit amounts involved
leaving Africa are incommensurate with the resources
that come to the continent through legal means. Such
situations, because of the crises we have seen in recent
years, have on several continents led to revolts and civil
wars that have undermined all the efforts made in the
past and all the economic progress achieved over many
years.

The persistence of major socioeconomic inequality
between and within States can fuel radicalization
and, above all, promote asymmetrical conflicts.
Radicalization is always possible when a certain level
of tolerance for frustration is overstepped. Development
is an issue for all social strata living within a given
country, and all members of society need to be involved
and to enjoy the benefits that their country provides.
Development must be inclusive. Young people, women
and minorities, who are often marginalized in some
countries although they have immense potential to
contribute to development, must be taken into account.
Reforms promoting inclusive development and shared
prosperity can help prevent war and ensure lasting
peace.

In that regard, the international community must
be more focused on the structural dysfunctions within
States, which, although they are a domestic concern,
also have a real impact on international peace and
security. Those concerns were addressed in resolution
1625 (2005) negotiated by Benin during its most
recent membership in the Council. The African Union
Peer Review Mechanism also seeks to achieve that
end. There is no harm in the Security Council, the
principle body responsible for international peace and
security, persistently encouraging States Members of
the Organization to undertake the necessary reforms
to eliminate such dysfunctions, which pose a threat to
peace and security. Furthermore, this problem could
be the subject of information-exchange between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
under Article 65 ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations, as
explicitlynotedinpresidentialstatement S/PRST/2015/3,
adopted this morning. The Peacebuilding Commission
could also contribute to that end were it not for the
restrictions that have been imposed upon that body
through its enabling resolutions.

In that regard, we cannot insist strongly enough
on the need for political leaders, whatever group they
belong to, to go beyond speeches and rhetoric to take
concrete account of the linkages among the ideas of
development, peace and security. The actions taken by
the United Nations on the ground in terms of security
and the promotion of sustainable development must
more than ever be coordinated with governmental
activities in the beneficiairy countries in order to
continue to make a significant and effective contribution
to stabilizing and improving the security situation,
protecting civilians and promoting social inclusion of
the victims of social exclusion.

Today, armed violence related to drug trafficking,
natural disasters caused by climate change, poverty
and the lack of social protection threaten human
security and hinder development. We must take all
those concerns into account not only in the post-2015
development agenda, but also in conflict-prevention
efforts. My delegation therefore wishes to express its
support for the presidential statement adopted by the
Security Council on the subject of today's debate and
also the contents of the concept note addressed to
the Secretary-General by the Ambassador of Chile,
President of the Security Council (S/2015/6).

