Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the able
manner in which you have been directing the work
of the Council. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing.
We welcome his intensive diplomatic efforts to achieve
an immediate ceasefire, as well as those by Special
Coordinator Robert Serry, United States Secretary of
State John Kerry and other regional leaders.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People condemns, in
the strongest possible terms, the excessive and
disproportionate use of force during the Israeli
onslaught in the occupied Gaza Strip, including in the
district of Shujaiya, which has caused many deaths and
injuries among Palestinian civilians, including women
and children. The casualty figures we heard during the
Secretary-General's briefing are truly appalling. The
Committee also condemns the indiscriminate rocket
fire emanating from Gaza, which has resulted in two
Israeli deaths and several injuries so far.

We are appalled by the disproportionate use of
force by a trained and well-equipped army, which has
resulted in the high number of Palestinian civilian
casualties, estimated at 77 per cent of the total fatalities.
On 16 July, the shelling of a Gaza beach where four
innocent boys, ages 9 to 11 years old, were killed while
playing football is an event emblematic of the type of
senseless violence that has annihilated entire families
and destroyed hundreds of homes.

The situation took a dramatic turn for the worse
with the beginning of the Israeli ground invasion.
The casualty numbers, the photos and the survivor
stories from the Shujaiya neighbourhood, which was
carpet-bombed by Israel, speak for themselves. An
international investigation should be considered by the
Human Rights Council to determine accountability for
those heinous acts.

Israeli attacks on Palestinian civilian infrastructure,
namely, hospitals, water and sewage systems, as well as
on mosques, are equally appalling. Thousands ofhomes
have been destroyed or severely damaged, displacing
over 100,000 people. Up to half of the population is
without a water supply today.

Those acts are direct violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which obligates the occupying Power to
protect the civilian population under its occupation.
Article 33 of the Convention states, "[n]o protected
person may be punished for an offence he or she has not
personally committed" and "[c]ollective penalties and
likewise all measures of intimidation or of terrorism
are prohibited".

The Israeli rhetoric that it no longer occupies Gaza
after the 2005 withdrawal of illegal settlers and soldiers
denies the reality, which is that Israel controls access
through border crossings, airspace and waters, and
Gaza is an integral part of the occupied Palestinian
territory.

The Committee welcomes and fully supports the
request by the State of Palestine to the Government
of Switzerland to convene a conference of the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
to address the continuing violations of its provisions
by the occupying Power, Israel. It is the responsibility
of the High Contracting Parties, under article 1 of the
Convention, to "undertake to respect and to ensure
respect for the present Convention in all circumstances".
Moreover, and as has been stated before, the Committee
will fully support the State of Palestine if it decides to
sign and ratify the Rome Statute, in order to establish
full accountability for the targeting, wounding and
killing of all innocent civilians.
The Committee calls upon the international
community to adopt concerted measures to halt
all violations of international humanitarian law,
including the collective punishment of the Palestinian
people. Only serious, resolute collective action by the
international community will compel Israel to abide by
its obligations as the occupying Power as defined under
international humanitarian law.

In the meantime, the United Nations humanitarian
agencies on the ground in Gaza have stretched their
resources very thin, and were underfunded to begin
with in the face of such military actions. Those
organizations are struggling to respond to the massive
humanitarian needs of more than 150,000 affected
Gazans as a result of the attacks. We urge donors to
respond generously to the latest emergency appeal for
$115 million launched by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

The Committee welcomes the convening of the
Security Council's emergency consultations on Sunday,
20 July to consider the ongoing crisis. The Committee
takes note of the remarks made to the press by the
President ofthe Security Council, and calls for concrete
follow-up action by the Council to stop the senseless
violence and to impede any further escalation of this
dangerous crisis. The Committee believes that only a
comprehensive solution to the Gaza situation, in line
with resolution 1860 (2009), can prevent the periodic
flare-ups of violence. Such a solution should become a
top priority for the Council.

