Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank former
President Thabo Mbeki and Special Representative
Haile Menkerios for their comprehensive briefings and
the significant work they have been undertaking. I
would like to congratulate them and the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan on the agreement that
has just been reached on Abyei. We hope it will allow
for a quick and full cessation of violence in the Area,
for the re-establishment of full humanitarian assistance
and for the return of the displaced population. We are
encouraged by these positive developments, but they
are only a first step, albeit a decisive one, towards
solving the Abyei issue. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Osman and Mr. Gatkuoth for their
statements.

As all members of the Council, Portugal has been
deeply concerned by the rapidly deteriorating situation
in several areas of the Sudan. We have expressed grave
concern about the ongoing violence, namely, the
fighting taking place in Southern Kordofan, which is
causing an alarming and increasing number of
displaced persons. We fully support and encourage the
efforts of former President Mbeki and Special
Representative Menkerios to find a quick solution to
the situation and an immediate end to the hostilities.

We strongly urge the parties to prevent any
further escalation of violence that could lead to new
losses of civilian lives, stop the looting, grant
unconditional humanitarian access to all and abide by
their undertakings and agreements. We encourage them
to build upon the positive indications we received
today in order to get the overall process on track and
fulfil the objectives of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA).

Indeed, the most recent events have threatened to
erode the common ground that enabled the successful
and peaceful referendum. As we have repeatedly
stated, it is our belief that it is in neither side's interests
to jeopardize all that has so far been accomplished. We
strongly condemn all unilateral actions meant to create
facts on the ground that would prejudice the outcome
of the negotiations. We are of the view that the
interdependencies between the North and the South are
too deep and that the failure or success of one of them
will determine the failure or success of the other.

For that reason, we recall the commitments made
by both sides and urge the parties to work decisively in
resolving their disputes. Dialogue and political
commitment at the highest level is what is needed. We
thus welcome the resumption of talks between
President Al-Bashir and Vice-President Salva Kiir. The
negotiations are complex and have to be led in the
spirit of continued compromise and cooperation. This
is the only path to ensure the viability of the two
States.

In this difficult context, the success of the
mediation work of the African Union's High-Level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, former President
Thabo Mbeki, appears to us more decisive than ever, as
I have already stated. We call upon the parties to
continue working with the Panel in order to urgently
find a durable and peaceful resolution to the status of
Abyei and to continue dialogue on all the other
outstanding issues.

Portugal welcomes the commitment by the
Sudanese parties to establish a common border zone
between North and South Sudan, which is to be
demilitarized and jointly monitored and patrolled. We
now call upon the parties to agree on where the zone
should be and to positively consider a third-party
presence along the border. Again, we share the view
that North and South would benefit from United
Nations assistance in this context.

As I have already said, we strongly condemn the
recent fighting in Kadugli and Umm Dorain, and call
upon both sides to exercise maximum restraint in
resolving their disputes in Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile states. In this regard, Portugal sees the
negotiations between representatives of the
Government of the Sudan and leaders of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement from the two states as a
positive step. We call upon the parties to rapidly
establish security arrangements for the two areas.

Allow me also to say a word on the appalling
humanitarian situation as a result of the violence. We
are deeply concerned by the impact of escalating
violence on the civilian population, including women,
children and internally displaced persons. We recall
that all parties to the conflict must respect and protect
civilians and ensure adequate security for humanitarian
workers. The parties must remove any restrictions that
would slow down the response, and ensure full and
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance and for
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan throughout
the mission area.

We would also like to echo Assistant Secretary-
General Catherine Bragg's appeal to the parties to
allow the establishment of a humanitarian corridor
between Kadugli and El Obeid.

I could not conclude without expressing
Portugal's strong support for the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan and commending it for its work
in the most difficult conditions.
