The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

ll-33032

I thank Ms. Amos, Mr. Leroy and Mr. Simonovie
for their briefings. I associate myself with the
statement to be made by the Acting Head of the
Delegation of the European Union.

I wish to stress three points. First, when grave
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, war crimes and crimes against humanity are
committed, it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to intervene to end them. That is what we did
in Libya. The Security Council authorized the forces of
the coalition to protect civilians under bombardment
ordered by their leaders. By striking Colonel
Al-Qadhafi's forces before they entered Benghazi,
France and its partners helped to prevent a massacre
there. By demining the port of Misrata, we enabled
humanitarian assistance to be delivered and civilians to
be evacuated.

In C6te d'Ivoire, the Security Council gave the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
the resources it needed to fulfil its protection mandate.
By helping to neutralize heavy weapons being used
against civilians, UNOCI prevented the commission of
atrocities. We hope that the resolve UNOCI has
demonstrated will serve as a point of reference for all
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
should continue to intervene with equal resolve. We
must support the Congolese authorities in building the
capacity to ensure the effective, long-term protection
of civilians.

Secondly, France believes that the protection of
civilians and human rights is a priority in all situations.
We are determined to ensure that the Security Council
shall continue to take measures tailored to individual
situations. For instance, the Government of Syria is
firing on and besieging its own people, and resorting to
arbitrary arrests by the thousands, forced
disappearances and torture. This must end.
Demonstrators, human rights activists and journalists
should be freed and freedom of expression respected.
The Government should cooperate with the
commission of inquiry of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and authorize
humanitarian access, including for the assessment
mission dispatched by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians requires the
victims to receive justice. The main responsibility in
that respect falls to States, but the international
community should support or supplement their efforts
if they fall short. That is why the Government of Sri
Lanka should undertake independent and impartial
investigations into the alleged grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law
documented in the report of the Secretary-General's
Panel of Experts, and those responsible should be tried.
The Government of Sri Lanka must implement the
other recommendations contained in the report and
continue to cooperate with the United Nations.

In Darfur, although the International Criminal
Court issued arrest warrants for crimes against
humanity and genocide, nothing has changed.
Humanitarian access continues to be impeded, civilians
continue to be bombed, and militias continue to
surround the refugee camps. That is unacceptable.

In recent months, the Security Council has
demonstrated its capacity to apply the principles of the
protection of civilians to concrete situations in which
civilians are threatened. We must pursue those efforts.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Uruguay.

