The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Portugal and Yemen in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Olhaye
(Djibouti), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Tessema
(Ethiopia), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Monteiro (Portugal) and Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Kieran Prendergast, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 June 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the
Security Council extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Dr. Hussein Hassouna, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to participate in the Council's
forthcoming discussion on the situation in
Somalia."

That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2000/623.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Hassouna.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kieran Prendergast, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

I invite Mr. Prendergast to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.


