Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I join others in thanking Mr. Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
I also thank Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for
her very moving statement, rallying us all to shoulder
our responsibilities as members of the Security
Council with the primary responsibility of preventing
the repetition of the type of atrocities and acts she
just described.

Four months have passed since the crisis began. It
has been a month since the Security Council adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22 on this matter.
Nevertheless, hundreds of thousands of innocent
victims of the Rohingya minority in Myanmar
continue to suffer from being persecuted, terrorized,
intimidated, forcibly displaced, murdered and raped,
and even their homes are set on fire - all of which has
forced them - panicked and fearful for their lives - to
flee their villages and abandon their homes and land.
That crisis, as well as all the humanitarian, political,
security and social challenges that it entails, continues
to threaten regional peace and security in that part of
the world. The serious threat posed could worsen and
generate additional tensions and heavy burdens for
neighbouring countries, in particular Bangladesh. In
that regard, we welcome the bilateral agreement recently
reached between the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh concerning the repatriation of refugees.
It is our hope that they will be able to return to their
native land within Myanmar.

Whether as a member of the Security Council or the
Contact Group on the Rohingya Muslims of Myanmar
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, Egypt has
been trying to conceive of an international approach to
dealing with the crisis within the framework of several
basic demands aimed at containing the crisis - which
the Secretary-General has recommended repeatedly.

First, the Government of Myanmar must shoulder
its national responsibilities, namely, stopping military
operations and violent practices so as to safeguard
Rohingya lives, and unconditionally allowing the
complete return of displaced persons and refugees
to their land and homes in Rakhine state, while
permitting the distribution of all forms of humanitarian
assistance to Rakhine state to help victims and other
affected persons.

Secondly, it is crucial to cease hateful narratives,
whether emanating from the Government or Buddhist
extremists, which incite violence and destruction. It is
also important to promote the concept of tolerance for
the other and peaceful coexistence among religions and
minorities without any racial or faith-based distinctions.

Thirdly, the national authority established recently
by the Myanmar Government and charged with
providing humanitarian assistance, facilitating the
repatriation of refugees and development in Rakhine
state should implement completely, comprehensively
and rapidly the recommendations of the final report of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by
Kofi Annan.

Fourthly, it is incumbent upon the Security Council
to follow the crisis closely with a view to encouraging the
Government of Myanmar to cooperate constructively
towards promoting the right to citizenship for and
conferring Myanmar nationality upon the Muslim
Rohingya people, and allowing them to return home.

Fifthly, we condemn all forms of terrorism
perpetrated by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
regardless of motivation or rationale.

At the national level, the role of the Al-Azhar
Mosque must be note, which has hosted events bringing
together all the various components of Myanmar
society - including Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus,
Christians and others - aimed at promoting the values
of religious tolerance and peaceful coexistence among
all races and nationalities. The most recent event was
a seminar held in January 2017 that brought together
young people representing the various religions
of Myanmar.

Lastly, I reiterate that it is important that the
Security Council establish a clear and functional road
map in order to peacefully resolve the crisis and settle
the issue in a just and definitive manner. The issue of
Rakhine state rests in conferring the right to citizenship
to Rohingyas in a clear way and ensuring their security
and inalienable human rights once and for all. In the
context of the twenty-first century, enlightened by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is inconceivable that the murder of part of
the population of Myanmar and its displacement to
neighbouring countries could be considered a way out
of the crisis. It is therefore important to act before it is
too late.

