Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My country appreciates your effective
presence, Madam President, in presiding over the
meeting today, which is International Women's Day. We
also welcome the presence ost. Julie Bishop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Australia, and Ms. Annika Siider,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, at the
meeting this morning.

My delegation thanks Mr. Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for the quality of his briefing on the
situation in Afghanistan. We would also like to express
our sincere gratitude to Ms. Habiba Sarabi, Deputy
Chairperson of Afghanistan's High Peace Council,
and Ms. Mariam Safi, Executive Director of the
Organization for Policy Research and Development
Studies, for the relevance of their interventions and for
their ongoing commitment to making women's voices
heard in the democratic process in which their country
is engaged.

Cote d'Ivoire deplores and condemns the wave
of violence and the series of deadly attacks recently
endured by Afghanistan. The three attacks that took
place between 20 and 27 January in Kabul and Jalalabad
call on us all to push the Council to pay sustained
attention to the situation in the country, given its impact
on the stability of the entire region.

Despite the worrisome security situation, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the holding, on 28 February in Kabul,
of the second conference of the Kabul Process on peace
and reconciliation as an important step on the path to
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan. My country
sees President Ashraf Ghani's extended hand to the
Taliban as a decisive step towards frank negotiations
between his Government and the Taliban. Cote d'Ivoire
remains confident that this offer of peace will lead to
the establishment of a genuine inclusive peace process.

We should also like to see an assessment of the
progress made in the area ofpeace andjoint measures to
combat terrorism in Afghanistan and the region. In that
regard, my country encourages Afghan stakeholders to
engage in an open dialogue, based on the achievements
ofthe 2004 Constitution, including respect for the rights
of citizens, especially those ofwomen. Notwithstanding
the sense of hope emanating from the second meeting
of the Kabul Process, my delegation remains concerned
by the persistence of some political tensions in the
country. It therefore urges the parties to prioritize
dialogue in the interest of the Afghan people.

On the occasion of the celebration of International
Women's Day, aimed at promoting women's rights
and the fight against inequality, Cote d'Ivoire would
like to pay a warm tribute to Afghan women for their
important contribution to the process of reconciliation
and peace efforts in their country in a sometimes
difficult socio-political context, in which the debate on
the place of women in society remains a particularly
sensitive subject.

My country calls on the international community
and our Council to give Afghan women the necessary
means to consolidate their place in society and promote
their participation in regional and international
initiatives for peace, while strengthening the protection

of their most basic rights. To that end, my delegation
welcomes the adoption of the Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women and the Afghan Government's
July 2015 launch of a national action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. Cote d'Ivoire calls for the
establishment of a financing mechanism for the plan in
order to give Afghan women their rightful place in their
country's consolidation of democratic institutions.

In conclusion, my delegation urges the international
community to support the efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan to restore lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

