Mr. Thorns (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate, which comes at a time
when the Great Lakes region is at a crossroads.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Major efforts have been made in this traditionally
fragile region to fight illegal revenue from mineral
wealth and to promote a return to peace. Yet we cannot
be sure that these efforts will bear fruit. Germany
remains committed to supporting the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and its
member States in their efforts to foster peace, stability
and development in the region. Since 2004, the German
Government has contributed significantly to various
projects in the region, wishing to promote transparency
and control of the mining sector. The current three-year
phase amounts to nearly $30 million.

Germany supports the ICGLR secretariat and
in particular the Regional Initiative on Natural
Resources, which aims at breaking the link between
mineral revenues and conflict financing. At the core
of the Resource Initiative is a regional certification
mechanism for selected natural resources, namely,
cassiterite, wolframite, coltan and gold. In order to
embed these efforts in wider peacebuilding activities
in the region, Germany is also currently in the process
of deploying an expert on the natural resource sector
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

In addition, Germany cooperates with selected
ICGLR member States. For example, support is
provided to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
ensure the good governance of its mining sector and
to implement a national certification system for the
artisanal and small-scale mining sector. This project
not only addresses the issue of illegal exploitation,
but also seeks to promote better living conditions for
artisanal miners by improving their environmental and
social working conditions.
The link between natural resources and conflict
is not the only challenge to the prevailing conflicts
across the Great Lakes region. As highlighted by the
report of the Peacebuilding Commission, progress in
development is also critical to preventing both lapse and
relapse into conflict. That is why Germany supports
peacebuilding efforts in the Great Lakes region through
targeted development cooperation programmes. For
example, since 2008 more than $100 million have been
disbursed to a peace Fund in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which hopes to deliver a tangible peace
dividend to the people of eastern Congo. More than half
a million Congolese have already benefitted from the
peace fundamental, which finances the construction
of labour-intensive infrastructure and activities that
stimulate the agricultural sector, all of which will give
a boost to the local economy. By focusing on locally
relevant drivers of conflict, the peace fund contributes
to the implementation of the revised International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Germany also reaffirms its full support for
MONUSCO, to which it will continue to provide
civilian expertise, and to the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region. We welcome
the steps that MONUSCO has taken to increase its
efficiency and effectiveness, agree with the assessment
that MONUSCO's political role should be strengthened,
and look forward to the results of the comprehensive
and collaborative multi-phase review. Germany will
remain committed to the developments and continue
to support efforts to increase peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region. This includes our continued
strong engagement in opposition to poaching and illicit
wildlife trafficking as co-chair, together with Gabon,
of the respective Group of Friends here in New York.

