Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for his briefing and especially for his action. I would
like to tell him that France fully supports his
endeavours, which are particularly difficult.

My delegation is extremely concerned by the
ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian and security
situation in Somalia. The number of people who have
fled their homes has now reached 1 million, with
600,000 having been displaced since the beginning of
the year - 200,000 in November alone.

We have three points to make. First, the
indiscriminate attacks which gravely affect civilians
are shocking. All parties must respect international
humanitarian law, including the troops of the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ethiopian
forces. There is no need to recall that the protection of
civilians is the primary responsibility of the
Government.

Secondly, we are pleased that during the visit of
the Under-Secretary-General the Somali Prime
Minister acknowledged the neutral, impartial and
independent nature of humanitarian assistance. We now
are waiting for the Somali authorities to facilitate
access by all populations to humanitarian assistance. In
this context, we were relieved to learn today that,
following Mr. Holmes's Visit, the Federal Government
has decided to once again authorize humanitarian
operations in the south-eastern part of the country.
Otherwise, 4,000 tons of food assistance, recently sent
by the World Food Programme (WFP), would be lost.

My third message concerns the French operation
to provide military escorts for vessels chartered by the
WFP. This operation responds to a request by the WFP
and has received the support of the Somali authorities.
With pirate attacks off the Somali coast on the rise, this
operation makes it possible to significantly improve
humanitarian assistance in Somalia. An initial rotation
was successful; others will follow in coming weeks.
The French navy commitment will continue until
16 January. Once again, I would call on all of our
partners subsequently to participate in these operations
and to take over from France.

In conclusion on Somalia, we must continue to
mobilize the international community and to make
progress. As we see from massive displacements of
populations in the last few weeks, the status quo is not
acceptable. I wish to thank the United Kingdom for
having organized yesterday's meeting of experts of
Member States with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). I am pleased that the Council will discuss
Somalia again on 17 December, in the presence of
Mr. Ould Abdallah, to address the complex of political,
security and humanitarian dimensions of the crisis.

With respect to Ethiopia and Ogaden, I fully
support the efforts of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator. My delegation is very concerned by
information regarding attacks on civilians and the risk
of widespread famine while the humanitarian situation
is already in a state of deep deterioration. I call on the
Government of Ethiopia to facilitate the free and
unfettered access of humanitarian convoys to all
populations in need, pursuant to international
humanitarian law and clear and consistent procedures.

My delegation remains extremely troubled by the
situation in Darfur. To claim that the situation has been
stabilized is to misunderstand the facts. Some 280,000
people have left their homes in 2007. Violence against
civilians, as well as the vagaries of the weather, have
increased the rate of malnutrition among the people of
Darfur, which had fallen from 2004 to 2006. The WFP
now provides assistance to more than 3 million people,
which amounts to 600,000 more than in June. Just as
humanitarian organizations are having to consolidate
their operations, deliberate attacks continue to be
conducted against humanitarian personnel. Along with
the insecurity they face, bureaucratic obstacles
continue to be set up by local authorities. In that
regard, France firmly condemns the recent expulsion of
the head of the OCHA office in South Darfur.

Protecting civilians is the first duty of the
Government of the Sudan, as it is of any Government.
In that regard, I recall that, if it is effectively to fulfil
its mandate of protecting civilians, the hybrid operation
must enjoy the robust resources anticipated by the
African Union and the United Nations. Humanitarian
actors also need the cooperation of Khartoum. The
Sudanese authorities undertook specific commitments
when they signed the joint declaration in March. Those
commitments were confirmed during the Secretary-
General's visit in September.

We welcome the positive signal sent by the
Sudanese authorities concerning the renewal of the
moratorium on humanitarian access restrictions, which
expires in late January. We need to ensure that that
intention is translated into reality without delay. We
must avoid any breakdown in the provision of food
assistance.

Moreover and in conclusion, the information
regarding forced relocation in southern Darfur is, as
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court told
the Council yesterday, most troubling. The principle of
voluntary return must be implemented, as it is the only
way to ensure sustainable returns.

I wish to affirm once again that we fully support
Mr. Holmes and his work on the ground.

