Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu
for her briefing

Belgium is particularly concerned about the current
risks in the area of non-proliferation and disarmament.
The end of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty, threats to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action and the uncertainties surrounding the future
of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and the

North Korean issue are all worrisome.

Those recent developments reflect the increased
polarization within the international community,
wherein trust and cooperation among States have taken
a major step backwards. This environment is presenting
a daunting challenge to the global non-proliferation
and disarmament architecture and makes achieving the
progress urgently required at a time of increasing risks
of proliferation even more difficult.

As was stated earlier, the INF Treaty was a pillar
of European and international security for more than
30 years. Thanks to the Treaty, nearly 3,000 missiles
equipped with nuclear or conventional warheads
were removed from European soil and destroyed in a
verifiable manner. The Treaty therefore represented
a tangible contribution to the fulfilment of the
disarmament obligations of the United States and Russia
under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Belgium therefore deeply deplores
the dissolution of the INF Treaty. We regret the fact
that Russia has not responded to repeated international
calls for it to resume the implementation of its Treaty
obligations. The dissolution of the Treaty was the result.

However, our debate cannot be limited to
accusations and recriminations. It is important that
Russia and the United States engage in active and
constructive dialogue in order to agree on stabilization
and confidence-building measures. A new arms race
is in no one's interests. Furthermore, the unparalleled
destructive power of nuclear weapons reminds us of
the need not only to prevent any proliferation, but also
to make progress in the area of disarmament. More
specifically, Belgium calls on Russia and the United
States to engage in productive dialogue in order to
develop initiatives to strengthen strategic stability and
take resolute steps to reduce their nuclear arsenals,
including weapons systems of all kinds. We also stress
the importance of extending New START beyond 2021.
The Treaty's expiration would end any limitation on the
strategic nuclear forces of both countries.

Let us also not forget the responsibility of other
nuclear-weapon States to contribute to arms control
through their actions and participation in international
deliberations. The development of new capabilities
and the expansion of arsenals take us away from the
objectives agreed under the Non-Proliferation Treaty.

Lastly, I would like to underscore that the global
non-proliferation regime is a crucial element of the
multilateral system, based on international law. We all
have a national interest in a global order based on arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation.

