Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, we, too,
would like to welcome the signing of the Darfur peace
agreement in Abuja, which we believe will lead to
restoring peace and security and end the suffering of
the people of Darfur. Slovakia commends the
instrumental role of the African Union and especially
the tireless mediation efforts of Mr. Salim Salim in
bringing about the positive outcome of the Abuja talks.
We appreciate the support and active diplomatic
engagement of all international partners and their
contribution to the negotiations.

We also commend the flexibility and responsible
approach of the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan Liberation Movement during the final stage of
negotiations in Abuja.

We call on all parties in Darfur to seize this
window of opportunity to reach lasting and sustainable
peace in Darfur. In that context, we encourage all
movements in Darfur that have not yet done so to join
the peace agreement and to start its implementation on
the ground expeditiously.

In order to effectively support and assist the
implementation of the peace agreement, the African
Union Mission in Darfur (AMIS) must be strengthened
and its operational capabilities enhanced as soon as
possible so as to be able to cope with the highly
complex situation on the ground.

We commend the role played and contribution
made to date by AMIS, which has been operating under
very difficult circumstances. From our point of view,
however, the current AMIS deployment is not adequate
and its transfer to a United Nations peacekeeping
mission is the only viable option. It is vitally important
that the joint United Nations-African Union technical
assessment mission to Darfur visit the region without
delay to start preparations for the transition.

Last but not least, it is essential that the
international community, in cooperation with the
Government of the Sudan, address the grave
humanitarian situation in Darfur. The Government of
the Sudan should allow unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance and remove any obstacles to
the delivery of humanitarian aid. We appreciate the
commitments undertaken so far by the international
community to provide the necessary funding.

Finally, we thank the United States delegation for
preparing the draft resolution on the Sudan and the
delegations of the Congo and the United Kingdom for
presenting the draft presidential statement on the
Sudan. We support its adoption.

