Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Russian Federation
for inviting my country to participate in this important
debate, held pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution
2378 (2017), which calls upon the Secretary-General
to provide an annual briefing on peacekeeping reform
with a view to increasing its effectiveness.

I would also like to thank my friend Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, for his comprehensive briefing, which
tackled the peacekeeping reform process and examined
the obstacles to enhancing and developing the
performance of peacekeeping operations. We commend
his efforts and those of his team.

I would also like to express my sincere condolences
to the Government and the people of sisterly Burkina
Faso following the heinous terrorist attack that claimed
the lives of many innocent people. We support them in
our collective war against terrorism.

Today's meeting coincides with a series of
intensive consultations among the various stakeholders
in the peacekeeping system, namely, the Secretariat,
the Member States of the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), police-contributing
countries (PCCs) and countries that host peacekeeping
operations. The aim is to discuss how to implement
the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
(A4P) initiative and move from the signing of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations to its implementation.

In that context, I would like to share a general
observation we have noticed from many meetings
and discussions of peacekeeping. The deliberations
on peacekeeping reform tend to focus on promoting
uniformed capabilities and the operational aspects
of peacekeeping, while disregarding its political
and strategic aspects. As a result, the discussions on
implementing such initiatives turn into debates where
some parties attempt to blame TCCs for failures in
the implementation of the Council's mandates. That
is a narrow perspective that fails to consider the huge
sacrifices of the TCCs.

Those who espouse that view also try to dodge
their obligations, ranging from drafting clear and
implementable mandates for peacekeeping operations
that avoid so-called constructive ambiguity, to providing
the necessary capabilities and resources to implement
their missions. In addition, they fail to create a political
environment conducive to peacekeeping operations in
order to carry out their missions in accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions.

I am sure the Council agrees that such a narrow
perspective of peacekeeping reform runs counter to
the core of many initiatives - starting with former
Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali's "An Agenda for
Peace" (S/24lll), the Brahimi report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809)
and the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), to the latest
initiative, namely, the current Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. All such initiatives
have comprehensively tackled the various political and
operational dimensions of peacekeeping. They stressed
that a supportive political framework accompanying
peacekeeping operations is a primary index for
measuring the effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations
and defining their appropriateness in specific scenarios.

The scope and nature of dialogue among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs and
PCCs must therefore be further developed. Despite
the intensive consultations, we as TCCs still sense
a lack of a strategic dimension in those dialogues,
which could otherwise make us true partners in efforts
aimed at ensuring that peacekeeping operations meet
their strategic objectives. The desired reform of the
peacekeeping system will be achieved only with
genuine collective political will on the part of all actors
and with complementing roles in order to meet the
various obligations and responsibilities.

Based on its continued commitment to enhancing
the effectiveness ofthe peacekeeping system, and being
aware of the enormous challenges facing peacekeeping,
Egypt, as a major TCC, was at the forefront of the
countries supporting the Secretary-General's A4P
initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments.

On its assumption of the chairmanship of the
African Union, Egypt took the lead in placing African
TCCs and peacekeeping host countries at the centre
of the efforts to implement the A4P initiative. In
November 2018, Cairo hosted the first high-level
regional conference, which provided a unique and
timely platform for the key actors of the peacekeeping
system to discuss ways to enhance the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations from a global perspective
that addresses the strategic, political and operational
dimensions across a given operation.

The regional conference resulted in the Cairo
Roadmap for Enhancing the Performance of
Peacekeeping Operations from Mandate to Exit. It
benefited from extensive consultations that reflected
the experience, expertise, wisdom and aspirations of
a broad range of actors and stakeholders, including
TCCs. The Cairo Roadmap provides a practical,
integrated and balanced framework to implement
the Secretary-General's A4P initiative by offering
practical solutions for a number of shortcomings
that undermine the performance and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

The Cairo Roadmap places operational and technical
capabilities on par with the issue of policy priority,
noting the important contribution of peacekeeping
operations in building and sustaining peace. It
defines the concept of performance in a way to reflect
the broad range of responsibilities and obligations
underpinned by the A4P initiative and the Declaration
of Shared Commitments. The Cairo Roadmap prioritize
conducting field analyses based on a comprehensive
consultative process among a mission's leadership,
host countries, TCCs and active regional organizations.
The conclusions and recommendations emerging from
such analyses should serve as an important source of
information for the Security Council when reviewing,
restructuring and withdrawing missions.

The Cairo Roadmap also develops the concept
of tripartite consultations into one of quadrilateral
consultations that include the host countries, TCCs, the
Security Council and the Secretariat.

I therefore call on the Security Council, which
is entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security, to give serious consideration to
the practical solutions set out in the Cairo Roadmap in
order to find solutions to the challenges that undermine
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you once again,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate at
a challenging time for peacekeeping operations, which
requires us all to work together and demonstrate
the genuine will and support necessary to make
peacekeeping operations more suitable for the purpose
for which they were created.
