Mr. Cooney (Ireland): Ireland is deeply
concerned at the apparently worsening conflict in the
occupied Palestinian territories and the resultant loss of
life, including the deaths of innocent children.

We have been working over the past week with
other members of the Council, in particular our fellow
Europeans, members of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the United States, to prepare a draft resolution that
could be adopted by the Council. This draft resolution
would invite the Secretary-General to consult with the
parties on taking early steps in a number of areas,
including an ending of violence, the resumption of
negotiations and the implementation of the
understandings reached at Sharm el-Sheikh in October
2000, as well as a range of confidence-building
measures.

We have also been seeking to provide Council
endorsement for the setting up, with the accord of the
responsible authorities, of a mechanism for the
protection of Palestinian citizens, a matter of particular
concern. We have made significant progress, and the
draft resolution has been submitted in the name of
France, Ireland, Norway, Ukraine and the United
Kingdom. We intend to continue consultations on this
draft with the remaining members of the Council and
other interested parties with a view to securing its early
adoption, if possible by consensus.

My delegation abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution before us tonight for two important reasons.
First, we have consistently stated that for the United
Nations to dispatch an observer force or an observer
mission, the agreement of the parties is necessary. I
know that this is not a view shared by all at this table,
but it is necessary for the essential guarantee of safety
and cooperation, without which no Member State could
be expected to provide the required personnel.

But there is a further and ultimately more
important consideration. The Middle East peace
process at the current critical juncture needs the full
support of the international community. The Security
Council has an overriding responsibility to channel this
support and in particular to give the Secretary-General
a strong mandate to engage the parties on the way
forward. The alternative draft resolution sponsored by
four European members of the Council and Ukraine
could provide a broader base of support for such
progress. We hope that work can continue on this draft
text. The sponsors would be very happy to accept
amendments that would help secure its passage.

Ireland intends to continue to use its position as a
member of the Security Council to work constructively
with fellow members to contribute to real progress in
the Middle East and to ending the long suffering of the
people of that region.

