Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Let me take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your country for assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month and wish you all the best in the
stewardship of the work of the Council. You can rest
assured of South Africa's continued support for and
cooperation with the work of the Council.

We consider this debate very timely, as it is an
important follow-up to the adoption of resolution 2331
(2016) and provides an opportunity to evaluate our
collective response aimed at ensuring that women,
children, refugees, migrants and internally displaced
peoples are protected from trafficking.

It is inexcusable that in this day and age, and in
almost every conflict situation throughout the world,
human trafficking thrives. It has been established that
the illicit trafficking of drugs, stolen antiquities and
small arms and light weapons often follow the same
routes used by human traffickers. Those activities
threaten international peace and security, for instance
by sustaining terrorism, criminals and armed groups.

The appalling reports over the past few days
showing that African migrants in Libya are being sold
as slaves is a clear indication of the urgent need for all
of us to commit to the eradication of that scourge. As
the Secretary-General said in his statement earlier in
the meeting, slavery has no place in our world and these
actions are among the most egregious abuses of human
rights and may amount to crimes against humanity.

My delegation is mindful of the fact that one of
the highest risks to displaced persons - specifically
refugees fleeing conflicts - is the threat of being
trafficked. Trafficking operations often flourish in
circumstances where Government institutions and law
enforcement capacities have been eroded and weakened
by sustained conflict. That undermines the rule of law,
which in turn contributes to other forms of transnational
organized crime, exacerbating conflict and insecurity.

Our ultimate objective should be to address the
conflict that has given rise to the scourge of human
trafficking, including its root causes. That requires us
to address development challenges and the dangers of
external interventions that we have witnessed in Libya,
Iraq and Syria, which have led to the proliferation of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

It is also imperative that we work together to
address underdevelopment, which lies at the root cause
of migration. That is manifested through poverty,
joblessness, inequality, conflict and trafficking in
persons, factors that force people to migrate beyond their
borders seeking better opportunities. In that regard,
South Africa stresses that issues related to trafficking
are not just an issue for the Security Council to deal
with; all related organs of this Organization ought to
work in concert to address the matter collaboratively,
so as to strengthen development and thereby sustainable
and durable peace.

The United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons provides a robust framework
for addressing trafficking in persons. However, it
remains imperative that international instruments are
properly supported by tangible actions and political
commitments at the international, regional and national
levels in order for them to fulfil their respective
mandates effectively.

Although human trafficking remains a significant
international challenge, we are encouraged by the
findings of the 2016 Global Report on Trafi'icking
in Persons, which shows that many countries have
criminalized trafficking, as required by the Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children. We note that the
number of countries that have done so increased from
33 in 2003 to 158 in 2016. That impressive increase has
contributed to a commensurate increase in the number
of prosecutions and, importantly, to the provision of
more assistance to victims.

No single country can solve the problem alone.
The transnational nature of trafficking demands a
transnational response. It is critical that we strengthen
and expand partnerships among stakeholders, including
civil society, academia and the private sector, in
supporting prevention, protection, and prosecution
efforts. It is also important to deepen cooperation with
the private sector in order to ensure that trafficking is
eradicated within global supply chains.

We also need to further strengthen efforts to
build the capacity of our front-line actors, including
criminal-justice system officials, social-service
providers, medical personnel, and law-enforcement and
border authorities in order to deal effectively with that
scourge. Particular attention should be given to gender
and age issues, exploitation and abuse in the context
of trafficking, smuggling and the contemporary forms
of slavery. We must also strengthen our capability
to prosecute such crimes through the provision of
technical assistance in areas such as international
law and practice, intelligence gathering, risk analysis,
investigative skills and interviewing the suspects and
victims.

In addition, we need to work to improve the
collection, sharing and analysis of data, including
data on the modus operandi and the economic models
and conditions that drive smuggling and trafficking
networks. Effective short- to medium-term strategies,
including awareness-raising campaigns and education
and training initiatives, are needed. In that regard, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is to be
commended for its efforts to assist States to improve
such capabilities.

In conclusion, we welcome this opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of the efforts to address
trafficking in persons in conflict situations, including
through resolution 2331 (2016). We are confident that
this review will assist the international community in
achieving its ultimate goal of eradicating this terrible
crime.

