Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
presentation.

According to the information that Mr. Egeland
provided, much work remains to be done if the United
Nations is to be effective in protecting civilians in
armed conflict. In View of the situations that he
described, we must reaffirm the responsibility of the
United Nations to protect human rights throughout the
world and the duty to prevent war crimes, genocide and
ethnic cleansing. We must also reaffirm the importance
of the task of ensuring humanitarian access to civilian
populations affected by conflict and protecting the staff
who provide such assistance, as well as all civilians
involved. In that connection, Peru believes that the
Security Council should continue to sponsor effective
and feasible actions to ensure the protection of
civilians who find themselves immersed in armed
conflict.

I should like to make a few comments about the
work of the Security Council in this area.

First, we seek full implementation of resolution
1674 (2006), which the Council adopted in April. We
should continue to include clear guidelines and rules
aimed at protecting civilians in all resolutions on
countries in which there are peacekeeping operations
and monitor their implementation. The Secretary-
General must regularly inform the Council about the
incorporation of the provisions of resolution 1674
(2006) into new or renewed mission mandates and
continue to monitor specific cases in which conflicts
and/or humanitarian crises have caused the civilian
population to fall victim to violence, insecurity and
systematic human rights violations.
Within the framework of the United Nations
system, we must seek greater cooperation among the
specialized agencies present on the ground so as to
improve our efficiency in the protection of civilians,
including displaced populations. Such efforts will help
to provide more effective follow-up to Security
Council decisions.

Likewise, the Council must cooperate with the
International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity. Effectively penalizing of those responsible
for grave human rights violations is an obligation of
the international community and a powerful signal of
the validity of the rule of law.

We express our grave concern at the persistence
of situations of risk for civilian populations that
Mr. Egeland cited this morning, including the
situations in Darfur, Gaza, Chad, northern Uganda,
Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo. We took note of the five
priorities that he set out for future work by the Security
Council on the issue of protecting civilians. They
clearly reflect the areas requiring greater attention,
such as preventive measures, timely information on
humanitarian crises and cooperative efforts with civil
society, including non-governmental organizations.

Finally, I wish to express Peru's gratitude to
Mr. Jan Egeland for his commitment to the defence and
protection of civilian populations in the immense
humanitarian crises that the world has witnessed.

