Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): In
pursuing our common goal of disarming Iraq of its
programme of weapons of mass destruction, the
international community now stands at a critical
juncture. The discussions today and in the days ahead
in the Security Council will certainly have far-reaching
implications for both the future of the United Nations
and the peace and stability of the world.

The Republic of Korea has fully supported, and
continues to support, Security Council resolutions on
Iraq, including resolution 1441 (2002). That resolution
was clear and unequivocal in demanding that Iraq
implement all of its international obligations for
disarmament under the relevant Council resolutions in
a prompt and verifiable manner.

My delegation greatly values the professionalism
and effectiveness with which United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) have been conducting weapons
inspections in Iraq over the past 11 weeks, based on
their strengthened mandate under resolution 1441
(2002). We note from Mr. Blix's report last week that
although Iraq's cooperation on process, such as
granting prompt access to sites, has so far been without
problems, its cooperation on substance has not been
enough to resolve existing questions of disarmament. It
is disturbing to note that many proscribed weapons and
other items still remain unaccounted for and that Iraq
has been importing large quantities of missile engines
for use in a proscribed missile system, in contravention
of resolution 687 (1991).

Judging from the findings of the inspection teams
as reported by UNMOVIC Executive Chairman Blix
and IAEA Director General ElBaradei last Friday, it is
clear that Iraq is not yet in full compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1441 (2002).

Given Iraq's dismal track record of failing to
comply with 17 Security Council resolutions over the
past 12 years, it is incumbent on Iraq to meet the two
key tests of resolution 1441 (2002): a full, accurate and
complete declaration; and full, voluntary, unconditional
and active cooperation with UNMOVIC and the IAEA.
We believe that Iraq knows best what is required if it is
to meet those tests. In the event that Iraq fails in those
critical tests, it should be responsible for the
consequences of such a failure.

We also note from the UNMOVIC Executive
Chairman's report that the period of disarmament
through inspection could still be short if there is
immediate, active and unconditional cooperation with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA. We strongly urge Iraq to
cooperate fully to ensure complete and verifiable
disarmament and thus spare the Iraqi people the untold
suffering that will result from non-compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Finally, the Republic of Korea reiterates its
commitment to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. The proliferation of all weapons of
mass destruction constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. We hope that the Security Council,
as the central organ entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, will act in a unified manner in
ensuring immediate compliance by Iraq with its
resolutions.

