The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), document
S/ 1997/239.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General of 19 March 1997 (S/l997/239)
and once again expresses its deep concern that the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation
(GURN) has not yet been established, owing primarily
to the failure of the Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) to send all
of its officials to Luanda as previously agreed. The
Council reminds UNITA of its obligations in
accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
(S/ 1994/1441, annex) and subsequent agreements
between the two parties.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the Secretary-General in his mission to Angola
to assess the situation and impress upon the parties
the need to establish the GURN without any further
delay. It calls upon the parties, in particular UNITA,
to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, and the Observer States and
to use the occasion of the Secretary-General's visit
to install the GURN.

"The Security Council remains actively seized
of the matter and recalls that, in accordance with
resolution 1098 (1997) of 27 February 1997, it will
consider the imposition of measures, including inter
alia, those specifically mentioned in paragraph 26 of
resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September 1993, against
the party responsible for the failure to form the
GURN. The Council, following the next report of
the Secretary-General, will also consider the role of
the United Nations in Angola after the expiration of
the current mandate of UNAVEM. III on 31 March
1997 on the basis of the progress made by the
parties to full implementation of their commitments
under the 'Acordos de Paz' (S/22609, annex) and
the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) as well as
their obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/ 17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.
