The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhaa'i
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security,
document S/ 1997/894.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security of 14 November 1997 (A/52/682- 8/1997/894), which was also considered by the
General Assembly.

"The Security Council reiterates its grave concern
at the continued military confrontation in Afghanistan,
which has caused human suffering and material
destruction, which threatens to lead to the
disintegration of the country and which represents a

growing threat to regional and international peace
and security. It deplores the unwillingness of the
Afghan warring factions to lay down their arms and
cooperate with the United Nations for peace.

"The Security Council stresses that the Afghan
conflict has no military solution and that the primary
responsibility for finding a peaceful settlement lies
with the Afghan parties themselves. It urges all
Afghan parties to take genuine confidence-building
measures, to agree immediately on a ceasefire, and
to engage without preconditions in a political
dialogue aimed at achieving national reconciliation,
a lasting political settlement of the conflict and the
formation of a broad-based, fully representative
government that will protect the rights of all
Afghans and abide by Afghanistan's international
obligations.

"The Security Council deplores the fact that
foreign military support to the Afghan parties
continued unabated through 1997 and reiterates its
call to all States to end immediately the supply of
arms, ammunition, military equipment, training or
any other military support to all parties to the
conflict in Afghanistan, including the involvement of
foreign military personnel.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General and Member States to undertake
preliminary studies on how an effective arms
embargo could be imposed and implemented in a
fair and verifiable manner.

"The Security Council insists that the United
Nations, as a universally recognized and impartial
intermediary, must be given all necessary support so
it can continue to play a pivotal, central role in
coordinated international efforts, including the
efforts of interested countries and organizations,
towards a peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict.
It believes that peace and stability in Afghanistan
can best be attained through intra-Afghan political
negotiations under United Nations auspices with the
active and coordinated assistance of all countries
concerned. The Council reiterates its full support for
the activities and mandates of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan and those of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan.
 

"The Security Council supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General aimed at the establishment of a
solid international framework in order to address the
external aspects of the Afghan question and, in this
context, welcomes the convening of meetings of
concerned countries as well as those of the immediate
neighbours and other countries.

"The Security Council remains deeply concerned
at the continuing discrimination against girls and
women and other violations of human rights, as well
as at violations of international humanitarian law in
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council notes with deep concern
the reports about mass killings of prisoners of war and
civilians in Afghanistan and supports the Secretary-
General's intention to continue to investigate fully
such reports.

"The Security Council expresses serious concern
over the looting of United Nations premises and food
supplies and deliberate restrictions placed on the
access of humanitarian organizations to some parts of
the country and on other humanitarian operations,
and urges all parties to prevent their recurrence.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan provides
a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
production and trafficking which destabilize the
region and beyond, and calls upon the leaders of the
Afghan parties to halt such activities.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to continue to keep it regularly informed

about the situation in Afghanistan and his efforts.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/55.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

