Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I congratulate
Ms. Hiroute Sellassie on her appointment as Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. I also
thank her for her briefings on the progress in the
implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel.

The Sahel region, which stretches across an
extensive transitional area of Africa, has faced many
complex and interconnected challenges. The region
remains vulnerable and susceptible to food insecurity,
terrorism and drug and arms trafficking, among others.
In particular, the security challenges in Libya, the
recent violent clashes in northern Mali and terrorist
attacks by Boko Haram in Nigeria have had a negative
impact on the civilian and local economies of the Sahel
region.

As such, the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel, which encompasses the three sectors
of governance, security and resilience, serves as an
invaluable framework to ensure a comprehensive and
coordinated approach to addressing such multifaceted
challenges. We believe that the full and timely
implementation of the strategy is of utmost importance.
In that vein, I would like to touch upon three points
regarding the implementation of the strategy.

First, it is important to strengthen the long-term
capacity of the Governments in the Sahel region
through the United Nations strategy. Capacity-building
can also foster the political will and national ownership
of the Governments concerned. In particular, given the
seriousness of the security challenges surrounding the
porous borders of the Sahel region, capacity-building
for border control, counter-terrorism, combating
transnational organized crime, and preventing violent
extremism needs to be urgently implemented.

Another element required is ensuring overall
coherence and complementarity. Taking into account
the various regional initiatives for the Sahel, it is
imperative to have an effective coordination and
coherence mechanism. The regional organizations,
based on their comparative advantages, should seek
to create synergies with other initiatives in order to
maximize the effectiveness of assistance and avoid the
duplication of effort. In that regard, we note that the
second meeting of the ministerial coordination platform
on strategies for the Sahel, which was held in Bamako
on 16 May, we called for the continued coordination
and priority setting through such mechanisms.

Finally, more focus should be placed on women
and young people, who are the potential driving force
for the development of the Sahel region. Women play a
key role in food production in the Sahel and often show
resilience to natural and economic shocks. Moreover,
unemployed young people are taken advantage of by
terrorist and extremist groups under circumstances of
poverty and food insecurity. Ensuring their participation
in the political process and empowering them through
assistance and support would greatly contribute to the
promotion of governance, security and resilience in the
Sahel region.

It is essential that the international community
maintain its engagement and commitment to the Sahel.
The Republic of Korea is committed to supporting those
efforts to promote peace, stability and development in
the region.

