Ms. Bensouda: Allow me to begin by offering my
congratulations to Kuwait for holding the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June and
presiding over this briefing on the situation in Darfur,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

As we are all aware, following months of
anti-Government protests and the removal from power
of Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad Al-Bashir on ll April,
the Republic of the Sudan is in an uncertain period of
political transition. While I do not underestimate the
complexity and fluidity of the events unfolding in the
Sudan today, I have a clear message to convey: now
is the time to act. Now is the time for the people of
the Sudan to choose law over impunity and ensure that
the International Criminal Court (ICC) suspects in
the Darfur situation finally face justice in a court of
law. The Council is now being presented with a unique
opportunity to decisively and effectively address
the impunity that has plagued Darfur. It must seize
this moment.

As Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
I am deeply concerned by the reports of recent violence
perpetrated against civilians, including alleged sexual
and gender-based crimes. Related violence has also
spread to other regions of the country, including
Darfur. Ijoin the members of the Council in calling for
the immediate cessation of violence against civilians,
their robust protection, and full accountability for the
alleged crimes and related suffering the victims have
endured. I also join the Council in regretting the lives
lost during the recent violence.

It is imperative that allegations of violence
against civilians, including sexual and gender-based
violence, be promptly and effectively investigated by
the Sudanese authorities and that those responsible be
brought to justice. On my part, within the scope of my
mandate and jurisdiction under the Rome Statute, I am
committed to continuing to do all that I can to secure
accountability in the Sudan. I also call for the full
cooperation of all States parties to the Rome Statute.
States parties must consistently and meaningfully fulfil
their statutory obligation to cooperate with the Court in
the investigation and prosecution of the Darfur cases.

As for the Sudan itself, it is now at a crossroads,
with the opportunity to depart from its previous
policy of complete non-cooperation with my Office
and embark upon a new chapter by signalling a new
commitment to accountability for the victims in the
Darfur situation. From our side, we are ready to engage
at the appropriate time if there is genuine will to bring
perpetrators to account.

All five ICC arrest warrants in the Darfur situation
remain in force. The circumstances, however, have
changed dramatically. The former status quo is over.
Mr. Al-Bashir has been deposed, arrested, detained and
charged with domestic offences. Two other suspects
in the Darfur situation, Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein
and Mr. Ahmad Harun, are also reportedly being
detained in Khartoum. The Sudan remains under a
legal obligation to transfer those suspects to the ICC
to stand trial, unless it can demonstrate to the judges
of the Court that it is willing and genuinely able to
prosecute them for the same cases. Consistent with the
bedrock principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute, I am ready to engage in dialogue with
the authorities in the Sudan to ensure that the Darfur
suspects face independent and impartial justice, either
in a courtroom in The Hague or in the Sudan. Continued
impunity is not an option. The victims of the Darfur
situation deserve to finally have their day in court.

There is an early history of cooperation between
my Office and the Sudan that we can and must resume.
From 2005 to 2007, with the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan, my Office undertook several
missions to that country. Since that time, there has been
no cooperation whatsoever from the Sudan. Taking into
account the complexity of the situation on the ground in
the Sudan, I am nonetheless ready to pursue cooperation
between my Office and the Sudanese authorities in
order to fulfil my mandate. In that endeavour, I must be
able to count on the full support of the Council. I invite
all stakeholders in the Sudan, including the relevant
Sudanese authorities and civil-society organizations, to
engage with my Office.

In its inaugural address on 11 April, the Transitional
Military Council made a commitment to honour all
treaties, charters and conventions - local, regional and
international. That pledge must include a commitment
to the Charter of the United Nations, pursuant to which
the Sudan is bound by the decisions of the Council,
including resolution 1593 (2005).

The judgment of the Court's Appeals Chamber on
6 May in relation to Mr. Al-Bashir's visit to Jordan
in March 2017 unequivocally confirmed the legal
obligation of State parties to arrest Heads of State
subject to ICC jurisdiction. While Mr. Al-Bashir may
no longer attempt to avail himself of immunity as
Head of State, the Appeals Chamber confirmed that
the Sudan's obligation to cooperate fully with and
provide any necessary assistance to the Court and the
Prosecutor, as mandated by paragraph 2 of Council
resolution 1593 (2005), is legally binding. The law is
clear, as is the opportunity to subject those who for so
long evaded justice, so that they finally answer to the
people of the Sudan and the world for the serious crimes
for which they stand accused before the International
Criminal Court.

This legal obligation to cooperate fully includes an
obligation to surrender those Darfur suspects already in
custody in the Sudan and to arrest and surrender those
still at large - Mr. Ali Kushayb and Mr. Abdallah
Banda. It must also include the obligation for the Sudan
to provide my Office safe and unfettered access to the
Sudan and Darfur in particular. My expectation is that
the Sudan, with the support of the Council, will engage
in dialogue with my Office to discuss the feasibility of
a mission by my Office to the Sudan in the very near
future to resolve those issues.

Together with members of the Council, past
and present, I have repeatedly stressed that ending
impunity for alleged Rome Statute crimes in Darfur
is essential to the maintenance of peace and security
in Darfur and beyond. As recent events in Darfur
sadly demonstrate, those are not empty slogans. In the
absence of accountability, security forces, including
aligned militias, allegedly continue to commit crimes
against civilians, undeterred.

Most recently, in Khartoum, the Sudan's security
forces, including the Rapid Support Forces (RSF),
allegedly attacked civilian protestors on 3 June. As
recently noted by the spokesperson for the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
RSF includes members of the former Janjaweed militias
linked to systematic human rights abuses in the Darfur
region from 2003 to 2008. Those abuses include the
crimes alleged in a number of the arrest warrants
of the suspects in the Darfur situation. It is simply
intolerable that reported attacks on civilians in Darfur
and elsewhere in the Sudan continue to be perpetrated.

I join the Council in strongly condemning the
recent violence in the Sudan. The Sudanese authorities
have announced 61 fatalities following the 3 June
attack, while civil society organizations in the Sudan
refer to the deaths of more than 100 protestors. Those
attacks also resulted in sexual and gender-based
violence and arbitrary arrests. That was the latest
of a series of reported attacks by security forces on
demonstrators in the Sudan, including in Darfur, since
mid-December 2018. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reported that, as
of 9 April, those attacks had resulted in the deaths of
70 people. It is of particular concern that, according to
the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund, at least 19 children have reportedly been killed in
the crackdown on protestors.

The 3 June attack prompted widespread calls,
including by the Secretary-General and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, for an investigation into the use of excessive
force by security forces against civilian protestors. I
am aware that the Transitional Military Council has
stated that it is investigating those events, and I urge it
to ensure that the investigation is promptly conducted
by independent experts and that it include all reported
human rights violations against peaceful protestors
throughout the Sudan, including in Darfur.

Attacks against civilian populations in Darfur have
continued during the reporting period and appear to be
increasing in severity. For example, in January a militia
attack in Kura, which I refer to as Katur in my report,
resulted in the killing of two civilians and the burning
of almost 50 houses. More recently, an attack on Deleij

market an 9 June reportedly resulted in the killing of
a number of civilians. Once again, such attacks are
unacceptable and must stop.
The approximately 1.64 million internally displaced
persons in Darfur remain especially vulnerable, and
sexual and gender-based violence continues to restrict
the freedom of movement of women and girls in camps
for internally displaced persons and areas of return.
Attacks against peacekeeping personnel also continue
in Darfur.

I share the deep concern expressed by the African
Union (AU) Peace and Security Council on 13 June
that security and political developments in the Sudan
have contributed to the recent deterioration of the
security situation in Darfur. I trust that the Council will
support the AU Peace and Security Council's call on
the international community to continue to support the
population in need in Darfur.

1 also note with concern reports that the RSF have
allegedly seized facilities and assets previously held by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). In that context, I support the
AU Peace and Security Council's resolve to extend
UNAMID's mandate for a period of 12 months and its
request to the Security Council to do the same, as well
as its rejection of the Transitional Military Council's
call for UNAMID to hand over assets to the RSF, and
its request that those assets be handed over to civilian
authorities. With respect to recent alleged crimes in
Darfur, let me be clear that I will continue to monitor
events closely, and I will not hesitate to investigate and,
where appropriate, prosecute those most responsible
for alleged crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court.

Before concluding my remarks, I wish to
acknowledge the support that my Office has received
from many States, including members of the Council,
which have publicly called for the Sudan's cooperation
with the ICC following recent developments in the
Sudan. Similarly, I want to thank all those individuals
and organizations that support my Office, including
those inside and outside the Sudan, calling for the arrest
and surrender of the Darfur suspects to the ICC. I also
express my sincere appreciation to those who continue to
provide my Office with valuable information in relation
to events in the Sudan. Their continued dedication to
ensuring justice for victims in the Darfur situation is
truly inspirational.

My Darfur team will keep working, and I will
continue to do everything in my power to obtain justice
for the victims in the Darfur situation, but my Office
cannot secure the arrest and surrender of the suspects
without support. To secure renewed cooperation
between my Office and the Sudan, the Council must
provide strong and effective support. In a press
statement issued on the 11 June (SC/13836) - more
than 14 years after referring the Darfur situation to
my Office - the Council once again emphasized the
importance of accountability andjustice in the Sudan.

With the Council's support, and the cooperation of
the authorities in the Sudan, there is an opportunity now
to make real progress in the pursuit of accountability
and justice for the victims in the Darfur situation. The
current reported violence against civilians in Darfur
must stop and all the ICC Darfur suspects must stand
trial. We must not squander this opportunity.

Now is the time to act. The victims of the Darfur
situation have waited far too long to see justice done.
We must not fail them. I thank members of the Council
for their attention, and I trust that the Council will take
decisive action in support of ensuring accountability in
this situation.

