Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): We
would like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
organized this public meeting of the Council in a spirit
of transparency. We would like also to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
progress report and to welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General himself at this important meeting.
We also commend their determination to implement
resolution 1244 (1999).

One year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), which establishes the
framework within which the international community
has committed itself to work to restore lasting peace in
Kosovo. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains the basis of
our work in Kosovo, and we reaffirm our strong
commitment to its implementation in full.
During the first phase of the mission, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) made
important progress in restoring normal living
conditions in Kosovo. Their staff is working in difficult
conditions, often risking their lives, as Ambassador
Lavrov recalled this morning. We commend them and
express our gratitude to them for their efforts and their
commitment and assure them of our support.

Regarding this support, we welcome the decision
taken by the Secretariat to authorize UNMIK to recruit
directly the civilian experts that it needs, and we are
pleased to have already received a descriptive list of
the posts and the jobs to be done. For 10 months now
we have been calling for the rapid deployment of
civilian personnel, but we have been frustrated by some
administrative problems between the Secretariat in
New York and UNMIK in Pristina. We believe this
decision is a wise one, and we have no doubt that it
will allow for a more effective and quicker recruitment
process.

As we noted in April during our visit to Kosovo
with the Security Council mission, Mr. Kouchner
deserves our respect and admiration for the way in
which he is shouldering the very heavy responsibilities
of his mandate. In particular we wish to encourage him
in his tireless efforts to maintain a relationship of
confidence and cooperation with all of the ethnic
minorities in Kosovo. This work seems to us absolutely
essential.

(spoke in English)

Despite these efforts, we all recognize that the
conditions have not yet been fully established for all
members of the Kosovar community to enjoy a safe
and peaceful life. In particular, we strongly condemn
the recent surge in acts of violence perpetrated against
Serbs in the run-up to the anniversary of resolution
1244 (1999).

KFOR has redirected its forces to concentrate on
potential hot spots. Visible proactive efforts by
UNMIK and KFOR must continue in order to combat
the culture of revenge, to protect all inhabitants of
Kosovo and to bring the guilty parties to justice. The
Mission needs the full support of the Council and of
the international community to progressively and
firmly stabilize the situation and improve human
security in Kosovo.

Within the community, our leaders must take
responsibility for promoting tolerance and respect.
UNMIK should adopt a very robust approach towards
those who do not.

UNMIK must also focus on hindrances to
reconciliation, including the crucial issue of missing
persons and detainees. This issue requires increased
attention and political will, including support for war
crimes investigations and consideration for the
nomination of a special envoy for detainees and
missing persons.

We were pleased to hear Ambassador Lavrov
speak of the importance of international humanitarian
law. We agree on the importance of respecting the
Geneva Convention in all situations of armed conflict.

On another note, the recent despicable murder of
UNMIK's Petar Topolj ski reminds us of the need
strictly to regulate media operations. Freedom of the
press is an important principle, but it should not extend
so far as to protect irresponsible journalism, which puts
people at serious risk from vigilante violence.

We are pleased that UNMIK is now working to
ensure that the media refrain from publishing details to
incite hatred and tolerance for violence. We encourage
a close watch upon media operations in the run-up to
elections in order to maintain civil law and order and to
protect human rights.

Media freedom goes hand in hand with
professionalism and responsibility. We hope the Serb
National Council will return to participate in Kosovo's
premier administrative and consultative councils. We
share important common goals with the Serb
community, and we must find the means to work
together.

In this connection, we warmly welcome the
presence of the representative here today and urge the
Serbian community to participate in the civil legislative
process.

Kosovo must have a place for people of all
ethnicities. The principles underlying Kosovo's future
need to include full respect for the rights of Serbs and
other national communities as well as a system to
ensure the implementation of these rights. It will be
important to preserve and promote the cultural,
linguistic and religious identity of Kosovo's
communities. Those who have left the community, be it
out of concern for their physical or their economic
security, must be given the opportunity and
encouragement to return in a safe, orderly and
sustainable fashion.

All communities must be fairly represented at all
levels of public administration. Now that preparations
for the municipal elections are well under way, we
encourage UNMIK to think about the second phase of
its mandate, the development of a provisional self-
governing institution. These we will need to establish a
stable, prosperous Kosovo which respects the
principles of democracy, human rights and the rule of
law.

In conclusion, we reiterate that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia will need to play a part in
reaching an eventual settlement.

Belgrade has an important role to play, for
instance in ensuring that the internally displaced
persons who are resident in Serbia can register to vote.
However, the extent of cooperation from the current
regime, particularly recent statements from
Government officials demanding an end to UNMIK's
presence, shows its disturbing lack of goodwill. A
future democratic Government in Belgrade will need to
reach out to moderate Kosovars in an effort to find a
means to live together again. Until then, Belgrade's
refusal to cooperate in good faith remains a major
impediment to the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).

