At the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month, which is for both South Africa and Belgium our last month at this virtual table. I would also like to thank the Permanent Mission of South Africa for convening today's debate on the issue of cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations. I would like to focus today on four points: first, the long-standing partnership between the African Union and the United Nations; secondly, the African Union's work in the Great Lakes region; thirdly, the importance of solutions that respect local contexts and, lastly, the sensitive issue of sanctions. First of all, we welcome the long-standing and productive partnership between the African Union and the United Nations. Since its establishment in 2008, the institutional framework has become stronger, while allowing for frequent exchanges that result in joint efforts in response to common challenges. Nonetheless, we can and must do better. A solution must be found to ensure adequate and sustainable funding of African Union peace operations. We wish to reiterate our support for United Nations funding. We would like to emphasize Belgium's willingness to further strengthen the institutional bonds between the United Nations and the African Union. Above and beyond key cooperation between the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, there are several areas with opportunities for greater synergy, such as the women and peace and security agenda. In addition, the African Union's work and discussions on transitional justice are extremely relevant to the work of the United Nations. Secondly, we would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the African Union's commitment to the Great Lakes region. Ahead of the upcoming chairmanship of the African Union by the Democratic Republic of Congo, we welcome the enhanced role of the African Union in promoting a positive regional dynamic and supporting United Nations efforts in that regard. We hope that the African Union will also be closely involved in the further implementation of the new United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework. Similarly, we welcome the lead taken by the African Union regarding Burundi. While some challenges remain, we have turned a page. As a strategic partner, alongside our European friends, we would now like to begin to write a new chapter in our bilateral relations. Thirdly, we continue to support African solutions to African problems. A good example is the African Union's Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. It accurately identifies several issues and challenges, including terrorism and climate change, and also points to various long-standing causes of conflict, such as the illegal exploitation of natural resources, that have yet to be adequately and comprehensively addressed. New conflicts on the African continent continue to deserve an initial response from the African Union or its subregional organizations, and we support the African Union in that common effort. However, the principle of subsidiarity should never imply inaction. Greater synergy between the African Union and subregional organizations, as well as optimum complementarity between the African Union and the Security Council, is essential to accelerating progress towards common objectives. It is in that spirit that Belgium expresses its support for the recent African Union initiative for dialogue in Ethiopia. Lastly, allow me to say a few words on sanctions policies. They are rooted in the values we share at the United Nations and are a tool for promoting international peace and security, preventing conflicts and upholding respect for international law, international human rights law and international humanitarian law. Belgium strongly supports the restrictive measures of the European Union where they prove necessary. They target those responsible for unfavourable acts and are designed not to harm civilian populations. We remain committed to ensuring that the humanitarian space is protected under all circumstances.
