Mr. Ruddyard (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking the delegation of the Russian Federation
for convening this briefing and for presiding over the
Security Council for the month of September.

I would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing. On behalf of my delegation, let me
also welcome the Foreign Minister of Palestine,
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, and the Foreign Minister of Jordan,
Mr. Ayman Safadi, to this meeting.

Exactly one month ago, in this Chamber, the
Council met in the spirit of responsibility to address
the agenda item entitled "Maintenance of international
peace and security: Challenges to peace and security
in the Middle East" (see S/PV.8600). At that meeting,
Member States expressed their views on the way
forward for the Middle East, underlining the primacy of
multilateralism and international law in our endeavour
to achieve lasting peace in the Middle East.

Last week, however, the incumbent Prime Minister
of Israel openly declared that if re-elected, he would
annex parts of the West Bank. Against that backdrop, I
would like to stress the following points.

First, we must denounce any act that undermines
multilateralism and international law. There are times
when it is dangerous to mince words. This is one ofthem.
Indonesia unequivocally condemns Mr. Netanyahu's
arrogant proposal. We affirm that such a proposal is
not designed to - nor can it possibly - yield security
or stability for Israel or for the region. If anything, the
plan would bury the prospects for a negotiated two-
State solution between Israelis and Palestinians upon
which United Nations policy has rested for decades
and the work of the Quartet has depended for so long.
Secretary-General Guterres has already described
the plan as being devastating to any hope of peace.
Similarly, at the extraordinary meeting of Council
of Foreign Ministers of the Member States of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation last Sunday in
Saudi Arabia, the Organization strongly rejected and
condemned Mr. Netanyahu's stated intention.

My second point is that the Council must assert its
authority in the event of any violation of international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. For
the Council, this is a very straightforward matter. In
resolution 2234 (2016), inter alia, the Council stressed
that it would not, I repeat, would not, recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties
through negotiations. The Council affirmed that Israel's
establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory
constitutes a flagrant violation of international law. Not
only does it threaten peace between them and in the
region, it also promises permanent insecurity.

Lastly, I would like to also remind us all of the
suffering of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories and of Palestinian refugees.
While we defend the hope of a two-State solution, let us
not forget the humanitarian crisis facing our Palestinian
brothers and sisters. We need to remain steadfast in
our efforts aimed at assisting the Palestinian people,
not only for humanitarian reasons, but also to enhance
the capacity of Palestinians to fully govern themselves.
To this end, we need to renew our commitment to
supporting all possible avenues by lending our utmost
assistance to the work of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and by strengthening our joint efforts through any
possible means.

Indonesia wishes to reiterate that a peaceful
resolution of the Palestinian issue can only be found in
the vision oftwo States coexisting within internationally
agreed parameters. We call on the international
community to come together to put the peace process
back on track and implement the two-State solution.
This is the only way to ensure that dangerous proposals
such as this do not arise again in future.

