Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to start by
joining previous speakers in expressing appreciation
for the Secretary-General's latest report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). I would also like to commend Mr. Annabi
for his briefing, which once again illustrated
UNMISET's good performance in discharging its
mandate.

I shall be very brief. Romania, as an acceding
country, aligns itself fully with the statement to be
made shortly by Ambassador Hoscheit on behalf of the
European Union.

Regarding the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL) - the follow-on special political
mission in Timor-Leste - Romania upholds the
approach reflected in resolution 1599 (2005). Romania
deems it a sound balancing act between, on the one
hand, the need to acknowledge the completion of the
mandate and fulfilment of the purposes of a successful
United Nations peacekeeping operation and, on the
other, the requirement of continued United Nations
support to prevent precious post-conflict achievements
from falling victim to persistent challenges.
We thus noted with satisfaction the indications in
the report of significant progress in terms of stability,
development and the strengthening of democracy and
State institutions in Timor-Leste. Those are, to a large
extent, attributable to the work accomplished by
UNMISET. We are also encouraged by the continuous
improvement of cooperation between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, which, it is hoped, will bring about further
progress in the resolution of outstanding issues,
including the completion of the land border
delineation.

At the same time, we concur with the evidence
presented in the Secretary-General report about the
remaining challenges. We do not wish to elaborate
unnecessarily on them, other than to re-emphasize the
need for continued international and bilateral
assistance to Timor-Leste, with the goal of its
achieving full self-reliance. The United Nations has a
central role to play within that framework. The
mandate crafted for UNOTIL - that of a new mission
with a predominantly political and civilian dimension,
retaining, as the same time, a reasonable presence in
terms of military advisers - is adequately fine-tuned
to address those requirements and expectations.

I would like to make a final comment about
Romania's position regarding efforts to bring an end to
impunity in relation to serious human rights violations
of 1999. We have welcomed the establishment of the
Secretary-General's Commission of Experts, as well as
the agreement reached between the Governments of
Timor-Leste and Indonesia on the setting up of a Truth
and Friendship Commission. The two measures have
the potential to make a difference within the overall
effort to put an end to impunity. We encourage
coordination between the two Commissions. At the
same time, it is important that all Member States
cooperate with their work.

