Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Although my esteemed
colleague from the Philippines has already read my
notes, I will repeat some of those remarks. First of all,
Pakistan warmly welcomes the progress that has been
made in the Somali peace process. We commend the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for this success and believe that it is an example that
other regions can follow. We welcome the election of
the parliament and the election of the President and the
appointment of the Prime Minister.

We welcome President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed
to the Security Council. We would like to add that we
are very happy that the Council decided to discuss
Somalia at this meeting in Nairobi; it is most
appropriate that we should devote attention to this
other critical conflict in this region.

We listened attentively to the statements by the
IGAD facilitator, by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Djibouti and Kenya and by my friend, the Ethiopian
envoy, and have taken due note of these statements. We
hope that the presidential statement that the Council
will adopt will reflect the sense that has been conveyed
that we welcome the establishment of the Transitional
Government and reaffirm our full support to the peace
process.

It is obvious that security is a priority
consideration, and the President has rightly underlined
this aspect. Of course, a comprehensive security
strategy will involve the consolidation of peace at the
local level, the full process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the creation of the
national army and, perhaps most importantly, a process
of reconciliation that involves all Somalis, including
those who have thus far remained outside of the peace
process.

The President and other speakers have appealed
for Security Council support for a stabilization force,
and we note that the African Union's response to this
has been positive. We hope the Council will be able to
hold consultations on this request and that a viable
response will be offered to give hope to the Somali
people, who are proceeding so boldly on the path to
peace.

Finally, Somalia must be given assistance to
make the new Government functional. Such assistance
should not wait for completion of the peace process but
should, we believe, proceed simultaneously. The
United Nations should assume an enhanced role
throughout Somalia, including in the process of
reconciliation and building bridges between all
Somalis, including those who are not yet involved in
the peace process.
