Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing to us
this morning and for her presentation to the Security
Council of the Prosecutor's seventh report. Jordan
underscores the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in combating impunity. We reiterate our ongoing
support for the efforts of the ICC in that regard.

Successive Libyan Governments since 2011 have
pledged to continue to enshrine the principles of the
rule of law and accountability for the crimes committed
during the conflict. We accept that there continue to
be challenges, obstacles and several security problems
facing Libya, which could undermine the progress made
thus far. We commend the efforts of the Government
to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and
with the ICC. We welcome references in the seventh
report concerning the imminent implementation of
the memorandum of understanding signed last year
between the Libyan Government and the Office of the
Prosecutor with regard to burden-sharing in carrying out
additional investigations and trials of suspects outside
Libyan territory. We also call on the Government to
expedite its conclusion of an agreement with the ICC
Registrar with regard to privilages and immunities, so
as to facilitate the work of ICC staff.

We are concerned about the slow progress in
dealing with the issue of detainees in Libya. We call
on the Government to work closely with the United
Nations to put an end to the crisis and release detainees
against whom there is no evidence for prosecution,
as well as to refer to national courts cases of persons
against whom there is evidence for trials in line with
due process and established legal rules. That will serve
to generate confidence in the Libyan judicial system.
With regard to the investigations carried out by the
Office of the Prosecutor into the approximately 30,000
persons displaced from Tawergha, we support the
conclusion of the Prosecutor's Office that this is a case
of forced displacement. In that regard, we commend the
efforts of the Libyan Government to hold consultations
and meetings with the inhabitants of Tawergha. We
hope that the Government will succeed in resolving
this situation and ensuring the return of the displaced
to their homes.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
its thanks to Ms. Bensouda for the information she has
provided us in the cases of SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi.

