Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing and
for her efforts to uphold the international rule of law,
justice and accountability.

Having reviewed the twenty-fifth report of the
Office of the Prosecutor on the Court's recent work to
implement resolution 1593 (2005), relating to Darfur,
we are pleased to note the considerable progress made
with regard to the security and humanitarian situation
in the country. We encourage that all efforts be made
to maintain that positive trend, with determined steps
to further reduce the tension between Government
forces and armed groups. The fewer incidents of
inter-communal clashes during the reporting period as
compared to the previous year, as well as the decline in
incidents of rape and sexual abuse, must continue so as
to de-escalate and avert unrest.

Kazakhstan welcomes the fact that access to areas in
Darfur has been significantly facilitated and expanded,
including the ability of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to visit
areas in J ebel Marra. We encourage the Government of
the Sudan to further continue its good cooperation with
UNAMID in all areas, in the greater interests of the
Sudanese people and to ensure progress and prosperity
for them.

Kazakhstan is confident that inclusive dialogue is
the only way towards a resolution of the Darfur crisis.
In that regard, we support the inclusive political process
under the leadership of the African Union (AU) High-
level Implementation Panel. We encourage all efforts to
fully implement the road map agreement by all parties.
We therefore commend the unilateral ceasefire declared
by the Government of the Sudan for an additional six
months ending on 15 June. We express our hope that it
will be extended further. The time ahead of us should
be used to consolidate the gains.

My delegation believes that respecting the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Sudan, as well as the ownership and leadership by
the Government of the political process, are crucial
elements for long-term peace and reconciliation in
Darfur. We need to support the Sudan's capability to
restore and promote the rule of law, address impunity
and protect human rights. The United Nations system
and international partners, together with the country
team, should make a concerted effort to help the
Sudan to continue the progress that has been made,
with a view to achieving international norms and
obligations with regard to peace and security and
sustainable development.

We commend the efforts of the AU and other
regional organizations and neighbouring countries to
resolve the crisis in Darfur. We welcome the fact that the
African Union has established a ministerial committee
to deal with the Sudan issue at the ICC. We believe
that the position stated by the AU should be taken into
consideration. In the light of that, we encourage that an
effective ongoing dialogue take place between the ICC
and the AU.

Finally, Kazakhstan stands ready to join in
multilateral action to help the Government and the
people of the Sudan to realize their national aspirations
on all fronts.

