Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Ottoman State started by invading Syria in 1516, as everyone knows. However, the Syrians, known for their patience, overthrew the Ottoman State in Syria in 1916, after 400 dark years of Ottoman occupation. Today, as members have seen, the Turkish representative threatened us once again, very arrogantly. He deems himself to be above the law. Our disagreement is not with the Turkish people. Our disagreement is with the Erdogan party, which sponsors terrorism in my country. Our disagreement is with the sponsors of terrorism in Turkey, because that terrorism has destroyed our infrastructure and led to the killing of hundreds of thousands of civilians. I told the Council in my statement that the Turkish regime had cut off the water supply to Al-Hasakah province, where 600,000 civilians live. The representative of the Turkish regime has no right to speak on behalf of the Syrian people; only the Syrian Government can speak on their behalf. Neither he, nor his leader nor his President can speak on behalf of the Syrian people. We speak on behalf of the Syrian people. We are the representatives of the Syrian people in this international Organization. The Syrian Government has not been waging a war against its own people. We are in a legitimate war against terrorism and against the sponsors of terrorism: Turks, Qataris and Saudis. They are the proxies, but the original sponsors, in the West, are even more dangerous because they are initial sponsors of terrorism. My country's Government is the victim of an unprecedented terrorist project to target a legitimate Government by investing in terrorism. All present have seen what happened when some invested in terrorism in Iraq; when they did so in Libya; and when they did so in Africa, especially in the Horn of Africa, where Erdogan's regime sponsors terrorism. Wherever we look, we find the fingerprints of the Turkish regime on the sponsoring of terrorism in those regions. Of course, I could speak about this issue at length, but in the interests of time I shall not. We have seen clearly today that some ignore the importance of the Astana framework and say that it is no longer viable. This is not true. The Astana framework compels the Turkish regime to fight terrorism. That is why the Turkish regime does not want the Astana framework to be sustained and successful. The Astana framework compels it to combat terrorism in Idlib and to distinguish between terrorism and the so-called moderate opposition.The Syrian Government has no problem with the civilian opposition because we deal with it in Geneva. There is a Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, and, before him, there were Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Brahimi. We have no problem with unarmed and non-terrorist civilian opposition. We must distinguish between the two. The Syrian Government has the right to combat the terrorism sponsored by Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia, as I said, along with other countries. The Astana framework is what has led to the current situation of peace and safety in most Syrian territories. That is why they want to distance themselves from the Astana framework. They have a terrorist project. They want to perpetuate terrorism by exerting political pressure on the Syrian Government. This is their project. The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
