Mr. Feltman: As we meet today, the intensification
of the violence the United Nations was trying so hard to
head offis becoming a reality in and around Gaza. This
is all the more dismaying as it comes so soon after signs
of hope had emerged, specifically the attempt by Egypt
to broker a ceasefire, followed by the United Nations
brokering of a humanitarian pause. For five hours
yesterday, a temporary ceasefire, mostly respected by
all parties, allowed civilians in Gaza to resume some
vital activities to sustain their daily lives. The pause
allowed workers to start some repairs on essential
electrical and water infrastructure. In Israel, civilians
were largely spared rocket fire for the same period.

The Secretary-General was therefore alarmed when
militants resumed the firing of projectiles out of the
Gaza Strip after the expiration of the lull, frustrating
our hopes that the humanitarian pause would be the
beginning of de-escalation. It pains us that the much-
needed reprieve was so short.

Shortly after the rockets fired into Israel marked
the end of the humanitarian pause, Prime Minister
Netanyahu announced the launch of a ground operation
into Gaza. To our knowledge, the Israeli Defense Forces

(IDF) has so far conducted four ground incursions
into Gaza and conducted some 90 air strikes, firing
91 missiles, mostly inside the access restricted area,
which has been extended to 3 kilometres. The IDF
at the barrier fired some 357 tank shells, while the
Israeli Navy fired some 150 shells. Since the end of
the humanitarian pause, militants have fired some 127
rockets and 29 mortar shells at Israel. Approximately
20 Palestinian houses were hit. Some 26 Palestinians
were killed and another 116 injured. One IDF soldier
was killed.

The Secretary-General is extremely concerned
that this escalation will further increase the already
appalling death toll among Gazan civilians. Israel
has legitimate security concerns and we condemn the
indiscriminate rocket fire from Gaza into Israel that
ended yesterday's temporary ceasefire, but we are
alarmed by Israel's heavy response. The Secretary-
General was shocked by the terrible killing by an
Israeli strike of four children on a beach in Gaza City
on 16 July. Three more children from one family were
killed yesterday. No further illustration is needed. The
violence must end.

Since 8 July when hostilities intensified in the lead-
up to the current escalation, over 2,000 rockets were
fired from Gaza into Israel, of which some 1,100 struck
Israel and hundreds were intercepted by the Iron Dome.
Two Israelis were killed, including one civilian. Twelve
IDF soldiers and 365 Israeli civilians were injured. In
the same period, some 261 Palestinians, a majority of
them civilians, including at least 48 women and over
50 children, have been killed, and over 1,600 have been
injured, as a result of some 1,900 strikes on Gaza from
land, air and sea. Israeli bombardment inflicted damage
to schools, health facilities and water and sanitation
infrastructures. Over 1,800 Palestinian families have
had their homes destroyed or severely damaged.

Since the beginning of the crisis, the Secretary-
General has urged regional and international partners to
exert all possible influence to bring about an immediate
end to the suffering and bloodshed. Since the last
briefing (see S/PV.7214) to the Council on 10 July, the
Secretary-General has been in touch around the clock
with world leaders to facilitate united and effective
action to stop the violence in and around Gaza and the
unbearable stress on Israeli families from continued
rocket attacks. We had hoped that the successful
brokering of a humanitarian pause would also help
efforts led by Egypt to facilitate a ceasefire on the basis
of the understanding of November 2012. The United
Nations has repeatedly expressed our support for all
efforts to put an end to the violence. We appreciate that
Israel accepted the Egyptian proposal for a ceasefire.
However, Hamas tabled counterproposals to the
Egyptian proposal that were in turn not acceptable to
Israel.

The Palestinian Authority has also expressed its
support for a ceasefire, and President Abbas has been
actively engaged with regional and world leaders in an
appeal for an end to the crisis. President Abbas met with
Egyptian President Al Sisi in Cairo yesterday to discuss
the Egyptian proposal. Both Presidents reportedly
agreed on the necessity of an immediate ceasefire
and on the urgency of holding a donors conference to
start rebuilding the Gaza Strip. President Abbas is now
scheduled to arrive in Turkey today for meetings with
Turkish President Gill and Prime Minister Erdogan to
discuss the situation.

President Abbas has also reportedly indicated
that, in the event of a ceasefire, he would be willing
to redeploy Palestinian Authority forces along the
Philadelphi corridor, between Gaza and Egypt, to
enable a reopening of the Rafah border crossing under
their supervision. That would be a key component of
bringing Gaza back under one legitimate Palestinian
Government, adhering to the Palestinian Liberation
Organization commitments and enabling that
Government to deliver tangible improvements to the
lives of Gazans. President Abbas has further written
to the Secretary-General requesting that Palestine
be placed under an international protection system
administered by the United Nations. The Secretary-
General is carefully studying that request.

The international community, including this
Council, has issued numerous calls for an end to violence
and for the protection of civilians. We again call for an
immediate end to the indiscriminate firing of rockets
by Hamas into Israel and Israeli retaliatory action. All
parties must respect international humanitarian and
human rights law. They must be held accountable for
any breaches of those obligations. We also again ask
parties to do their utmost to ensure that humanitarian
assistance continues to reach all those in need. A11 must
ensure the protection of civilians and the integrity of
United Nations premises and staff. In that regard, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has strongly
condemned those responsible for placing approximately
20 rockets in a vacant UNRWA school in the Gaza Strip
as a flagrant violation ofthe inviolability ofits premises
under international law. The Agency has launched a
comprehensive investigation into that incident.

A ceasefire is indispensable and urgent. Until efforts
to that end succeed, further humanitarian pauses will
remain necessary, and we urge the parties to consider
such windows so that civilians can move freely and
undertake vital activities. The United Nations in Gaza
has been a crucial provider of emergency assistance
to alleviate the humanitarian impact of the escalation.
UNRWA has been playing a lead role in providing
shelter in 43 different facilities to around 47,000 Gazans
who have nowhere else to flee following IDF warnings
to leave their houses before they come under attack.
UNRWA's capacity is stretched to the limit, raising
fears that further civilians warned of IDF operations
could not be accommodated in terms of supplies.

Unless we address the root causes of the current
escalation, this dreadful violence will recur again
and again. We cannot return to the status quo
ante - a concern that Palestinians and Israelis share.
Core elements of resolution 1860 (2009) remain
unimplemented. Once calm is restored, it is imperative
to immediately tackle the underlying causes. These
include an end to weapons smuggling, the full opening
of the crossings and bringing Gaza back under one
legitimate Palestinian Government adhering to the
PLO commitments.

As for the latter, it is imperative to address the
issue of governance. Tens of thousands of employees
hired after 2007 and working in Gaza are not getting
paid, while over 60,000 employees continue to receive
salaries from Ramallah without performing the essential
governance functions that Gaza so urgently needs. That
is simply not sustainable. The United Nations remains
prepared to help facilitate all efforts in that regard,
in coordination and consultation with all concerned
parties. The parties must seize this opportunity to
not only renew a ceasefire but also to support durable
political, security, institutional and socioeconomic
progress that stabilizes Gaza.

As the Secretary-General has noted, the impact of
the Gaza crisis is starting to be felt within the region.
We would also note that since the 9 July meeting of
the Council on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006), at least 11 rockets were launched from the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area
of operations towards Israel in five separate incidents
between 11 and 18 July. According to the information
available so far, five rockets hit Israel, while four fell
inside Lebanon and two into the sea. In addition, on
11 July the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) found and
dismantled two rockets set to launch towards Israel.
The Israel Defense Forces retaliated on all occasions
with several rounds of artillery or illumination fire
across the Blue Line towards the launching areas. No
casualties or significant damage have been reported
from either side so far.

In each instance, UNIFIL immediately engaged
with the IDF and the LAF to urge them to exercise
maximum restraint and cooperate with UNIFIL in order
to prevent further escalation and restore the cessation of
hostilities. The Lebanese security forces announced the
arrest of three people in connection with the 11, 13 and
14 July attacks. UNIFIL, in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, is maintaining an enhanced
operational presence on the ground and has intensified
patrols across the area of operations to prevent further
incidents. The Lebanese Armed Forces have increased
their presence in the area.

On a different front, recent violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement between Israel
and Syria have shown the grave danger that the security
situation continues to pose to stability in the Golan. On
three occasions this month, explosions and rockets from
the Bravo side impacting on the Alpha side led the IDF
to respond with fire to the Bravo side. In a very recent
development, on 15 July Syrian Arab Armed Forces
troops with heavy weapons deployed in proximity to
United Nations observation position 56. The exchange of
fire between the Syrian Arab Armed Forces and armed
members of the opposition resulted in mortar rounds
impacting in the vicinity of the position. Subsequently,
armed members of the opposition approached United
Nations observation position 68 demanding that United
Nations peacekeepers ask the Syrian Arab Armed
Forces to move away from position 56, failing which
they would attack position 68.

The threat by armed members of the opposition was
repeated today, when a United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) patrol escorting a logistic
convoy from positions 60 to 68 was intercepted and
armed members of the opposition handed UNDOF a
written notice threatening to attack operating position
56 if the Syrian Arab Armed Forces did not vacate.
As we speak, the Syrian Arab Armed Forces remain
30 metres to the north and 200 metres to the south of
observation position 56. Position 56 is a communications
hub for all United Nations positions south of it. Those
developments seriously threaten the safety and security
of United Nations personnel and have the potential to
jeopardize the ceasefire between Israel and Syria.

While we focus on Gaza today, we must not forget
the bigger picture. The escalation in Gaza has also
had repercussions in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, as clashes have occurred between those
demonstrating in support of Gaza and the Israeli
security forces. Since this morning, restrictions have
been placed on Palestinian access to the holy places in
the Old City of Jerusalem, and Israeli security forces
are heavily deployed. Reported clashes since have led to
several Palestinians being injured. In addition, tensions
persist, including from settler violence, putting a strain
on the much-needed security coordination between
the Israeli and Palestinian security forces. Our appeal
stands to the Israeli and Palestinian leadership to defuse
tensions and act responsibly.

The situation on the ground is ultimately the result
of a collective failure to advance a political solution for
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Temporary fixes will no
longer do. The international community must assume
its responsibility to urgently help restore a serious
prospect for a two-State solution that will bring an
end to the decades-long conflict and occupation. That
is the only way to make a ceasefire last. It is the only
way to break the seemingly endless cycle of attack and
retaliation. It is the only way to ensure a durable peace
for this and succeeding generations of Palestinians and
Israelis.

The Secretary-General is prepared to do his part.
He will leave for the region tomorrow to express
solidarity with Israelis and Palestinians and to help
them, in coordination with regional and international
actors, to end the violence and to find a way forward.

