Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Sangqu of South Africa, Ambassador
Wittig of Germany and Ambassador Singh Puri of
India for their detailed reports on the activities of the
counter-terrorism Committees and for their dynamic
and excellent efforts in leading those activities. The
recommendations and analyses in their briefings
deserve our careful attention.
The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) are essential mechanisms to ensure
the implementation of the obligations derived from
those instruments. It is therefore essential to continue
coordinating their activities, to continuously assess
their working methods and to revitalize their tools in
order to facilitate assistance and cooperation to
Member States.

The 1540 Committee has shown a positive trend
in the implementation by States of measures to prevent
nuclear, chemical and/or biological weapons and their
delivery systems from falling into the hands of armed
non-State actors, and to prevent the spread of such
weapons by strengthening the international
non-proliferation regimes.

Among the Committee's activities, two deserve
special mention: the adoption of the report (see S/2011/579) on compliance with resolution 1540
(2004), submitted in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1810 (2008); and the adoption of its tenth
programme of work. In addition, the four working
groups created in 2009 as part of the Committee's
eighth programme of work, which focus on national
monitoring and national implementation, assistance,
cooperation with international organizations and
transparency and media outreach, respectively, have
proven to be very useful in making the work of the
Committee more efficient and effective.

The organization of outreach activities at the
national, subregional and regional levels has been
useful to efforts to promote Member State
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
spirit, Colombia will hold, next March in Bogota, a
regional workshop for representatives of Governments,
the private sector and civil society. This will be a
valuable opportunity to promote and facilitate
interaction between Member States and international,
regional and subregional organizations.

The 1540 Committee has been an important
partner in the context of non-proliferation. Its
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations has made an effective
contribution to improving border and export controls,
increasing technical assistance and building national
capacities. We recognize, however, that much remains
to be done. The threat remains extremely serious and
we can confront it only by adopting appropriate and
effective measures.

Regarding the 1267 Committee, Colombia
welcomes the reforms of the regime introduced in
resolution 1989 (2011), which are aimed at improving
respect for due process, transparency and quality of the
information contained in the consolidated list.

The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson and the strengthening of its mandate in
resolution 1989 (2011) have been fundamental steps in
efforts to strengthen and ensure the legitimacy of the
regime. The number of de-listing requests processed by
the Office, the reports that it has presented to the
Committee and the decisions taken to date as a result
of its efforts show that this is an essential entity that
could be replicated in all sanctions committees.

In order to benefit the sanctions regime, two
areas need to be strengthened: the quality of
information submitted by States when proposing names
for inclusion on the sanctions list, and the provision of
technical assistance to States in order to facilitate the
full implementation of their obligations.

I will now refer to the 1373 Committee. We agree
with Ambassador Puri on the relevance of the special
meeting commemorating the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and the outcome
document adopted, which reflects the issues on which
there is consensus within the Organization.

We also highlight the publication of the global
implementation survey of resolution 1373 (2001),
updated to 2011, which provides an overview of the
progress achieved in implementing the various aspects
of the resolution and assesses the evolution and
emergence of risks. Despite the deficiencies and gaps
identified in the survey, States have clearly made
significant progress and now have more appropriate
legal and operational frameworks to fight terrorism.

That is why the Committee must strengthen its
dialogue with Member States and work closely and in a
coordinated manner with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other United Nations
bodies, which have the experience and the mandate to
assist States in capacity-building to implement the
numerous international instruments related to the fight
against terrorism, including the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We agree with the Chair of the 1373 Committee
that there is a need to continue paying particular
attention to respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism. In that regard, we
highlight the emphasis given in resolutions 1624
(2005) and 1963 (2010) to this core aspect of
international counter-terrorism efforts. Colombia is
convinced that more attention needs to be given to
defending and protecting the rights of victims. We must
ensure that the voices of the victims are heard and that
States have appropriate mechanisms for redress. To
that end, targeted measures should be promoted in
order to protect, promote and recognize the rights of
victims.

My delegation welcomes the briefing given to the
1373 Committee by the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. We
trust that the Committee will hold more such
exchanges and continue to cooperate closely with his
office.

In conclusion, and stressing the importance that
Colombia attaches to defending and protecting the
rights of victims of terrorism, I would like to draw
attention to the forthcoming publication of the
handbook on criminal justice responses to terrorism,
prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in collaboration with some States, including
Colombia. We hope that the handbook will provide the
basis for the capacity-building activities undertaken by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to ensure that the voices of the victims are
heard in criminal proceedings.

