Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and to start by
expressing the Movement's appreciation for the
briefing presented today by Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, which remains one of the most important tools
for assessing the situation on the ground and for
addressing efforts aimed at advancing the peaceful
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The situation in the Middle East, which has
deteriorated as a result of the ongoing unlawful Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories since 1967, continues to be a matter of
serious concern not only to the region, but to the entire
international community.

The Non-Aligned Movement regrets the lack of
progress made, despite increased efforts at the
international and regional levels, in achieving a just
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine and a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East on the basis of
the two-State solution, the Madrid terms of reference,
the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1373 (2001), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008).
That lack of progress is due to Israel's continued
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights laws, and its rejection
of all calls to cease its flagrant violations and to pursue
negotiations in good faith on all tracks of the peace
process.

Israel, the occupying Power, obstructs efforts to
resume peace negotiations by its violations of the
human rights of the Palestinian people, including their
humiliation on a daily basis, in addition to its constant
actions aimed at imposing unilateral solutions by
illegally creating new facts on the ground aimed at
2

altering the demographic composition, status and
character of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

Israel does not refrain from taking measures that
prejudice the outcome of negotiations on final-status
issues, namely Jerusalem, settlements, the refugees,
borders, security and water. Such illegal measures
deepen mistrust, provoke further tension, prevent real
progress and raise real doubts as to Israel's credibility
as a partner in the peace process.

In the West Bank, Israel continues its illegal
colonization of the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in and around East Jerusalem, intensifying
its confiscation of Palestinian land, expansion of
settlements and transfer of settlers, construction of the
wall and other destructive measures, including the
demolition of more Palestinian homes, in an attempt to,
de facto, annex more Palestinian land. All of that is
being done in grave breach of international law and
United Nations resolutions, as well as Israel's
commitments under the Road Map, which clearly calls
for a freeze of all Israeli settlement activities, including
natural growth, and the dismantlement of all outposts
established since March 2001.

Israel has failed to commit to a freeze on all
settlement activities and continues to defy the
international consensus in that regard. The
international community, including the Security
Council, must use all practical means and tools
available under the Charter and international law to
take the necessary measures to compel or to bring
Israel into compliance. The Non-Aligned Movement
expresses deep concern regarding the extensive
damage caused by the Israeli settlements, the wall and
the spread of checkpoints, which are severing the
Palestinian territories into separate cantons, isolating
East Jerusalem, undermining the contiguity, integrity,
viability and unity of the Palestinian territory, and
jeopardizing the prospects for achieving the two-State
solution.

Further, the unresolved crisis in Gaza continues
to have negative repercussions on all efforts to advance
the peace process and wreaks unacceptable havoc on
the fabric of society and civilian life in Gaza. Israel
continues to impose a blockade on the Palestinian
civilian population, to deprive them of their
humanitarian needs and to prevent Gaza's
reconstruction, in violation of international
09-42592
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).

The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
lift immediately its illegal blockade by allowing for the
immediate and sustained opening of all border
crossings to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and to
realize the urgent early recovery and reconstruction of
Gaza. The Non-Aligned Movement also believes that
there is no legal, political or moral justification for the
Israeli imprisonment of the Palestinian population in
Gaza and calls for the end of such unlawful collective
punishment.

Turning to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned Movement
remains deeply concerned by Israel's ongoing air and
land violations of Lebanon's sovereignty, in breach of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), and calls on
Israel to withdraw fully from the remaining Lebanese
occupied land in the Sheba'a farms, the Kfar Shouba
Hills and the northern part of al-Ghajar village.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structure, as well as the Israeli
measures to impose jurisdiction and administration
there, are null and void and have no legal effect. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel abide by
Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation also of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

International determination to work towards
achieving peace in the Middle East and ensuring that
commitments made are commitments monitored and
kept is stronger today than ever before. The Arab side
has reiterated time after time the readiness and
willingness for peace, as stipulated in the Arab Peace
Initiative, based on the concept of full land for full
peace. It is now the responsibility of Israel to seize the
opportunity to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace by stopping its illegal settlement
activities, bringing an end to its 42-year occupation
and clearly committing to the two-State solution, to be
achieved peacefully through negotiations on all core
issues on the basis of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions. In that regard, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its firm commitment
09-42592
to continue to support and to contribute to all efforts
aimed at achieving peace in the Middle East.

(spoke in Arabic)

I shall now speak in my national capacity. Egypt
is participating in the efforts to relaunch the peace
process, which, regrettably, are countered by
continuing Israeli rejection of the requirements for
peace, primarily the full cessation of all settlement
activities, in accordance with the commitments under
the Road Map. Israel's escalation of its settlement
policy, particularly in and around East Jerusalem, does
not serve the goals of peace, but seeks to change the
realities on the ground and to create a new reality to
prejudge the final-status negotiations, hoping that the
international community will stand silent in the face of
attempts to seize Palestinian territory and to annex it
de facto. However, the international community as a
whole stands against Israel's settlement policies and is
aware of its real endeavours and rejects them.

In this context, Egypt warns of the consequences
of settlement and so-called natural growth activities,
which not only hinder efforts to relaunch the peace
process, but are also aimed at undermining the
contiguity of the Palestinian territories and at
obliterating the chances of achieving an international
solution based on the existence of two States along the
lines of the 1967 borders. Those activities call into
question the credibility of the Israeli Government's
commitment to the peace process, in particular because
they directly contradict the main principle upon which
the process was established - the principle of land for
peace.

Egypt warns against Israel's intensifying
endeavours to alter the features of occupied East
Jerusalem and to separate it from its Arab and
Palestinian surroundings through the confiscation and
demolition of Palestinian homes and the construction
of new settlement units, including the planned
construction of 20 new housing units in the Sheikh
Jarrah neighbourhood. Israel has also attempted to
violate the sanctity of Islamic holy shrines in the city
by issuing statements that Jerusalem, including all of
its neighbourhoods, is the united capital of Israel. All
of those actions clearly contradict United Nations
resolutions repudiating all of Israel's attempts to annex
East Jerusalem and declaring them null and void.

At the same time, international endeavours to
attain a just and agreed solution to the long-term
3
refugee problem must be intensified. Israel has tried to
skirt that issue, in particular through recent increased
talk within the Israeli Government of the concept of a
Jewish State. Such talk has a negative impact on the
entire Arab population of the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Today more than ever, the international
community must work to end Israel's violations and to
compel it to comply with its obligations to protect
Palestinian civilians and to work to promote peace and
security in the Middle East.

Egypt encourages the efforts of the United States
Government and welcomes the sincere desire of its
President to work towards a comprehensive peace in
the Middle East by ending settlement activity and
enshrining an objective vision of a two-State solution.
Egypt also supports the efforts of the international
Quartet, which has sent a clear message of solidarity
with the two-State solution and supports the convening
of a meeting in Moscow later this year to follow up on
the implementation of the Annapolis process. Egypt
will spare no effort to achieve Palestinian
reconciliation through the Cairo dialogue leading to the
reunification of the Palestinian people in the West
Bank and Gaza, under the legitimate leadership of the
Palestinian Authority represented by President Abbas.

Egypt is also working on arrangements to allow
the sustainable opening of the Gaza crossing points
based on the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access, an end to the collective punishment by Israel
of the Palestinian civilian population in Gaza, and the
honest and full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009).

