Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Prosecutor Fatour
Bensouda for her briefing. We have great respect for
her and the responsibility that she has. There should
be no doubt about that, despite the differences that we
have had - and still have.

We strongly condemn the recent attack carried out
by an unidentified group against peacekeepers of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) in Nyala, in South Darfur state.
We mourn the death of the Nigerian peacekeeper and
express our condolences to his family, as well as to the
people and the Government of Nigeria.

The topic of this afternoon's discussion is very
important to us indeed, for obvious reasons. Time and
again, we in Africa have affirmed our unflinching
commitment to fighting impunity and promoting
democracy, the rule of law and good governance
throughout the continent, in line with the Constitutive
Act of the African Union. That has been empirically
validated by bold actions taken by the African Union
(AU) in recent times. When it comes to the International
Criminal Court (ICC), many African Union member
States have ratified the Rome Statute, faithfully
subscribing to its cardinal objectives and principles.
Unfortunately, the manner in which the International
Criminal Court has been operating ended up being a
major disappointment and left a very bad impression
in Africa. That is why Africa has been expressing a
serious reservation about the ICC, and this has been
reflected in a number of decisions adopted by the policy
organs of the African Union.

On the issue of the Sudan and the ICC in particular,
the African Union was convinced that the referral by
the Council of the situation in Darfur to the ICC and
subsequent developments as it related to the President
of the Sudan would cause more harm than good. That
it would seriously undermine the ongoing efforts aimed
at facilitating the early resolution of the conflict in
Darfur was in no doubt.

In view of the delicate nature of the peace process,
the AU repeatedly requested the suspension of the
proceedings against President Omar Al-Bashir of the
Sudan and urged the Security Council to withdraw said
referral to the ICC. Given the indispensable role that
the Sudanese President was playing for peace, not only
in the Sudan but also in the subregion in general, it was
the conviction of the AU, including at the summit level,
that the whole effort was short-sighted, with grave
implications for the peace and security of the region.

The position taken by the AU was not by any means
the result of an emotional reaction motivated by the
urge to defend an African leader regardless; far from it.
Past experiences on our continent and elsewhere amply
demonstrate the need to balancejustice on the one hand,
and security and reconciliation on the other, in complex
conflict situations. It is in the light of this fact that we

in Africa have been insisting on the importance of
finding homegrown solutions to some of the intractable
conflicts on our continent.

It is on the basis of this understanding that the
African Union requested said deferral, in accordance
with article 16 of the Rome Statute, under Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter.

It is indeed regrettable that Africa's repeated
requests have so far been neither heard nor acted
upon. That is why we feel that it is our obligation, as
an African member, to reiterate once again the request
made by the African Union, which should be responded
to by the Council with a view to promoting lasting
peace and reconciliation in the Sudan.

The undue politicization that has victimized the
President of the Sudan needs to come to an end. I hope
that Prosecutor Bensouda will come to this conclusion,
for which she will need the support of the Council.

The fact that Sudan has been playing a constructive
role in dealing with peace and security issues in the
region is not widely recognized. President Omar Hassan
Al-Bashir has indeed been demonstrating the political
leadership and commitment necessary to resolve the
Darfur issue and also address outstanding issues with
South Sudan.

As we have been saying for quite some time now
and as acknowledged by the various reports of the
Secretary-General, including the recent special report
on the strategic review of UNAMID (S/2017/437),
the situation in Darfur has continued to show marked
progress. The hostilities between the Government of
the Sudan and rebel forces have decreased substantially,
and the security situation on the ground has improved
significantly.

I wish to applaud Prosecutor Bensouda for
recognizing and appreciating this fact. The Darfur
peace process laid out by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and supported by UNAMID has
also achieved some progress. This notwithstanding, the
lack of constructive engagement by the leaders of the
remaining armed movements has been a major obstacle.

Of course, we also recognize that a lot remains to
be done in addressing the root causes of the conflict in
Darfur and ensuring long-term stability. It is for that
reason that we would like to call on the Government
to redouble its efforts to implement all the remaining
tasks. The international community should also live
up to its commitments, and the Council in particular
should exert pressure on the armed movements to
negotiate seriously to put an end to the suffering of the
people of Darfur.

Finally, we condemn in the strongest terms
the attacks conducted by the armed movements in
Darfur on 19 and 20 May, aimed at undermining the
implementation of the ceasefire and reversing the
positive momentum registered so far. We urge the
leaders of these armed groups to lay down their arms
and join the political process without delay. Of course,
as already indicated, the case against the President of
the Sudan is so weak that its continuation makes no
sense. In fact, it would only damage the credibility of
the Council, for the lack of action concerning the issue
would not be consistent with the primary responsibility
that the Council has for international peace and security.

