Ms. Lee (Singapore): We too would like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his
useful update on the situation. We congratulate the
facilitator, Sir Ketumile Masire, and his team on the
success of the preparative meeting and express the
hope that all parties will continue their constructive
approach when the inter-Congolese dialogue begins in
Addis Ababa in October. Addis Ababa, as a venue, of
course, has its own significance because it is the site of
the headquarters of the Organization of African Unity
and of its successor body, the African Union. We would
like to reiterate the importance of an open,
representative and inclusive dialogue by the parties in
such an important setting.

The withdrawal of troops by Uganda and Namibia
is a step forward. Every step forward fosters
confidence and generates its own momentum for the
peace process as a whole. However, we note from
Mr. Annabi's briefing that military disengagement has
not been proceeding well. Although countries in the
conflict have officially disengaged their forces, there
are reports that indicate that they continue to operate
through rebel and militia proxies. We should continue
to put pressure on those found to be undermining the
disengagement process. We would also like to
emphasize that the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) needs to be given the means to carry out its
duties as mandated under resolution 1291 (2000).
Furthermore, the parties to the conflict must be made
responsible for ensuring that the areas under their
control are accessible and safe for MONUC to proceed
with its work. The news that another United Nations
helicopter was recently shot at is not encouraging.

The Council should also continue to follow the
peace process closely and discourage any backsliding.
All parties must be made to realize that they are under
the close scrutiny of the international community. We
note with concern the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and urge that
immediate attention be given to alleviating the plight
of civilian victims. The facts show that more than 2
million Congolese have died since the start of the
current conflict in 1998 and that many more are in
critical need of food and medical attention. We urge aid
agencies to intensify their efforts to help those people
and again call on the parties to the conflict to allow aid
workers safe access in order to carry out their work.

Finally, we would like to assure the Secretary-
General's new Special Representative to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Amos
Namanga Ngongi, of our support as he takes on his
functions this month.

