Mr. Feltman: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General's latest
report on the situation in Mali (S/2013/189), as well as
to update the Council on some of the most important
political and security developments in the country.
Ensuring that the United Nations does its utmost to help
Mali resolve the complex crisis it faces today is one
of the highest priorities of the Secretary-General. That
commitment is reflected in the important work already
under way on the ground in Mali - whether political,
humanitarian or in support of the security process - as
well as in the options presented in the current report.

The most significant development in the political
process remains the adoption in January of a road map
for the transition, which highlights two priority tasks for
the transitional Government, namely, the restoration of
territorial integrity and the organization of free and fair
elections. The road map also provides for the reform
of the armed forces and for dialogue with groups that
renounce terrorism and adhere to the unitary nature of
Mali and its Constitution.

Furthermore, the transitional Government has
established the National Commission for Dialogue
and Reconciliation. On 30 March, interim President
Dioncounda Traore appointed Mr. Mohamed Salia
Sokona, a former Minister of Defence, as Chair of
the Commission, and Ms. Traore Oumou Toure and
Mr. Meti Ag Mohamed Rhissa as its two Vice-Chairs.
The appointment ofa woman and a Tuareg as vice-chairs
of the Commission is consistent with the transitional
authorities' repeated assurances that inclusiveness and
plurality would be the foundation blocks of the political
process moving forward.

The United Nations will provide all the assistance
it possibly can to the Commission and will continue
to support the mediation efforts by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In that
regard, the United Nations Office in Mali (UNOM) is
providing good offices aimed at facilitating contacts
between the Government and those groups that wish
to take part in the search for a political solution to the
crisis, while the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for West Africa (UNOWA)
continues to coordinate closely with and support
regional efforts spearheaded by ECOWAS. In my own
conversation with Malian Foreign Minister Coulibaly
two days ago, I underscored the Secretary-General's
commitment to providing appropriate support to the
political process, and to the National Commission in
particular, which the Foreign Minister welcomed.

Strengthening the capacity and legitimacy of the
State and the political system at all levels remains a key
priority for the United Nations and for political leaders
in Mali. The coup d'etat of 22 March 2012 and the crisis
in Mali are, in large measure, manifestations ofa crisis
of governance that encompasses endemic corruption,
weak State capacity to provide basic services and the
low level of legitimacy of State institutions and the
political system. We hope that a broad and inclusive
Malian-led political process can begin to address those
long-term challenges that must be overcome for Mali
to achieve long-term political stability and economic
prosperity.

While humanitarian access has improved in some
parts of the country, the situation remains highly
volatile, particularly in Timbuktu and Gao. Currently,
more than 470,000 people are estimated to have fled and
sought refuge either in Malian host communities or in
neighbouring countries. More than 290,000 people are
internally displaced, and about 177,000 are refugees in
Mauritania, the Niger and Burkina Faso. Some 750,000
people are in need of immediate food assistance, and
660,000 children are at risk of malnutrition in 2013,
including 210,000 at risk of severe acute malnutrition.
Access to basic social services is limited in particular
in the north; in the regions of Timbuktu and Gao, for
example, only 50,000 out of 200,000 pupils have access
to education.

The United Nations is monitoring the human rights
situation, in particular reported serious violations
in northern Mali, including summary executions
and illegal arrests and the destruction and looting of
property. Although arbitrary acts of violence against
Tuaregs and Arabs have recently decreased, there is still
a risk of reprisal against members of those communities
who are alleged to be associated with the armed groups.
Worryingly, it appears from reports that new patterns
of human rights violations have emerged, including
retaliatory attacks based on ethnicity. The Human
Rights Council appointed a special rapporteur on Mali
earlier this month, and UNOM's human rights team is
rapidly expanding, with a view to deploying mobile
teams to Mopti, Gao and Timbuktu as soon as security
conditions permit. In meetings and conversations with
United Nations officials, authorities in Bamako have
repeatedly stated their commitment to international
human rights standards and practices.

As outlined in the report, there have been significant
security improvements in Mali as a result of the French
and African military operations alongside the Malian
army in northern areas. I want to repeat here the
appreciation of the Secretary-General for the rapid and
decisive action taken by the French, African and Malian
forces. Already by the end of January, State control had
been restored in most major northern towns thanks to
the efforts of Malians and other African forces, with
critical support from French troops. The redeployment
of civilian authorities has started in Timbuktu and Gao.

Despite the real and significant gains on the
ground stemming from the efforts of French, African,
and Malian forces, the security situation remains
challenging. Combat continues with armed groups in
the Adrar des Ifoghas mountains and in the periphery
of some urban centres - Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal.
More fighting occurred in Timbuktu this weekend.
Humanitarian partners are reporting an increase in
criminality around Timbuktu. Armed groups are
proving to be mobile in the combat areas, and there
have been reported cases of infiltration in urban
zones, including Bamako. The continued planting of
mines is hampering humanitarian activities, while also
endangering civilians.

In the interplay between political and security
priorities, it is of critical importance to ensure that the
security imperative does not detract from the primacy
of politics in Mali, in both the short and long term. In
addition to national dialogue, multiple dialogues need
to take place between and within communities and
between various actors, including the Malian armed
forces. Dialogue and reconciliation efforts must also
be linked to justice measures to ensure that there is no
impunity for the human rights violations that have been
perpetrated.

The Head of UNOM, Mr. David Gressly,
accompanied by a small team, visited Timbuktu, Gao,
Kidal and Tessalit from 29 to 31 March. He met with
a wide spectrum of people, the majority of whom
expressed a strong desire for constructive dialogue and
reconciliation, as well as the demand for accountability
for the crimes and abuses committed during the current
cr1s1s.

Mr. Gressly learned about the return of the
Governors of Timbuktu and Gao, with whom he met.
That is an important first step in the restoration of
State authority to those regions. According to Malian
authorities, that will be followed by the re-establishment
ofjustice and security services, as well as other organs of
civil administration at the regional and local levels. We
are encouraging the Malian authorities to implement a
more rapid deployment of civilian authorities, including
of the gendarmerie and civilian police.

As Council Members are aware, President Traore
has indicated the transitional Government's intention
to hold elections by 31 July. We are encouraged by
President Traore's commitment to moving rapidly
toward elections, a fundamental benchmark in
restoring the constitutional order in Mali. In our
view, the declarations by leaders of the transitional
Government not to stand in those elections further
demonstrate the authorities' commitment to free and
fair elections. Mindful of how much work is required
to meet the July deadline set by President Traore, the
United Nations has offered its support for the holding
of free, fair, transparent and credible polls in keeping
with international standards.

We encourage all those committed to an inclusive
and fair electoral process to help address some of the
conditions required for successful voting. Areas of
concern include, on the security side, the still volatile
security conditions in northern Mali and, on the political
side, the absence so far of reconciliation, which limits
space for constructive political debate. We hope that
ongoing security operations, as well as the appointment
of the National Commission, will help overcome
those difficulties and create the essential conditions
for credible elections. We agree fully with the Malian
authorities that a legitimate Government reflecting
the will of Mali's diverse population needs to be in
place by the end of 2013, and we encourage continued
consultations among Malian actors to achieve that
goal. The Secretary-General is firmly committed to the
United Nations doing its part to support that objective.

The United Nations has strengthened its support
for the planning and preparations for the deployment
and operations of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA). United Nations
military planners have provided planning support
to AFISMA, helped in establishing coordination
mechanisms, assisted AFISMA and the Malian armed
forces in identifying priority needs, and supported the
development of key documents for AFISMA, including
operational directives, guidelines for the protection of
civilians, rules of engagement and a code of conduct.
Planning support is also being provided to AFISMA's
police component. The United Nations works in close
cooperation with the African Union, ECOWAS and
other partners in supporting AFISMA, including
through coordination mechanisms in both Bamako
and Addis Ababa. Support has also been provided to
ECOWAS meetings of chiefs of defence staff, aimed at
ensuring the eventual smooth transition from AFISMA
to a potential United Nations stabilization force.

As Council Members are aware, the Secretary-
General deployed a multidisciplinary exploratory
mission to Mali from 10 to 16 March to develop
recommendations on options for establishing a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Mali. I will
highlight the key observations and recommendations
that the Secretary-General has made in his report.
One is that the serious and interlinked challenges that
confront Mali require the concerted and broad-based
efforts of the authorities and people of Mali, together
with significant international support. They go beyond
addressing security threats and require tackling
deep-rooted political, governance, development and
humanitarian challenges that are not susceptible to any
easy solution.

With respect to the security challenges, the report
says that a key question is the extent to which the United
Nations can or should assume responsibility for security
and stabilization, which ultimately will need to serve
as an incentive to engage in a viable political process.
The report notes that humanitarian actors have raised
increasing concerns about the possible deployment of
a United Nations force in Mali and the need to retain
a clear distinction between the humanitarian and
the political/security agendas in order to ensure the
impartiality of humanitarian action, avoid threatening
the safety of aid workers, and guarantee humanitarian
access to all those in need.

The Secretary-General has proposed two options
for United Nations engagement in Mali. Under
either option, the United Nations would maintain a
strong focus on the political aspects linked to the
creation of suitable conditions for elections and
reconciliation. Under the first option, a United Nations
multidimensional, integrated political presence would
operate alongside AFISMA. The United Nations would
continue its political and human rights activities under
a strengthened political mission. The strategic areas
of focus under that option would include good offices
support for mediation and national and community
dialogues, assistance to the electoral process, the
promotion of respect for human rights, including
with respect to women and children, and support for
AFISMA.

Under the first option, AFISMA would be
responsible for security, together with bilateral military
efforts, in support of the Malian defence and security
forces. AFISMA would also have an offensive combat
and stabilization mandate focusing on extremist armed
groups. The United Nations, in conjunction with other
partners, would help build the operational capability
of AFISMA through the Trust Fund in support of
AFISMA and possibly through a Security Council-
authorized logistics support package funded through
assessed contributions. In parallel, the European Union
would continue to train the Malian armed forces.
Support could also be provided to the Malian defence
and security forces through the Trust Fund for Peace
and Security in Mali. That option would provide the
flexibility for the rehatting of AFISMA to a United
Nations peacekeeping operation when the Council
decides the conditions are right.

The second option involves the establishment
of a United Nations multidimensional, integrated
stabilization mission under a Chapter VII mandate,
alongside a parallel force. In addition to a political
mandate, the mission would carry out security-related
stabilization tasks, protect civilians and create the
conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.
The mission would operate under robust rules of
engagement with a mandate to use all necessary
means to address threats to the implementation of its
mandate. That could include the conduct of operations
independently of or in cooperation with the Malian
defence and security forces.

Under the second option, the bulk of AFISMA
would be rehatted under that United Nations
stabilization mission. Most of the military, police and
civilian components would operate in the north, with a
light presence in Bamako. Given the anticipated level
and nature of the residual threat, there would also be a
fundamental requirement for a parallel force to operate
in Mali alongside the United Nations stabilization
mission to conduct major combat and counter-terrorism
operations and provide specialist support beyond the
scope of the United Nations mandate and capability.

These two options can be viewed as phases in the
gradual process of transition from the current situation
to a United Nations stabilization mission deployed
alongside a parallel force. They take into account
the fact that the United Nations is operating in a new
geopolitical context and faces threats that have not been
encountered before in a peacekeeping context. The
situation on the ground remains fluid, and extremists
and criminal elements continue to pose a significant
threat to the safety and security of civilians and United
Nations personnel in Mali.

The Secretary-General observes that it will be of
crucial importance that

"clear distinction be maintained between the core
peacekeeping tasks of an envisaged United Nations
stabilization mission and the peace enforcement
and counter-terrorism activities of the parallel
force" (S/2013/189, p. 100).

Any blurring of the distinction would place
severe constraints on the ability of United Nations
humanitarian, development, human rights and other
personnel to safely do their work.

In the same vein, given that the crisis in Mali is
part of serious wider regional challenges, it will be
essential to coordinate support to Mali within a broader
regional strategy that incorporates Mali's neighbours
and key partners in the process. The Secretary-
General's Special Representative to West Africa,
Mr. Said Djinnit, continues to work with countries of
the Economic Community of West African States on
a shared approach towards the security and political
challenges in Mali and beyond. In addition, the regional
strategy that the United Nations is leading in developing
for the Sahel should be viewed as a complementary
and indispensable process. The Secretary-General
met with his Special Envoy for the Sahel, Mr. Romano
Prodi, on 1 April with respect to the United Nations
overall approach to the region, with a focus on what the
international community can do to support the people
of the Sahel.

In closing, let me note again the Secretary-General's
satisfaction with the progress made so far in securing
Mali's territorial integrity and his commitment to using
the tools of the United Nations to promoting, through
a Malian-led process including elections, long-term
political stability and economic growth in Mali.

