Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We
are all in a state of shock following the death of our
colleague and friend Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. On
behalf of France and on a personal level, I want to
once again express our heartfelt condolences and deep
sympathy to his family, friends and all the members
of the Permanent Mission of cote d'Ivoire. The United
Nations has lost a great professional, C6te d'Ivoire an
excellent representative, and France a friend whose
limitless kindness will continue to inspire us.

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jean Arnault for his very informative briefing,
as well as for his commitment and exemplary effort.
I also thank the Vice-President and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia for their presence
here today and their tireless work in negotiating and
implementing the Peace Agreement concluded with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP).

On behalf of France, I would like to once again pay
tribute here to the political courage of the Colombian
authorities, which took the initiative of launching the
historic peace process with FARC-EP. Colombia's
commitment to peace is a source of inspiration for us
all, as the Ambassador of Ethiopia so eloquently said
earlier. The United Nations, in general, and the Security
Council, in particular, have played their full roles in
providing the necessary support for the disarmament
and political transition of that armed group. Since
September 2017 that support has been manifested
through ensuring the monitoring of the reintegration
of former combatants, which is a crucial step towards
the lasting implementation of the peace agreement.
With regard to the mandate for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, the Organization's
second Mission to that country, I will briefly underscore
three points.

First, France congratulates the Colombian
authorities on the organization and successful holding
of the 11 March congressional elections, which the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC),
the new political party that resulted from the peace
process, participated in. Colombian institutions and
the Peace Agreement have been strengthened by
that democratic exercise, as a result of which former
combatants will become members of the Senate and the
Chamber ofRepresentatives. The opening ofthe Special
Jurisdiction for Peace to the public also represents a
significant step towards the political reintegration
of former combatants. We encourage the current
Government and, more generally, all of the country's
political groups, to consolidate the progress made and
move forward towards the full implementation of the
Peace Agreement between Colombia and FARC-EP.
Particular attention should be given to the issue of
amnesty for prisoners, as provided for in the Agreement.

My second point concerns the security of the
women and men who are working to bring peace to the
conflict-affected areas. We welcome the steps taken
by the Colombian Government to end the high level
of violence in those areas, in particular the murders
of civil-society leaders, human rights defenders and
people involved in coca substitution programmes.
Despite the commitment of the authorities, the
situation remains worrisome. The local populations
have not seen much evidence of the peace dividends.
We therefore encourage efforts to deploy State services
to those areas, whether through security forces or civil
institutions. It will also be crucial to combat impunity
for crimes committed within the context of the
conflict, including extrajudicial executions, whether by
investigating the perpetrators of such crimes or those
who ordered violent acts.

Lastly, I would once again like to draw attention to
a critical point related to reintegration and the future of
the peace process, which is access to land and sources of
income. Once the issue of access to land, including the
restitution of land that was seized during the conflict
and is under legal proceedings, has been settled, it is
economic projects that will provide former combatants
with the prospect of a future within the Colombian
national community. Such economic reintegration will
be key to the lasting success ofthe peace process. It will
continue to enjoy broad support from the international
community, including France and the European Union,
through various financial instruments. Ensuring peace
in territories that have been ravaged by conflict for
more than 50 years depends on it.

France, which supported President Santos
Calderon's efforts to achieve peace from the beginning,
hopes that the Peace Agreement between the Colombian
Government and FARC-EP will be recorded in history
as the end of a conflict and the beginning of a new era
in Colombia in which former combatants will have
their place in Colombian society and other groups
will follow the example of FARC. We hope that the
Colombian Government and the Eje'rcito de Liberacion
Nacional will reach a new ceasefire as soon as possible
and that negotiations will enable the achievement of a
historic peace in Colombia that will send an exemplary
message of hope to the world.

