Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Mr. Ladsous, Mr. Lake and
Mr. Tolbert for their statements. I would also like to
thank Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing and to congratulate
her on her recent appointment as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. And I would like to take this opportunity to
express my country's gratitude for the tireless work
of her predecessor, Mrs. Radhika Coomaraswamy, in
fulfilling her mandate.

Similarly and before addressing the matter at hand,
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
you, Mr. President, and the German delegation for the
special attention you have given to this issue, not only in
organizing this debate but also in supplying the impulse
that led to the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) during
the previous German presidency of the Council and
now to the adoption of resolution 2068 (2012) today, as
well as in the commitment that Germany has shown in
leading the efforts of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict since last year.

There is no doubt that the United Nations in
general, and the Security Council in particular, has
made significant progress over the past 10 years in the
area of the protection of children in armed conflicts.
The framework set up by resolution 1612 (2005), which
led to the establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the creation of the Working Group,
and which also promoted the design of action plans,
through which the parties can commit to ending their
criminal practices, has had tangible results that are
genuinely reflected in the number of children who have
been released and reintegrated, and in the delisting of
parties to conflicts that had previously been included
on those lists.
However, as on previous occasions when we
addressed this issue, the Council is once again dealing
with new challenges and must make important decisions
in order to continue to improve the existing protection
system. In that regard, we welcome the initiative
to convene a debate that focuses on the issue of
accountability for persistent perpetrators. The Council
must develop a response to the challenge that is posed
by the existence of actors who, in spite of repeated calls
and warnings made by the international community,
continue to commit the same grave Violations against
children, thus calling into question the effectiveness
of the system and, ultimately, the very authority of the
Council, which on numerous occasions has expressed
its readiness to take targeted and incremental measures
against those who continue to perpetrate such acts.

In response to this concern, both the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the
issue (S/2012/261) and the report produced by
Ambassador Jean-Marc de La Sabliere at the request
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
provide interesting recommendations on how to address
the issue. We believe that all the recommendations
should be discussed in depth and none discarded out
of hand, with the aim of putting into practice the
alternatives that are most appropriate for persuading
and pressuring those parties to conflicts who have
repeatedly resisted it to engage in dialogue, to negotiate,
to implement action plans and, ultimately, to radically
change their behaviour.

In this short space of time it is impossible to
comment on all of the recommendations in the reports.
However, we understand that there are a number of
suggestions that could be implemented in the short term
and that have the potential to produce tangible results,
among which I would like to single out the following: the
convening of specific Council consultations aimed at
addressing persistent perpetrators, and the application
of designated criteria for serious violations of children's
rights in all of the relevant existing sanctions regimes,
as is currently the case with those concerning Somalia,
C6te d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Sudan, without forgetting the more difficult
discussion of how to impose sanctions in cases where
no such regimes exist.

Taking advantage of the momentum created by
the handing down by the International Criminal Court
of the verdict in the Lubanga case and the important
doctrinary contribution that that verdict represents, the
Council could explore various forms of cooperation
with the Court in order to bring pressure to bear on
individuals and entities, with strict respect for its
judicial independence and in the context of the legal
competencies of both entities.

As we have said previously, the gravity and
complexity of the issue mean that all options aimed
at improving the system require in-depth analysis.
Argentina, as a member of the Council, participated
actively in the 2005 negotiations that led to the adoption
of resolution 1612 (2005), convinced of the need to
implement specific measures to protect children affected
by armed conflict and committed to the promotion
and protection of human rights, which is one of the
pillars of its foreign policy. These same convictions
and principles will underlie our participation in future
discussions.

