Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Thank you, Mr
President, for convening today's important meeting. I
would also like to thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.

United Nations peacekeeping operations play
a critical role in containing and reducing conflict,
often in the most challenging circumstances, such as
in Mali and South Sudan. There are many examples
of the effectiveness of these missions. There are
also, unfortunately, examples of the sacrifices that
individual peacekeepers make, as we were reminded
by the outrageous attack that killed 15 Tanzanian
peacekeepers earlier this month.

Today we have been briefed on the persistent
gaps that remain in peacekeeping operations. We do
not always have the right capabilities, equipment and
trained personnel to deploy and deliver the demanding
mandates that the Security Council sets. We must do
more to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
United Nations peacekeeping. This will enable us
to better manage the conflicts where peacekeepers
are deployed and better protect civilians caught up
in conflict, as well as the peacekeepers who take up
this crucial role. To achieve this we must invest in the
United Nations force generation process. There have
been significant improvements to the process, but more
needs to be done.

When the Council last discussed force generation
(see S/PV.8064), the United Kingdom set out three
steps which, if taken, would improve the effectiveness
of peacekeeping missions: deployment innovation,
improved mission performance, and better long-term
planning and strategic force generation. Today, I want
to update the Council on the United Kingdom's actions
to support these three areas.

Last year we trained more than 11,000 troops from
some 30 countries to prepare them for deployments to
United Nations missions, including the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS),
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Support has ranged
from instructor and leadership training through to
assistance with the planning, conduct and delivery
of national predeployment training for troop- and
police-contributing countries.

In addition, we continue to support mandatory
e-learning predeployment training for all troops
to prepare them to respond to and prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse. The Women Peace and Security
Chiefs of DefenceNetwork, which we launched alongside
Canada and Bangladesh in November, is a critical tool
to strengthen training and capacity-building on gender
throughout peacekeeping and at all levels. We have
also provided over $800,000 in extrabudgetary funding
to the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support.
The United Kingdom now has over 700 personnel
deployed on eight United Nations missions operating
in seven countries. These include 380 troops in South
Sudan, 40 in Somalia and 280 in Cyprus. We have
embraced smart pledging, which was raised by my
Minister of State for Defence at the Peacekeeping
Defence Ministerial Conference in Vancouver. This
innovation will enable us to better meet our obligations
through a coordinated response with partners. For
example, through our deployment to UNMISS, we are
working with Viet Nam, the United States of America
and Australia to provide a field hospital in Bentiu,
South Sudan, which ensures the provision of medical
care for peacekeepers.

But coordination needs to go further. First, we
must collect performance data and use this to better
understand and focus our limited resources to where
training and capacity-building are most needed. We
must coordinate our collective efforts more broadly.
Cooperation should be expanded to cover leadership,
gender integration, protection and victim support.

Secondly, we must see more partnerships and more
smart pledges. We need to develop mechanisms that
match up countries that can provide equipment and
technology, specialist skills and personnel or logistical
support. Smart pledges will help plug persistent gaps.

Finally, we must consider the non-military
components of peacekeeping. We must support
capacity-building work carried out by individual police
officers and specialized police teams. This approach
bolsters recovery and creates long-term stability. We
must also consider how we can generate the civilian
component, so that missions do not just keep the
peace, but build and sustain it as well. Wider work on
management reform has a role to play. Crucial civilian
posts must not remain unfilled.

We all recognize the positive impact peacekeepers
have worldwide. We ask them to take on enormous
challenges to protect the most vulnerable. We must do
our utmost to improve the systems that support them.
We owe this to the brave women and men who serve
under the blue banner.

