Mr. Laborde (spoke in French): We are meeting
here today to discuss the links between security and
climate change in the Sahel. Is that a perception or a
reality? Given that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate is in charge of the fight against
terrorism, I will frame my intervention from the
perspective of the potential impact of climate change
and global warming on it.

In the absence of concrete data or studies to
establish such a correlation, it is difficult to say with
confidence that such an impact exists. However, we can
venture to say that climate change can be an aggravating
factor leading to human insecurity and more conflicts,
as recalled by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel. We
also know that terrorism feeds on conflict. We have
an illustration in the Sahel, which is experiencing a
proliferation of terrorist groups. For years, Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and
Jihad in Western Africa, Ansar Eddine - in Mali, the
Niger and Libya - and Boko Haram - in the Niger,
Cameroon, Chad and Nigeria - have recruited from
what I would call a bottomless pool of candidates for
terrorism. It is therefore essential to prevent conflicts
and address their causes in order to stem terrorism.

However, climate change cannot alone contribute
to insecurity. It must be accompanied by other socio-
political variables, such as poor governance, local
conflicts over ownership of natural resources, economic
instability and youth unemployment. A lack of training
and jobs for young people leads them to find a solution
to their alienation in crime, which allows them a way
out, even temporarily, of poverty. Such disillusionment
can lead to radicalization via actions by terrorist groups
aimed primarily at young people - not just in Africa
and the Sahel, but throughout the world.

In a recent study by the United Nations Development
Programme study initiated by the Executive Directorate
and conducted in 2015 among border populations of
eight Sahel countries on their perceptions of the factors
of insecurity and violent extremism, it was found that
continued desertification and ecosysment degradation
were seen as a form of human insecurity that pushed
young people into violent extremism. I would add, "and
who knows, to acts of terrorism?" The plundering of
natural resources, such as the smuggling of rare woods
in West Africa, leads not only to a degradation of
ecosystems but may in the long term have significant
consequences on the socioeconomic balance of the
region by increasing the vulnerability of populations,
thereby creating fertile ground for the recruitment of
young people who may then be doomed to destitution
by organized criminal groups and terrorist groups.

That brings me to the links between transnational
organized crime and terrorism. The Security Council
has addressed that issue on several occasions, in
particular in resolution 1373 (2001), which establishes
the foundation for the Committee's action against
terrorism - our Chair is also its Chair - and that of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) on the links between transnational organized
crime and terrorism. The position of the Council was
very clear when it stated that it:

"Notes with concern the close connection
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime, illicit drugs, money-laundering,
illegal arms trafficking, and illegal movement of
nuclear, chemical, biological and other potentially
deadly materials" (resolution 1373 (2001), para. 4).

Those links are indeed a challenge and a source
of concern to the national authorities of the Sahel, the
region that is our focus today. We counted the cases
that have been brought before the courts in the Sahel,
and despite the low number of cases that establish those
facts, the zones of convergence, from straightforward
taxation of activities of criminal groups that operate in
the territory under the control of terrorist groups - by
which we mean taxation by terrorist groups that control
territories and engage in organized crime - in all
likelihood they directly implicate terrorist groups in
activities arising from organized crime.

Organized criminal groups and terrorist groups
may have different objectives, including those that
affect the environment. Nevertheless, the pooling of
their criminal techniques or networks can be mutually
beneficial. That is the important point. In total, between
2013 and 2014 trafficking in drugs, weapons and tobacco
reportedly yielded nearly $3.5 billion, according to the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).
Given that fact, we have to underscore here that we do
not know the exact percentage of that funds that go
directly to terrorist groups.

The very porous borders of a region that is already
unstable, the large size of the informal economy,
the low amount of banking and corruption are all
additional factors that, with climate change, facilitate
the entrenchment of trafficking routes through the
Sahel to North Africa or Europe, in particular the route
of cocaine from South America, that of cannabis resin
from North Africa, the trafficking of migrants towards
Europe or Asia, or arms trafficking from Libya or
East Africa. In the Sahel, mass migration, which is
also one of the consequences of global warming, has
put a lot of pressure on the border control agencies and
reduced their ability to monitor the use of different
forms of trafficking by those terrorist and organized
crime groups.

The recent terrorist attacks in Bamako, Ouagadougou
and Grand-Bassam are illustrations of the capacity
for action of terrorist groups thriving in the region,
especially Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and
Al-Mourabitoun, which have claimed those attacks.
This violence has also demonstrated that those terrorist
groups can strike below the Sahel region, which is under
stricter control because of the presence of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and Operation Barkhane.
Their ability to bypass secure zones demonstrates
once again, if it were necessary, the extreme adaptility
and flexibility of these terrorist organizations, which
operate on the principle of attacking where they are
not expected i in the Sahel but also beyond. In other
words, it must be strongly emphasized that no single
country in the region is safe from the terrorist threat.

Certainly, in the area of Lake Chad, Boko Haram
has suffered serious setbacks due to the mobilization
of Nigerian security forces and the concerted action of
countries of the region through the Multinational Joint
Task Force. However, that terrorist group continues to
hit civilian populations hard through the mass use of
improvised bombs and suicide bombers, half of whom
are women and at least 20 per cent are minors.

The situation in Libya is also a source of concern
for peace and security in the Sahel. CTED is very
closely following the evolution of the terrorist threat
in that country, especially the rise of Da'esh and its
affiliates there. I underscore, among other things,
the opening of training camps of that terrorist group
on Libyan territory, where some foreign terrorist
fighters might be trained before returning eventually
to their countries of origin to carry out terrorist acts.
We also need to carefully monitor the very aggressive
recruiting methods used by Da'esh with nationals of the
Maghreb and Sahel countries and their possible haven
in Libya. Due to underdevelopment, lack of solid State
institutions and climate change, these recruits are easy
pickings for Da'esh.

Libya, in which Da'esh is present in the coastal
city of Sirte, could therefore serve as an expansionist
platform since it is, for now, a hotbed of destabilization
for the Sahel, and even for Europe, and remains the
source of the proliferation of all types of weapons in the
region. In that regard, many weapons convoys have been
intercepted in northern Niger, near the Salvador Pass,
a historical crossroads for trafficking between Libya
and northern Niger. A United Nations report on arms
trafficking in Libya, conducted by a Panel of Experts,
stresses the alarming rate of Libyan arms proliferation
in more than 12 countries, including Mali. The report
underscores the presence of not only small arms and
heavy weapons, but also mines and anti-aircraft defence
systems. Apart from terrorist groups, that influx of
weapons also promotes all types of crime in the Sahel.

Those terrorist groups are a complex threat that is
constantly changing in form, scope and methods. The
transnational operational capacity of these terrorist
groups lies in their flexibility to adapt, innovate and
quickly reorganize, while keeping their harmful power
intact despite the efforts of countries of the region and
the international community. The attack in Bamako on
7 March - the first since the terrorists made northern
Mali their outpost some 15 years ago - was a painful
reminder for us. Despite the actions of the Blue Helmets
and the forces hunting them down, terrorist groups still
enjoy fertile ground in the Sahel.

Since the threat is flexible, innovative and adaptable,
the United Nations and its Member States must also put
in place rapid, fluid and flexibility responses to find
effective solutions to the threat, while making full use
of international cooperation mechanisms, in accordance
with the rule of law and human rights. That is why the
consideration of those elements by the Council and its
subsidiary bodies - CTED; the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities;
MINUSMA, the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations - is so
important. As also underscored in his briefing, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa pointed out the urgent need to find political
solutions to the current problems in the Sahel because
terrorist groups and organized crime are slipping
quietly into the lawless areas, to the greatest detriment
of everyone.

Given the facts that I have just mentioned, it is
essential that the countries of the region put in place a
number of different measures to prevent terrorist attacks
on their territory, or at least to diminish their impact so
as to ensure that innocent lives are lost and no act of
terrorism goes unpunished. That is the message that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
transmitted through a series of scheduled visits to the
region since April 2016.

It is clear that the United Nations system as a whole
is intensifying its cooperation and assistance to address
climate change and support sustainable economic
and social development in order to effectively fight
against terrorism and armed conflict. But those efforts
to promote sustainable development cannot succeed
without improving security in areas beset by conflict
and terrorism, and the Sahel is one such area. That is
why I outlined the preceding facts. That is also why the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which
combines the security and development approaches,
seems to us to be the framework through which those
problems must be addressed and, if possible, solved.

The dual approach of security and development
was - very opportunely - taken up at the regional
level with the establishment of the Group of Five (G-5)
Sahel. The Executive Directorate has spared no effort
in promoting the regional cooperation necessary in the
fight against terrorism was determined to support the
initiative, whereby the G-5 Sahel countries decided to
work together to fight desertification, poor governance,
terrorism and organized time. Moreover, my team is
preparing to work with UNODC in operationalizing the
security cooperation framework just established by the
G-5 Sahel.

I believe more than ever that improved coordination
in that area requires a decisive response to terrorism. It
is also important to highlight the significant progress
made in the Sahel region to address legislative and
judicial matters involving terrorism, particularly
the establishment of specialized training centres for
magistrates. Nevertheless, the number of terrorism
cases prosecuted remains low, leading to a lack of
citizen confidence, which tends to exacerbate the
effects of climate change. A high number of suspects
remain in detention. Impunity engenders terrorism and
must be ended.

I cannot reiterate enough that cooperation among
countries in the region is crucial, but international
cooperation, especially in criminal matters is critical,
because terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters are, by definition, criminal phenomena
that are transnational par excellence. They also have
an impact on natural resources. To ensure effective
international cooperation, information-sharing must
be strengthened among the various services involved
in the combat against terrorism, and police cooperation
must be strengthened in the Sahel through the G-5 by
pooling resources in the area of criminal investigations,
strengthening cooperation between public prosecutors
and making magistrates aware of what is at stake in
terms of such cooperation. To that end, I will be in
Cotonou next week for a meeting with the leaders of
the judicial bodies of the region and its surroundings.
With French in common, we will meet on those issues,
with the Sahel first and foremost in mind.

However, we must not forget the key role played by
the international counter-terrorism instruments. They
have precisely defined the vast majority of terrorism acts
at the international level, thanks to our 19 conventions
and protocols and the Council's resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2178 (2014). It is critical for
States to reform their legislation as soon as possible in
order to criminalize the recruitment of foreign terrorist
fighters and participation in terrorist acts abroad,
strengthen investigations and legal tools and the system
for gathering evidence.

Concerning dialogue, we have talked about its
criminal aspects, but I think that dialogue is also
important for States of the region. Dialogue and
partnerships need in particular to be bolstered within
all segments of civil society so as to make it clear that
terrorism must be distinguished from all other areas of
society and that terrorists must be clearly distinguished
from everybody else. Tribal and religious leaders must
play a significant role in that particular context.

Additionally, it is necessary to strengthen
cooperation in the region to allow those countries to
fully shoulder their responsibility in protecting the
people in emerging conflicts. They need to know how
to settle emerging conflicts, render justice, provide
basic services such as education and health care
throughout the entire territory, and promote a culture of
peace and tolerance. There is an urgent need to develop
communications and awareness-raising strategies to
address the threat among those worst off and in the
rural areas. That is the only way to successfully combat
the ideology of terrorist groups and put an end to their
recruitment activities.

Along with security stratgies. the States of the
region must therefore establish prevention strategies
aimed at tackling the root causes of terrorism.
Climate change and mitigation measures should be
considered in terms of such strategies. The support of
the international community is crucial in that sense,
including United Nations European Union programmes
and, as the Special Representative so eloquently noted,
global leadership.

I would like to state that the Executive Directorate
stands ready to assist the Council and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in providing necessary assistance
to the countries of the Sahel with a View to establishing
an integrated counter-terrorism strategy. On that solid
basis, we can work with other United Nations agencies,
in particular the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF), which I recall is made up of 38
United Nations bodies and is therefore an important
technical cooperation entity. It is headed by Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Feltman. Of
course we work closely together, I am pleased to say,
and with the Office that supports the work of the
CTITF. We will inform it as soon as possible of those
efforts and possible joint tasks if the Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee deem it useful.

The Executive Directorate is also ready, if
the Council deems it necessary, to further explore
cause-and-effect links between climate change and
terrorism and, in line with resolution 2129 (2013), to
study in greater depth and with the help of more than
30 research institutes and universities the possible
correlation between terrorism and climate change. I
would also be pleased to include that topic as part of
our programme of work.
Finally, allow me to quote Albert Camus, whose
reflection in his acceptance speech for the Nobel Prize
in Literature in 1957 seems especially relevant and
topical in the context of our work today:

"Each generation undoubtedly considers that
it is destined to change the world. My generation
knows, nonetheless, that it will not do so. But
perhaps its task is greater; it must prevent the world
from falling apart."

I thank Council members for their attention and for
their confidence in me reflected in their request that I
brief them on this matter today.

