Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
fully associate myself with the statement made this
morning by the observer of the European Union. We
commend the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative of organizing this debate on the situation in
Somalia, following the important London conference,
which the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg had the opportunity to
attend.

The next six months will be decisive for Somalia.
We welcome the progress made in Somalia at the
political level with the adoption of a road map and the
Garowe Principles, which set ambitious milestones for
finalizing the constitutional process and establishing
legitimate, stable and representative institutions. It is
now primarily up to all Somali political actors, in
particular the Transitional Federal Government, to
demonstrate their will to seize this opportunity to
complete the transition process by August, with the
support of the international community, so that the
reconciled Somali people may live in peace and
security and the Somali authorities may establish the
rule of law and leave no room for pirates and terrorists.

In terms of security, we note with satisfaction the
recent retreat of the Al-Shabaab militia from certain
strategic towns in the south and centre of the country.
However, Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat
to the security and stability of the country. We
welcome the essential contribution and sacrifices of the
personnel deployed in the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the operations of neighbouring
countries to support the Somali security forces. We
commend the Security Council's adoption of resolution
2036 (2012) on 22 February, authorizing an increase in
AMISOM's troop ceiling and the deployment of a
substantial logistical support package. It is now
imperative to ensure the full implementation of that
decision, including its financing.

The humanitarian situation remains worrying.
Although the World Food Programme has recently
announced that the famine is over, close to one third of
the population, of which the majority lives in areas
controlled by Al-Shabaab, remains in need of emergency
humanitarian assistance. We call on all parties to allow
3
unhindered humanitarian access. The denial of access
imposed by Al-Shabaab to the main humanitarian
organizations is unacceptable.

A sustainable solution that would help to stabilize
Somalia will require a holistic approach combining
security, political, humanitarian and development
components. We wish to underline, in this regard, the
European Union's adoption in November 2011 of its
strategy for the Horn of Africa.

Our national engagement is articulated along
three lines: political, security and humanitarian.
Luxembourg has contributed €750,000 to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the Somali security institutions.
In parallel, Luxembourg participates actively in the
European maritime mission, Operation Atalanta, by
providing two reconnaissance planes based in the
Seychelles. Luxembourg has also deployed military
instructors to the European military training mission,
which is training Somali security forces. Luxembourg
also remains an important and reliable donor of
humanitarian aid. Over the past few years, more than
€11 million has been disbursed for the Horn of Africa,
more than half of which has gone to Somalia.

To conclude, allow me to affirm that, as pledged
by the Deputy Prime Minister in London on
23 February, Luxembourg will continue to support
Somalia on the road to stabilization and peace in its
national capacity, as well as in the context of the
efforts undertaken by the European Union and the
United Nations.

