Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish, on behalf of
Ghana's delegation, to thank the Presidents and the
Chief Prosecutors of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their comprehensive briefings to the Council.

The ICTY has played a vital role in strengthening
the rule of law in the States of the former Yugoslavia
by investigating and bringing to trial those accused of
war crimes and genocide. We take this opportunity to
commend the President, the Chief Prosecutor and their
staffs for their dedication to duty, their professionalism
and their commitment, which have contributed in no
small measure to the Tribunal being regarded as an
inspiration and model for other international tribunals.
The work both of the Trial Chambers and of the
Appeals Chamber is testimony to that fact.
We are encouraged that the ICTY has remained
very productive in spite of the difficulties encountered
with the deaths of two of its well-known defendants
and that it rendered judgements and issued decisions in
the Trial and Appeals Chambers.

While we appreciate those achievements, we wish
to express our concern about the generally slow pace of
trials. Unreasonably lengthy trials not only use up the
limited resources of the Tribunal, but also have the
potential to compromise the completion strategy of the
court, in View of the long waiting list of accused
persons. It is important that public and international
confidence in the Tribunal and in its procedures be
maintained. Trials bogged down by delays and
overcomplicated rules of procedure may not be the best
way for the Tribunal to project an image of
transparency and efficiency.

It is for that reason that we welcome the report of
the working group on speeding up trials, and we are
happy to note that its proposals are being implemented.
We also support the idea of referring less serious cases
to national jurisdictions as a means of easing the
caseload. In pursuing that option, the international
community should support the Tribunal in its efforts at
capacity-building for national courts to enable them to
handle cases efficiently.

The fact that six persons wanted for the most
egregious violations of human rights and for war
crimes are still at large is a source of great concern to
my delegation. We call on the States of the former
Yugoslavia to cooperate with the Tribunal in bringing
those fugitives to justice. The mandate of the Tribunal
cannot be regarded as having been fully implemented
when the most serious violators are still at large.

With regard to the question of the completion
strategy, it may be too early to assess whether the time
limits set out in resolution 1534 (2004) will be met by
the Tribunal. However, we believe that there should be
room for Council flexibility on this matter, depending
on how events unfold.

We wish to commend the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda for the fundamental role it has
played towards peace and reconciliation in Rwanda. Its
work has been crucial in restoring democracy and the
rule of law in a country that has suffered the traumatic
consequences of genocide. We are pleased to note that
the ICTR has completed all investigations, as requested
by resolution 1503 (2003), and that it has endeavoured
to meet the targets set in the completion strategies of
2004 to 2006.
The ICTR is committed to bringing to justice
those persons most responsible for genocide and
violations of international humanitarian law committed
in Rwanda in 1994. It requires sufficient resources to
accomplish that task and to respect the time frame laid
down by Security Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004). In that regard, we support the request
made in the report for an increase in the number of
personnel in the ICTR Appeals Chamber to enable it to
complete its cases by 2010. We also call on Rwanda's
neighbouring countries and the international
community to cooperate with the ICTR in
apprehending accused persons still at large.

The two Tribunals have largely succeeded in
accomplishing the tasks for which they were set up.
The successful completion of their work will depend
not only on the competence of their judges and other
staff, but on the international community's continued
commitment to the fulfilment of their mandates.

