Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the political
process in the Syrian Arab Republic, and thanks
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-
General for Syria, for his excellent briefing, updating
us on the status of the political process in that country.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the signing on 17 September
in Sochi, under the auspices ofthe Russian Federation and
Turkey, of an agreement providing for a demilitarized
zone that has generally calmed the fighting, particularly
in Idlib governorate. My country therefore urges the

parties involved in the Syrian crisis to comply strictly
with the memorandum of understanding and to refrain
from any action likely to lead to a resumption of
hostilities, which would further aggravate an already
worrisome humanitarian situation.

My delegation believes that the memorandum
will provide a new impetus to the process of political
settlement of the Syrian crisis. In that regard,
my country welcomes the holding in Istanbul, on
27 October, of a quadripartite summit involving France,
Germany, Russia and Turkey, which stressed, inter alia,
the importance of a lasting ceasefire through the full
implementation by all parties concerned of the measures
contained in the agreement on the demilitarized zone.

Cote d'Ivoire also supports the call issued at
the summit for the effective establishment of the
constitutional committee and a start to the drafting of
a new constitution by the end of 2018, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of Council resolution 2254
(2015). It also calls on the Syrian parties to define
as soon as possible the regulatory framework for the
organization of free and transparent elections, which
will ensure the restoration of lasting peace in Syria.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its call for a
political settlement to the conflict and urges the Syrian
parties to resume negotiations. Cote d'Ivoire reiterates
its support for Special Envoy De Mistura, warmly
congratulates his successor, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and
urge all stakeholders to support them in their quest for
a lasting political solution to the Syrian conflict.

