Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and on your capable steering of the
work of the Council. I thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate to discuss the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We appreciate the importance that
the Polish presidency attaches to this topic, which
was demonstrated by the participation of Poland's
Minister for Foreign Affairs during the beginning of
today's debate.

In a famous decree, when the caliph of Prophet
Mohammed, Caliph Abu Bakr As-Siddiq, sent an
army of Muslims in a defensive mission in the seventh
century, he gave them rules of guidance that served
as a basis for the protection of civilians at all times.
He stated:

"Do not commit treachery or deviate from the
right path. You must not mutilate dead bodies. Do
not kill a woman, a child or an aged man. Do not
cut down fruitful trees. Do not destroy inhabited
areas. Do not slaughter any of the enemies' sheep,
cows or camels, except for food. Do not burn date
palms, nor inundate them. You are likely to pass
by people who have devoted their lives to monastic
services; leave them alone."

With those eloquent words the caliph of Prophet
Mohammed summed up the rules of the protection of
civilians. He did not forget those who devoted their
lives to worshipping. Those are principles and rules
that should be committed to and complied with at any
time and in any place.

The bleak reality of today's world is painful; it
falls far short of the vision of Caliph Abu Bakr. The
protection and integrity of civilians guaranteed by
Abrahamic religions and international law are violated
without fear of accountability or persecution and with
total disregard of humanitarian principles. A few days
ago, we witnessed new carnage that was committed
by Israeli forces in Gaza, claiming the lives of tens of
Palestinian martyrs and wounding thousands.

For seven successive years, the world has witnessed
the bloodshed in Syria, claiming the lives of hundreds
of thousands of civilians through all means of murder
and genocide. In Myanmar, the world is watching
hundreds of thousands of Rohingya Muslim civilians
being expelled from their homes; their homes are being
burnt, their women raped and their children displaced.
In Yemen, Iran-supported Houthi gangs are carrying
out abhorrent forms of torture and humiliation against
civilians, including the recruitment of children, planting
mines in residential areas and using civilians as human
shields, including a 4-year-old child, Jamila, who was
saved by the Arab coalition to restore legitimacy in
Yemen and handed safely back to her family.

It is high time that the perpetrators ofsuch hostilities
against civilians recognize that their crimes will not go
unpunished. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has therefore
endorsed the establishment of a commission of inquiry
for the crimes committed in Gaza, and also supports
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic. We call for the facilitation of
the return of the Rohingya Muslims to their homes and
for those responsible to be held to account for the harm
inflicted upon the Rohingya.

My country, in collaboration with its partners in
the Arab coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen, is
carrying out a military operation to save the Yemeni
people from the obscurantist Powers that wish to
control and lead the Yemeni people into subversion. We
have exercised the greatest care, caution and restraint
in our operations to ensure the efficient and inclusive
protection of civilians. Occasional and undeliberate
incidents have been given due attention and investigated;
in many cases, we held to account those responsible and
compensated those affected. The measures taken by the
coalition to protect civilians included the following.
First, we have worked to identify military targets,
which includes a number of phases, starting with
selecting, analysing and making sure that the target
is a military object by consulting a number of sources
in order to guard against mistakes in the targeting
mechanism. We assume that any site in Yemen is a
civilian site, unless proven otherwise.

Secondly, we continue to assemble a list of
prohibited areas and sites that cannot be targeted,
including, inter alia, civilian areas, places of worship,
diplomatic offices, headquarters of international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
and archaeological and heritage sites. That list is
regularly updated.

Thirdly, coalition forces use guided and pinpoint-
accuracy weapons, despite the high cost of such arms,
in order to guard against any collateral damage.

Fourthly, we drop warning leaflets in the areas
where we plan military targets before targeting those
objects, in order to ensure that civilians clear the area.

Fifthly, we follow standard operating procedures,
while investigating and evaluating the impact of
air strikes.

Sixthly, we established a unit on the protection of
children and civilians in our Joint Command, and we
enable the technical team of the United Nations to train
the members of that unit.

All of that proves that the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia is committed to the high standards that emanate
from the venerable religion of Islam and the decree of
Caliph Abu Bakr and relevant international law. We
confidently call for those who disregard such rules and
do not admit responsibility for their actions, carrying
out cold-blooded murder, to be held accountable, be
they snipers in Gaza or those using barrel bombs and
chemical weapons in Syria. They are supported by
parties, particularly members of the Iranian regime, who
commit murder through sectarian militias in Lebanon,
Syria and other parts of the world. It is regrettable and
reprehensible that the Iranian representative speaks
about the suffering of civilians in Yemen, given that
that country is the primary cause of such suffering.

