Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is
grateful to the State of Kuwait for having convened
this debate, which affords the States Members of the
United Nations a chance to consider and reiterate the
importance of the principles of the Charter. This event
coincides with the twenty-seventh anniversary of the
invasion of Kuwait by Iraq, in 1991; international
cooperation was decisive in the liberation of Kuwait,
and we are particularly pleased to see here with us
today the Deputy Prime Minister of Kuwait. We would
also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
for his incisive intervention and welcome the presence
of and the statement made by Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the
former Secretary-General.

The United Nations as we now know it was born as a
consequence of the ravages caused by the Second World
War at a time when the devastation caused by that war
was still fresh in the collective memory of humankind.
It is for that reason that the conviction took root among
those who met in San Francisco that there should not
be a repeat of the same mistakes that led to two bloody
world wars. Both conflicts represented a huge setback
for humankind in every respect, and the goal, therefore,
was to come up with an appropriate formula to enable
the peoples ofthe world to live together in peace thanks
to just rules that would enable them to prosper. The
main purpose in drafting the Charter was to achieve a
lasting peace for humankind.

In order to achieve the peace and prosperity we so
fervently sought, it was vital to establish equitable rules
for coexistence within a system in which any problems
that might arise could be collectively addressed. The
establishment of an Organization such as the United
Nations therefore proved justified, as this gave rise
to the possibility of holding meetings that would
enable us to debate problems that could jeopardize our
common coexistence.

His Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
President of Equatorial Guinea, highlighted the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations in the statement he made during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-second
session, on 21 September:

"It should be recalled once again that Chapter
I of the Charter of the United Nations enshrines
the intent of its Member States to build a world of
peace and well-being for humanity by encouraging
friendly relations and mutual respect for the
independence and sovereignty of every nation."
(A/72/PV13, p. 9)

The words of my President are in line with the
Secretary-General's conviction of the importance of
collective security as an instrument for prevention
and the idea of the urgent need to increase the use of
diplomacy for peace. In this paradigm, sanctions, for
example, cannot be seen as an end in themselves, and
interventions, be they peacekeeping operations or
measures geared to re-establishing global order, are
but a reflection of the inability of the system and its
stakeholders to implement the principles of preventive
diplomacy to which the Secretary-General referred.

We cannot deny some of the important
achievements and progress recorded by United Nations
over its more than seven decades of existence in
fostering peace, security and international cooperation.
These achievements led to real and irreversible
changes in today's world. We as Africans have first-
hand knowledge of these achievements, which made
a significant contribution to enabling some of our
countries to take their rightful place as fully fledged
Members of the United Nations after having achieved
independence.

The Charter remains a valid instrument that has lost
none of its relevance; we must all continue to decisively
defend its purposes and principles. International
relations, which must be just and democratic, must
be underpinned by the principles enshrined in the
Charter: equality among countries; respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity; non-interference in
the internal affairs of States; and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. These principles must continue to be held
as sacred and must be defended by all countries.

Relations and interactions among States must be
guided by mutual respect, on a basis of equality, so
that all can contribute to achieving the common good.
Issues of international and regional interest must
be addressed through consultation, cooperation and
negotiation. Only in this way can challenges such as
terrorism, threats to peace, conflicts, disputes between
countries and climate change, inter alia, be resolved
satisfactorily. Regrettably, we continue to note breaches
of the Charter, which weaken the central role that the
United Nations must play as a framework for dialogue
and diplomacy. To interrupt that trend, it is important
to renew multilateralism and a spirit of compromise
among Member States and, of course, to insist on
the democratization of the Organization's internal
structures and processes.

We must not be naive or become complacent. The
world is changing, and the Organization must know how
to adapt and anticipate such change. The Organization's
success and its relevance in a constantly evolving
world depends largely on what I have just outlined.
The Charter of the United Nations is flexible enough
to be able to respond to the complex new challenges
before us. However, it is up to us, the Member States,
to be brave enough to modernize the Organization's
structures and procedures; otherwise, the credibility,
legitimacy and moral authority of the purposes and
principles ofthe Charter will be increasingly questioned
and undermined.

Developments in the current scenario present a clear
challenge for all. International affairs are undergoing a
process of change, which, on the one hand, can yield
new opportunities for economic cooperation, and,
on the other, presents the challenge of having to face
security threats and challenges.

Building the global economy, promoting sustainable
development, eradicating poverty, countering environmental
degradation, and so on, are actions that must lead to
the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, which should have a positive
impact on the greater well-being of, and equality
among, the various peoples of the world. Those needs
are most pressing in Africa, the continent that suffers
most from the shortcomings of the modern world.

As we have already said, the world is in constant
flux and is no longer what it was 70 years ago. That
is evident in the nature of armed conflicts, especially
their capacity to inflict devastation and suffering. The
response of the international community should adapt
to the new reality and the challenges we all face. In
that process, the role of the United Nations is vital,
and its purposes and principles, if used effectively,
remain useful.

The world must be guided by the principle of
peaceful coexistence in international relations. When
it comes to choosing social systems and development
models, the unique traits of every country must be
respected. The principle of the sovereign equality of all
countries must remain intact, international justice and
equality must prevail and the rules of international law
must always be applied, without double standards.

Equatorial Guinea has had its security threatened
on several occasions, the last of which occurred last
December. Thanks to international cooperation, which
we wish to mention here, we were able to avoid what
could have been a true massacre on Equatorial Guinean
soil. I therefore conclude my statement by stating that
the motto of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea - unity,
peace and justice - which guides the actions of our
country's foreign policy, is in full accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

