Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to join previous
delegations in expressing our appreciation to Special
Adviser Jack Lang for his briefing and for his very
comprehensive and thoughtful report (S/201l/30). Our
appreciation also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
Stephen Mathias for his remarks and to Ambassador
Elmi Duale, Permanent Representative of Somalia, for
his statement.

Along with the July 2010 report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/394), Mr. Lang's report provides a
solid basis for an in-depth analysis and effective
response by the Council to piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia. In particular, Brazil values
two aspects of Mr. Lang's report, one methodological
and the other substantive. The first aspect involves the
extensive consultations with numerous stakeholders,
which served as a basis for its conclusions and
recommendations. The second is the effort to deal with
the many facets of the problem, including the socio-
economic one. While a thorough assessment of the
report's content is still under way, I would like to make a
few preliminary comments.

The document highlights a sense of urgency in
the search for sustainable solutions to the issue of
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia. This urgency is all the more evident when it
comes to the political and security situation in Somalia,
as indicated by the fact that, according to the report,
the insurgency does benefit from piracy. Such
cooperation between crime and terrorism, which at the
moment seems based on mere mutual convenience at
the local level, should be effectively combated before it
becomes a true alliance that could destabilize Somalia
further. In this regard, it is important that the Council
act on the counter-piracy recommendations in a manner
consistent with our efforts on Somalia, in particular our
decision to authorize the strengthening of the African
Union Mission in Somalia and the consideration of the
outstanding African Union recommendations.

We are pleased that Mr. Lang's report seeks to
translate our common comprehensive approach to
fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia into concrete
recommendations aimed at prevention and suppression.
Regarding prevention, we welcome the attention he has
rightly given to the social and economic rehabilitation
of Somalia's coastal areas and to illegal fishing and
dumping of toxic wastes. Support for job creation,
especially for young people, seems key in this regard.
At the same time, assistance provided to help Somalia
reform its legal framework on anti-piracy and maritime
jurisdiction would be most beneficial if it were
extended to suppressing illegal fishing and toxic waste
dumping in Somali waters.

Another cross-cutting aspect of the report is its
emphasis on the importance of strengthening and
implementing the Kampala process. Cooperation among
the Transitional Federal Government, Somaliland and
Puntland in the fight against piracy can also serve as a
confidence-building measure to address sensitive
political issues in the long run. In this regard, the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia, through its
regional offices in Hargeysa and Garoowe and its
increasing footprint in Mogadishu, could play a
fundamental role in supporting the Kampala process
and the implementation of Mr. Lang's recommendations
concerning the regional administrations.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report regarding prosecution of the instigators of
acts of piracy. Such action is necessary to deal with the
problem in a meaningful way. Encouraging the private
sector to do more in preventing and suppressing acts of
piracy, protecting the rights of seafarer victims of
piracy and financing the international efforts is also
positive. Many shipping companies that have benefited
from international efforts to provide security off the
coast of Somalia could be further encouraged to
comply with the best-management practices agreed on
by the industry itself. Seafarers - so far the greatest
victims of piracy off the coast of Somalia - should
also be better protected, in terms both of prevention
and of assistance during and after a hostage situation.
The collaboration of the private sector can be equally
key to substantiating strong cases against suspected
pirates and their instigators, as highlighted in the
report.

On the central issue of the judicial mechanisms,
we appreciate the Special Adviser's proposal
concerning alternatives that could lead to a
Somalization of the response. One key aspect of that
recommendation, as we see it, is the strengthening of
the rule of law in Somalia and the creation of judicial
and penal capacities in Puntland and Somaliland. We
fully concur with this view. We also believe that the
new solutions proposed in Mr. Lang's report are
compatible with efforts to improve, in the short term,
the solutions currently in place.

Although the challenges are considerable and the
means to overcome them complex, I reiterate my
delegation's active support for fighting impunity in the
waters off the coast of Somalia and bringing peace and
stability to those waters and, above all, to Somalia
itself.

