Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation appreciates the Russian initiative
to convene today's open debate. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

United Nations peacekeeping operations, as an
important United Nations tool in the maintenance of
international peace and security for over six decades,
have significantly contributed to the settlement of
conflicts and disputes, and the restoration and building
of peace. Meanwhile, given the changing nature of
conflicts and disputes in recent years, the concept and
practices of peacekeeping operations have displayed
new trends and characteristics.

How can United Nations peacekeeping operations
fulfil evolving requirements, grow in effectiveness and
better promote political settlements, while ensuring a
stable and sustainable security environment for peace
consolidation and peacebuilding? The subject merits
the international community's in-depth consideration
within a peacebuilding framework. I wish to focus on
the following five points.

First, continued adherence to the guiding
principles of peacekeeping - that is, the parties'
consent, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence or implementation of the mandate - is
fundamental to winning the confidence and support
of Member States for peacekeeping operations and
ensuring their smooth conduct. China approves of
innovations and improvement in certain peacekeeping
practices, in the light of current developments and
realities, but the basic principles are key to ensuring
the healthy development of such operations and should
be upheld over the longer term. Any practice that
deviates from or weakens those principles will hamper
the operation's impartiality and objectivity and, worse
yet, could transform the United Nations into a party to
conflict, thereby undermining the conflict resolution
efforts of the international community.

Secondly, in implementing peacekeeping mandates,
United Nations peacekeeping missions should strictly
abide by the Council's resolutions and fully respect the
leading role of the countries in question. The deployment
of peacekeeping missions is not a goal in itself and
cannot substitute for the responsibilities and obligations
of the host Government and the parties to the conflict
concerning the protection of civilians. Such missions
should instead focus on promoting peace and stability
in conflict situations through political settlement and
reconciliation processes, and on helping the countries
in question effectively to assume their responsibilities
for the protection of their own nationals.

Thirdly, it is very important to ensure the
dovetailing of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
and to consolidate the fruits of those efforts in order
to ensure lasting peace and stability. In determining
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, the Council
should attach priority to the urgent need for security and
stability, while focusing on long-term perspectives by
taking into account the current realities of the country
in question, strengthening coordination between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and strengthening the
country's capacities, while ensuring a smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding through a realistic
and practical exit strategy.

Fourthly, strengthening the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations requires continuous
improvements in scope and management. Nearly half
of peacekeeping missions now comprise over 10,000
troops. Many missions are deployed in increasingly
complex environments. An effective response to
the resource and equipment challenges faced by the
operations requires improved management and efficient
use of resources. Through inter-mission cooperation
and other means - including the rationalization of
resource allocation in the light of developments on
the ground and the timely adjustment of the scale
and mandate of the mission - the Security Council,
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat
should strengthen their coordination and collaboration
and work together to ensure the smooth deployment
of peacekeeping operations and the implementation of
their mandates.

The wider use of unmanned aerial vehicles and other
advanced technologies in peacekeeping operations will
require in-depth study and discussion by Member States
on its legal implications and operational management.

Fifthly, great attention and support should be
given to the important role of the African Union (AU)
and other regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of peace and security in Africa.
Today, more than half of United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed in Africa. The United Nations
and the international community should increase their
coordination and cooperation with African regional
organizations in the field of peacekeeping operations,
increase their support to the AU and other regional
organizations so as to help Africa build its peacekeeping
capabilities, and give full play to the advantages of the
AU and other regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations.
China is a firm supporter ofand participant in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and we have over the
years contributed a total over 20,000 peacekeepers.
As the largest troop-contributing country among the
permanent members of the Security Council, we have
at present more than 2,000 peacekeepers serving in
10 peacekeeping operations. For the first time, we
have deployed a security troop to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and are ready to raise the number of our troops
deployed in the United Nations peacekeeping operation
in South Sudan, thereby making a bigger contribution
to the restoration of peace and stability in South Sudan
in the nearest future.

China will continue its active participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, and is ready to
work with the international community in contributing
to the further development of peacekeeping operations
and the maintenance of international peace and security.

