The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.

First of all, I want to join the other members of the
Council, and I believe that we are all together in this
regard, in thanking the Ambassador and representative
of Uruguay for the excellent work he has done and
continues to do, together with his team, at the helm
of the Informal Working Group on International
Criminal Tribunals.
I would also like to commend the efforts of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), headed by Judge Agius, for
adapting to the completion strategy. In fact, all of the
sentences it has delivered this year have been within
the established deadlines. Such work is praiseworthy
given that the ICTY has achieved its goal despite the
complex circumstances it has faced, especially due to
staff attrition. We certainly trust in the capacity of the
Tribunal to overcome such difficulties and complete its
operations next year, according to plan. My country will
support the extension of the mandates of the judges and
the Prosecutor for the periods that have been requested.

The International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals that Judge Meron has been
honourably leading for more than four years now has
become a model institution for its ability to apply the
lessons learned from previous experiences with a view
to ensuring both effectiveness and transparency in the
management of delivering justice at the highest level.
Since that is of the utmost importance within a justice
system, we trust that the Tribunal will continue to
operate in that same manner.

Regarding the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY, the smooth
and efficient transitions to the Residual Mechanism are
most noteworthy. It was not easy, but was achieved in
the case of the Rwanda Tribunal, and it appears that
the same will happen for the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The operations of both institutions seem
to be satisfactory, but some concerning issues remain.
Eight defendants of the Tribunal for Rwanda are still
on the run, which is an unacceptable challenge to the
law and an intolerable affront to the victims of the Tutsi
genocide. We hope that the measures adopted by the
Prosecution will bear fruit, and once again we call on
States that may have information to make it available
without delay.

No international tribunal can fulfil its mandate
without the essential cooperation of States, which, let us
not forget, is an obligation under international law. We
must recall once again that Serbia must implement the
orders of arrest issued by the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and return to the path of full compliance
that it always followed in the past, whatever the nature
of the proceeding.

One year after the closure of the Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, it is more important than ever that
the countries of the region take over and continue with
a true commitment to investigating and prosecuting
pending war crimes caes, which remain insufficient in
pace and number. A degree of political accountability
and a continued effort to ensure respect for the rule of
law are needed in order to educate new generations and
promote true reconciliation based on acknowledgement
of the facts, and in which there is no historical
revisionism, denial of the facts and lawfully proven
crimes, or glorification of perpetrators.

I conclude by reiterating the strong support of
Spain for the work, first, of the Tribunals, and now
of the Mechanism, which are evidence of the firm
commitment of the international community to
combating impunity. Their pioneering jurisprudence
has opened up new paths in international law, and
their work has given hope to many victims, not only
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, but around the
world by demonstrating that, in spite of appearances,
justice is possible when there is enough political resolve.
It is now our responsibility to preserve the legacy ofthe
Tribunals as testimony to the past, but also as proof of
the strength of law and value ofjustice, and as a lesson
to future generations so that the terrible events that led
to their creation are never repeated.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

