Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Madam President, for organizing
this important meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his useful briefing and,
frankly, for having been such a driving force for the
revitalization of the United Nations, including in the
area of peace and security.

This meeting has certainly attracted a lot of
attention within the broader membership of the United
Nations. It has also already stimulated interesting
discussions among members of the media, academia
and civil society organizations. That is indeed a good
thing, and we are among those who truly believe that
there is a need for a frank discussion on reforming
United Nations peacekeeping operations to make them
fit for purpose.

We thank the United States presidency for the
concept paper (S/2017/287, annex) framing the topic
for our discussion, which we have found useful and
carefully crafted.

What we are discussing today is critical for the
lead role that the United Nations plays in ensuring
international peace and security. That has been a
recurring theme in the Security Council. Without any
doubt, the whole membership of the United Nations
has agreed upon the need to reform peacekeeping.
Approximately two years ago, we undertook a major
review ofpeace operations in all their aspects. That was
done in close consultation with all Member States and
other relevant stakeholders. What essentially guided
that major review process was indeed the absolute need
for United Nations peacekeeping operations to change,
adapt to new circumstances and ensure their increased
future effectiveness and appropriate use.

In our opinion, the outcome of the review certainly
lived up to expectations in making an array of important
recommendations aimed at enhancing the efficiency and
effectiveness of peace operations both at the strategic
and operational levels. We believe that the outcome
of the review has also raised the extremely pertinent
and serious questions that have been brought up by the
concept paper, and the review covered much ground in
responding to those queries. It therefore appears to us
that this meeting affords us a great opportunity to lay
a strong foundation for the implementation of most of
the recommendations that are contained in the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(HIPPO) (see S/2015/446).

We have a Secretary-General who is truly
committed to implementing the necessary structural
reforms in line with the HIPPO recommendations,
and who has already begun to take concrete steps in
the direction of improving the peace and security
architecture of the United Nations so as to make it fit
for purpose and deliver results in the most efficient and
cost-effective manner.

We should be expected to support him because
some of those important reforms cannot be carried
out without bringing all Member States on board.
Unquestionably, that is frustrating as building the
necessary consensus is never easy, but it is absolutely
necessary because, as the High-level Independent Panel
rightly noted,
"Many of the constraints to improving peace
operations are political in nature, and can be
addressed through political will to find compromise
and to respond to long-standing challenges"
(S/2015/446, p. 16).

There is therefore a need to work in close consultation
and partnership with troop-contributing countries and
other relevant stakeholders.

In the context of our discussion today, I would like
to bring up two points. Although they are not new ideas,
we feel that they should be underlined. We need to have
a clear political strategy to effectively respond to the
peace and security challenges affecting us today. The
significance of investing in prevention has long been
evident. It is not only a matter of being cost-effective;
most important, it is a matter of saving lives. That
was the primary reason for the establishment of the
Organization - to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.

Whenever the need arises, we should be able to use
the range of tools available in a pragmatic and flexible
manner while taking into account the realities on the
ground. Peace operations have been and continue to
be one of the most important tools in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security.
If peace operations are guided by a clear political
strategy attuned to specific conflict situations, they
can indeed deliver better results. The same is true
with regard to any given exit strategy, which should be
appropriately aligned with the transition from conflict
to sustainable peace.

In all our efforts to ensure greater efficiency and
effectiveness of peace operations, we should therefore
be cognizant of the specific context in which such
missions operate and the strategy at stake. There
should be no one-size-fits-all approach, which could
have undesirable consequences. We may perhaps need
to look at how the strategic reviews of missions are
conducted. There is a feeling that such reviews could
be improved to realize their goals.

The other important point that needs to be stressed
is the need for global regional partnerships, which is no
longer a matter of choice but of necessity. That has been
a topic ofdiscussion in the Council, and it is encouraging
to know that there is now a greater appreciation of that
important reality. Such partnerships are unquestionably
instrumental not only in enhancing the responsiveness
of the United Nations to address conflict situations, but
also in ensuring greater efficiency and effectiveness.
Finally, as one of the leading troop-contributing
countries, we definitely attach great importance to
strengthening United Nations peace operations in all
their aspects. Our long-standing contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping operations is dictated by a strong
conviction because of our history in multilateralism
and collective security. This is attested to by our
track record of the past 70 years, as well as by the
performance of the thousands of our peacekeepers who
are currently operating in some of the most volatile
conflict situations, making sacrifices for the cause of
regional and international peace and security. This,
by the way, began in the early 19505, when, as the
representative of France said, peacekeeping was only
an ad hoc concept, in its infancy.

Ethiopia is ready to look at the possibility ofhosting
a high-level open debate at the level of Heads of State
and Government in September, during its presidency
of the Council, two years after the high-level review
on peace operations, with a view to facilitating serious
discussions and follow-up of the implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations and charting the best way forward.

