Mr. Kinkel (Germany): Madam President, I too
would like to express our pleasure at the fact that you, as
the Foreign Minister of Italy, and as a woman, have
assumed the office of President of the Security Council.

This special session today manifests our resolve to
take stock after fifty years and jointly to look to the
future.

 

The Security Council is the international community's
central forum for decisions designed to preserve peace and
international security.

Since the end of the cold war, it has recovered from
its paralysis. And the challenges facing the Security Council
have dramatically increased, but so too have the Council's
activities. Well over 400 of its more than 1,000 resolutions
have been adopted since 1989. Of course, I am pleased that
the one-thousandth resolution was adopted during
Germany's presidency of the Council.

Sixty-eight thousand Blue Helmets are at present
engaged in 16 peace missions under the auspices of the
Security Council. To my mind, this is an encouraging
development. It demonstrates the international community' s
awareness that security and peace can be achieved only
through joint action within the framework of the United
Nations.
Criticism of the United Nations has become louder in
the last few weeks and months - destructive criticism, to
my mind. However, what we need is constructive criticism,
above all with respect to the Security Council. In view of
the criticism we have heard, I feel justified in asking
whether anyone knows of an alternative or of an
organization better suited to master the challenges facing
the United Nations, one that can look back to the same
achievements as this Organization can.

Recent developments, however, have placed the United
Nations in a very difficult position. The gap between the
demands made upon it and the willingness of Member
States to provide material and financial support is growing
ever wider, and therefore we are faced with hard decisions
regarding the future of international peace-keeping. The
Security Council must strike the right balance between the
obligation to intervene and the need to avoid making
excessive demands on the solidarity and on the resources of
the international community.

In its declaration of 31 January 1992, the Security
Council rightly underlined the significance of the economic,
social, humanitarian and, not least, ecological sources of
instability. It must increasingly focus its attention on the
prevention of conflicts, and in this endeavour it needs the
support and close cooperation of the regional organizations.
I do not believe that everything has to be taken immediately
to the Security Council or to the United Nations. I think
that many regional organizations can play a key role and
that this is very important for the future.

The Security Council's credibility and efficiency
crucially depend on recognition of the Council by the
entire international community as the legitimate
representative of its security interests. I believe that today
there is worldwide consensus on the need to reform the
Council. We need a more equitable representation of the
Asian, African, Latin American and Caribbean countries,
as well as more transparent working methods that would
increase the Security Council's operational role and
representative character.

Germany, with the support of many Member States,
has announced its interest in permanent membership of
the Security Council. Our willingness to assume greater
responsibility, also within this framework, is for us the
logical and consistent extension of our commitment to the
United Nations.

Cooperation, networking of interests, joint action in
a spirit of solidarity as the basis of global security and
development: this is, and will continue to be, our basic
foreign policy precept. In this belief, we are committed to
European unity. It is also with this objective in mind that
we would like to play our part in the Security Council.

The Federal Government is determined to do
everything in its power to ensure that this forum can
continue, in the decades to come, to fulfil the mandate to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, as
laid down in the Charter.

