Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (Spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Special Envoy to South Sudan,
Mr. Ismael Wais, and Ms. Jackline Nasiwa for their
briefings. Similarly, we thank you, Madam President,
for your briefing and leadership at the helm of the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan.

Unfortunately, the situation in South Sudan
remains one of the most critical in the world. The
constant deterioration of security, the slow progress
in the political process and the complicated economic
situation are exacerbating the humanitarian crisis,
which is increasingly difficult to control and affects
a large swath of the population. Given that complex
backdrop, we are aware that it is very difficult to find
an immediate solution, especially if deep divides persist
between the parties. It is regrettable that the clashes
have continued despite the signing of the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement, in December 2017.

For that reason, it is essential to work towards
reconciliation between the parties to the conflict, and
we therefore highlight the recent progress made in
the 2015 agreement on the reunification of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement. We also acknowledge
the recent statement by President Salva Kiir calling
for the return of the opposition leader, Riek Machar, to
Juba, which, if done, could ease tensions on the ground.

We also welcome IGAD's efforts and commitment,
which continues its work to bring the Government and
opposition groups to the negotiating table through the
High-level Revitalization Forum of the peace process.
However, it is clear that the process will not have the
expected results until the parties take the commitments
made seriously and show real political will to deliver on
them. We expect full participation and flexibility from
the parties in the next phase of the forum, scheduled
from 17 to 21 May.

The humanitarian situation, as I mentioned, remains
alarming. The data presented by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show us a very
difficult reality, in which more than half of the world's
population needs humanitarian assistance. Millions of
refugees and internally displaced persons face a lack
of basic services, severe food insecurity and disease
outbreaks. We call on the international community to
continue to cooperate to ensure humanitarian assistance
in South Sudan.

South Sudan today is one of the most dangerous
places in the world for humanitarian workers. We
deeply regret the deaths of three of them last month,
with approximately 100 deaths since 2013. We condemn
the attacks on humanitarian workers and urgently call
on the Government and opposition groups to ensure
unhindered and safe access for humanitarian assistance,
within the framework of respect for international
humanitarian law and an optimal operational
environment for the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan. In the same vein, we call on the parties to
uphold the status of forces agreement and take concrete
measures to prevent any breaches.

Another aspect that we believe is important to
mention is the request made by the delegation from the
African Union Peace and Security Council during its
visit to South Sudan last month, in which it called for
greater cooperation in the establishment of the Hybrid
Court to advance the fight against impunity. On the
other hand, with regard to the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts, we agree that the Security Council
should avail itself of all the tools at its disposal to adopt
measures against those who sabotage or do not comply
with the outcomes of the IGAD process.

In conclusion, there is a need for regional and
subregional organizations, the United Nations and
the international community at large to join forces in
support of IGAD's efforts. We, the members of the
Security Council, have agreed that the only way to
resolve the conflict in South Sudan is through a process
of inclusive and sincere political dialogue between the
parties to implement the 2015 Agreement.

