Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to say that it was with great sadness
and emotion that we learned of the death of President
Yasser Arafat in Paris early this morning. Algeria's
condolences have been addressed to the Palestinian
people and their leadership by our President, and I
wish to reiterate them here. The passing of President
Arafat, who for 40 years embodied the aspirations of
the Palestinian people to an independent State, is an
enormous loss for that valiant people. We are
convinced, however, that they will come out of this
trial further strengthened. Algeria mourns along with
the Palestinian people and assures it of its fraternal
solidarity.

I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Mladen Ivanie.
I also want to thank Lord Paddy Ashdown, the High
Representative, for his report (S/2004/807, enclosure)
and for his commendable efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to build a future of peace and prosperity
in that country, which has, in the recent past,
experienced the tragedy and suffering of war.

The twenty-sixth report of the High
Representative enables us to assess the progress
achieved in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement and in the strengthening of administrative
and institutional capacities, the promotion of the rule
of law and economic reform. It is undeniable that
Bosnia and Herzegovina, resolutely turned towards the
future, has succeeded in binding its wounds and in
patiently and painstakingly undertaking task of
stabilization and reconstruction.

Recent measures in the field of reform of the
defence forces and the information and security
services, and the establishment of the State
Investigation and Protection Agency, represent
significant progress in the strengthening of State
institutions. This important achievement can bring
Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to its objective of
building a sovereign, strong and stable State. It also
opens the prospect of integration into Euro-Atlantic
structures. The initiative of creating a single police
structure for Bosnia and Herzegovina is an additional
effort towards the attainment of that objective.

We also appreciate the progress made in the field
of consolidating the rule of law. In that context, the
establishment of a legal framework, the creation of
new competent bodies and the improvement of the
functioning and effectiveness of the judicial system are
positive results that help consolidate the rule of law
and the struggle against the threats of organized crime
and terrorism. Nonetheless, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities need adequate means to

strengthen their capacity to effectively combat those
scourges.

Considerable work has also been accomplished in
the area of economic reform. Major efforts have been
made to develop an adequate legal, budgetary and
structural framework and to promote the relaunching of
the Bosnian economy.

However, I would like, at this point, to refer to
the three areas of shortcomings to which Lord Paddy
Ashdown referred. In spite of the encouraging results
achieved, a great deal of progress remains to be made.
Bosnia and Herzegovina must overcome difficulties
related to the implementation of reforms, the problem
of the entities' internal indebtedness and the lack of
investment and of jobs. These difficulties are major
obstacles to the launching of negotiations with the
European Union on the conclusion of a stabilization
and association agreement. They must therefore be
eliminated if progress is to be made towards reform.
The efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina alone will not
suffice to achieve this goal.

The lack of cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
with respect to the arrest of persons charged with war
crimes is another obstacle to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
participation in the NATO Partnership for Peace
programme. Cooperation with the ICTY needs to be
intensified. Bringing the perpetrators of war crimes
before the Tribunal, reunifying the city of Mostar and
strengthening its statute and recognizing the sources,
the nature and the extent of the atrocities committed in
Srebrenica are, in our View, all part of reconciliation
and understanding among all the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the establishment of a tolerant and
multiethnic society, an objective that my country fully
supports.

In that spirit, my delegation welcomes the
progress made in the process of the return of refugees
and of displaced persons. We are pleased to see the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully
assuming their responsibilities under the Peace
Agreement. We hope that the few remaining difficulties
in this field will soon be overcome.

I do not want to conclude my statement without
paying tribute to the NATO Stabilization Force
(SFOR), whose mission comes to an end by the end of
this year, for the important and constructive role that it
has played in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are pleased
with the European Council's decision to establish in
that country a European Union peacekeeping force,
including a military component, as of next year.

