Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the initiative that you have
taken to organize this meeting. We are also grateful to Mr.
Fall for his very useful briefing.

The situation in Burundi is a source of concern for my
delegation. Notwithstanding the enormous time and energy
invested by the international community to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict, there is yet to be a breakthrough.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere for his
preponderant role and invaluable contribution in the Arusha
process. With the demise of Mwalimu Nyerere and the
resumption of hostilities, it would appear that the Burundian
factions are even further away from peace. There is
therefore an urgent need to redouble efforts with a View to
salvaging the flagging peace process.

As a first step, a facilitator should be identified as
soon as possible to continue the important work started by
Mwalimu Nyerere. The new facilitator should be someone
of high calibre, morally and politically. A former African
head of State, if possible, agreeable to the Burundian
parties, would be the ideal choice.

We note with keen interest that the parties concerned
are already considering some personalities and that they
will be discussed at the upcoming summit of the countries
of the Great Lakes region. We encourage them, in
consultation with the United Nations and all the parties
concerned, to reach an agreement on a facilitator as quickly
as possible.

The Arusha process, through its committees, has made
progress in many areas. The work of these committees
should be continued. We cannot afford to start the process
all over again. It is our View that we should build on what
has been achieved already rather than going back to square
one, especially at this time, when more and more civilians
are being targeted.

The situation is exacerbated by the fact that not even
humanitarian and United Nations personnel are spared. This
state of affairs is unacceptable to the international
community. We are outraged by these barbaric and
despicable acts committed against civilians, both local and
international. We therefore condemn the attack in Rutana
and all attacks against unarmed non-combatants. We call on
the authorities in Burundi to investigate these incidents and
to prosecute those responsible with the full vigour of the
law.
We must emphasize that it is the responsibility of
every Government to ensure the protection of its citizens.
We understand the concerns of the Government of
Burundi, but we fear that putting people in camps, away
from their farms, may not be the best solution. We
understand the constraints of the Government, but there
might be better alternatives. Having heard from the
Permanent Representative of Burundi this morning that
this is only a temporary measure, our fears have now
been allayed, and we look forward to the early return of
the families concerned to their respective homes.

The humanitarian situation in the country is
deteriorating very rapidly. The belligerents are not helping
the situation, either. With the recent trend of calculated
attacks against humanitarian personnel, the corridors for
the delivery of humanitarian assistance are shrinking
significantly. We urge all sides to ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of all humanitarian
personnel.

The presence of combatants in refugee camps is also
a source of grave concern to us. This unfortunate state of
affairs has been largely responsible for the numerous
reports of executions. The civilian character of refugee
camps must be respected by all concerned.

The latest report on the food situation in Burundi is
very bleak, and it is feared that next season will not be
any better. Relief assistance is therefore badly needed to
avert an imminent humanitarian crisis.

In the same vein, it is worrisome for my delegation
to note that, notwithstanding the lifting of the sanctions
against Burundi, the economic situation continues to
deteriorate. My delegation wholeheartedly supports the
expansion of aid to the Government of Burundi. We
therefore appeal to the donor community to resume
assistance to Burundi as soon as possible.

It cannot be gainsaid that the present civil war in
Burundi is hampering economic development. The
belligerents must understand this fact and stop their
people from suffering any further. They must get their
acts together, lay down their arms and negotiate genuinely
and in good faith for a final settlement. This would be a
welcome tribute to the memory of Mwalimu Nyerere. In
this way, his efforts will not have gone in vain. We hope

 

that the Burundian parties will see reason and heed the call
of the rest of the international community.

