Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you for convening
this meeting, Mr. President. We wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Mr. John Ging and Mr. Ivan Simonovic' for
their respective briefings.

At the outset, Malaysia would like to express its
sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
the coal mine accident in Zasyadko in eastern Ukraine.
The incident, which resulted in dozens of casualties, has
further exacerbated the already grim situation in the
Donetsk region. We call on the parties to the conflict to
give full cooperation to the relevant authorities for the
rescue and recovery effort.

As is normally the case, the civilian population
bears the biggest brunt and pays the highest price in any
conflict. The Ukraine crisis is no exception. In a matter
of one year, Ukraine went from being a country without
a single displaced person to one having over 1 million of
its people displaced from eastern Ukraine and Crimea.
Of the 1 million, 1 in 3 internally displaced people in
Ukraine is a child. Currently, an estimated 5 million
people in eastern Ukraine are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Over 6,000 people have been killed in the
conflict, including the 298 passengers on flight MH-17,
a tragic incident that was a direct consequence of the
Ukraine conflict.

Malaysia condemns indiscriminate attacks against
civilians in the strongest terms. We are alarmed to learn
that attacks that seem to intentionally target civilians
in residential areas have further intensified in recent
months, including in Volnovakha, Mariupol and the city
of Donetsk. As reported by the human rights mission
in Ukraine, the fighting and indiscriminate shelling
have severely damaged civilian property and vital
infrastructure, leaving civilians without electricity, gas,
heating, water or food. We also condemn the attacks
against hospitals, schools and kindergartens, carried
out in stark disregard for international humanitarian
law and civilians' lives. We repeat our call for an
independent investigation into those incidents, so
as to bring those responsible for gross violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law to
justice.

Malaysia is deeply concerned by the allegations
of violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law in Ukraine. Reports of the
arbitrary detentions of civilians, torture and enforced
disappearances committed against both sides of the
conflict must be investigated to prevent impunity. We
regret the lack of progress in ensuring accountability
for the grave human rights violations, such as those that
occurred during the Maidan protest in Kyiv and Odessa
last year.

We deplore the attacks against journalists in
Ukraine, particularly in eastern Ukraine and Crimea.
Over the past year, at least 78 journalists have been held
by armed groups, and at least 60 attacks were carried
out against media offices. We call on the parties to
respect the right to the freedoms of opinion, expression
and peaceful assembly. We also view with concern the
targeting of religious minorities in the areas controlled
by armed groups, as reported by the human rights
mission in Ukraine.

Since the ceasefire went into effect on 15 February
2015, fighting has generally decreased in the Donbas
region. We also welcome the progress made in the
withdrawal of heavy weapons on both sides. At this
point, however, the ceasefire remains fragile, and the
progress made thus far is far from irreversible. We urge
the parties to the conflict not to miss the opportunity
for peace once again and to ensure full compliance with
the provisions of the Minsk agreements. We also call on
both sides to cooperate fully with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine so as to enable the mission to carry
out its mandate, including to monitor and verify the
ceasefire and the heavy weapons withdrawals.

Malaysia commends the tireless efforts and
commitment on the part of various organizations,
including the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, to provide humanitarian
assistance to those affected by the Ukraine crisis. With
the ceasefire in effect, we hope attention can now be
focused on intensifying humanitarian assistance in an
environment that would ensure the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel. We urge all parties to allow
safe and unrestricted humanitarian access and to remove
bureaucratic impediments that could create barriers to
deliveries of immediate and effective humanitarian aid.
We reiterate our position that humanitarian assistance
must be carried out in accordance with international
law and international humanitarian law and respect for
Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In conclusion, we wish to reflect on the priority task
facing the Chairperson of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, which is to rebuild trust and
confidence in Europe, in particular in view of the worst
crisis the region has faced since the end of the Cold
War. We believe that the Minsk agreements provide
an excellent opportunity for the parties in conflict to
take a step back from the spiralling violence in Ukraine
and recommit themselves to a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. Full adherence to the Minsk agreements
by both sides would constitute a first step towards the
rebuilding of trust and confidence, hopefully leading to

a sustainable political solution to the conflict.
