The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among Council
members, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the
Yemeni-led peaceful transition process to a just
and democratic political system. It notes the
recent progress, including the 21 February
elections, which occurred in a largely peaceful
manner and with an encouraging level of turnout,
and the 25 February transfer of power to
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, as
per the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and
implementation mechanism. The Security
Council reaffirms its commitment to the unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Yemen.

"The Security Council expresses concern at
the recent deterioration in cooperation among
political actors and the risks this poses to the
transition. The Security Council reaffirms its
resolution 2014 (2011), and calls upon all
political actors in Yemen to remain committed to
the political transition and constitutional order,
and to play a constructive role in the process and
reject violence.

"The Security Council notes that the second
phase of the transition should focus on the
holding of a conference for national dialogue,
restructuring of the security forces, tackling the
unauthorized possession of weapons outside the
control of the State, passing legislation on
transitional justice to support reconciliation,
constitutional reform, electoral reform and the
holding of general elections in 2014. The Security
Council emphasizes the need for these political
processes to be conducted in an inclusive manner
involving the full participation of the different
segments of Yemeni society, including the regions
of the country, the major social groups and the
full and effective participation of women.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of a well-planned and peaceful
preparatory process for the conference for
national dialogue, and therefore urges the quick
formation by the Yemeni Government of an
inclusive preparatory committee involving the
major constituencies. In the context of a
genuinely inclusive process, the Security Council
reminds the Yemeni Government and other actors
of the need to release those protesters arbitrarily
detained during the crisis.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
concern about intensified terrorist attacks,
including by Al-Qaida, within Yemen. It
condemns such terrorist attacks in the strongest
terms and supports the efforts of the Yemeni
Government to combat terrorism in compliance
with all their obligations under international law,
in particular international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law. It expresses deep
condolences to the families of the Victims in the
March attacks in Abyan, southern Yemen.

"The Security Council notes the formidable
economic and social challenges confronting
Yemen, which have left many Yemenis in acute
need of humanitarian assistance. It welcomes the
expansion of the humanitarian response capacity
by United Nations agencies and partners, while
noting its concern that the 2012 humanitarian
response plan is significantly underfunded, and
urges renewed and sustained support by donors
for the plan. The Security Council also urges all
parties to facilitate full, safe and unimpeded
access for humanitarian actors to reach people in
need of humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council notes with
appreciation the planned 23 May Friends of
Yemen ministerial meeting in Riyadh and calls
for the international community to maintain its
active support to help the Yemeni Government
meet the forthcoming political, security,
economic and humanitarian challenges. The
Security Council looks forward to an action plan
set out by the Yemeni authorities, in close
12-27935
cooperation with all the parties in Yemen and in a
spirit of dialogue, on how these challenges could
be addressed with the support of the international
community. They affirm their view that the
Friends of Yemen have a particularly important
role to play by bringing together the main
international actors in a common endeavour to
support Yemen's overall transitional plans during
the next two years.

"The Security Council reiterates that all
those responsible for human rights violations and
abuses, including acts of violence, should be held
accountable. The Security Council also notes
with concern that children continue to be
recruited and used by armed groups and certain
elements of the military and calls for continued
national efforts to discourage the use and
recruitment of child soldiers.

"The Security Council reiterates its call to
all parties to remain fully committed to the
success of the transition, and welcomes the
continued engagement of the good offices of the
Secretary-General and his Special Adviser Jamal
Benomar. It welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention to dispatch a team of experts to monitor
the implementation and provide advice to the
parties in consultation with the Government of
Yemen, and supports the intention of the United
Nations to focus its political engagement through
a small presence in Yemen of officials working
closely alongside the United Nations country
team in order to support Yemeni efforts to
organize a national dialogue process that is
inclusive, transparent and participatory, and will
work, in coordination with partner missions, with
the Yemeni Government to adopt transitional
justice legislation, carry out constitutional reform
and offer support up to and including the general
elections in 2014. The Security Council remains
closely engaged on the situation in Yemen and
will continue to closely follow the next steps
towards a peaceful political transition of power."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/8.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Yemen.

