Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): It was with shock and distress
that we learned about the tragic events yesterday in
Belgrade, which led to the convening of the present
meeting of the Security Council. We deplore the tragic
incident reportedly caused by a missile which hit the
Embassy of China in Belgrade and which caused the deaths
and injury of Chinese diplomats and other civilians in the
Embassy. We expect that the ongoing investigation by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization will provide additional
information with a View to establishing all the relevant
facts. Information available at this moment is not yet
complete.

I wish to emphasize that Slovenia deplores every
instance of loss of life, injury, destruction of property and
other consequences affecting civilian populations in armed
conflict. We wish to convey our sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of China.

The incident addressed today is part of a wider
situation. The Security Council is actively seized of the
situation in and around Kosovo, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. This is not a new situation. In fact, the vicious
spiral of Violence started about 10 years ago. The
humanitarian consequences of that situation are extremely
serious. Council members are aware of the extent of the
humanitarian disaster which has recently evolved in Kosovo
and which is the result of the systematic policy of ethnic
cleansing directed against the Albanian population in
Kosovo.

A draft resolution relating to the humanitarian aspects
of the situation has been submitted to the Security Council,
and we hope that the Council will take action on that draft
resolution soon. Furthermore, the Security Council is aware
of the efforts of the Secretary-General and of his decision
to send a humanitarian-needs-assessment mission to the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, beginning in Kosovo. All
these humanitarian efforts are essential. In addition, the
Security Council is aware of the diplomatic efforts being
made, including those led by the Secretary-General and
those of the G-8 member States. All efforts for a peaceful
resolution of the situation in and around Kosovo, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, must continue with vigour and
commitment, and the Security Council must be actively
involved in this process.

Let me repeat that the spiral of violence in and around
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, started many
years ago. It is now high time to take decisive steps
towards its resolution and towards the establishment of the
foundation for a durable peace.

