Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would first
like to thank Mr. Kafando, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, for his very clear and
frank briefing, which comes at an important time for
Burundi, in the wake the referendum. I should also
like to thank Ambassador Lauber, for his thoughtful
briefing, particularly the six recommendations he
made for international community engagement. I am
happy to say that we support all of those very clear and
useful recommendations.

The United Kingdom would like to join the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, the United States,
France and other speakers today in expressing our
concern about the violence seen in the run-up to the
referendum. Human Rights Watch has reported that
at least 15 people opposing the referendum have been
killed, while six have been raped and eight abducted.
We remain very concerned about the restrictions on the
political space and the media in the period leading up
to the referendum. Regrettably, the preparations for the
referendum and the vote itself were held in a climate
of intimidation and repression, with a lack of public
information on the proposed reforms. We heard today
from Special Envoy Kafando about reports of many
irregularities by the opposition and from civil society.
Such actions only reduce the confidence that the results
of the referendum represent the will of the electorate.

We are of the view, in strong agreement with Special
Envoy Kafondo, that the Government of Burundi must
ensure that the spirit ofthe Arusha Accords is respected
when any constitutional reform is implemented. The
current crisis in Burundi can be resolved only by
continuing an inclusive dialogue that preserves the
Accords. We hope that the implementation of the
constitutional amendments will not have any impact
on the previous agreements, particularly with regard
to ethnic quotas and the representation of women in
the Government. The United Kingdom calls on the
African Union and the other guarantors of the Arusha
Accords to pay careful attention to preserving them
during any implementation of constitutional changes in
Burundi. We encourage and support the African Union
in its efforts to ensure that the spirit of the Accords is
adhered to.

As others have already said today, we remain
extremely concerned about the human rights situation
in Burundi. We note with concern the points made
by the Special Envoy about the expulsion of human
rights experts, and we join his call to the Burundian
authorities to facilitate their return and cooperate with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. We continue to call on the
Government to implement the two resolutions adopted
at the thirty-sixth session of the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/36/2 and A/HRC/36/l9). We also urge the
Government to make progress on the criteria set by the
European Union (EU) that would pave the way for a
resumption of EU financial assistance to Burundi.

What we have heard today indicates that there is
little prospect of an early end to the political crisis
or improvement in the humanitarian situation in
Burundi. The current situation is unsustainable. We
often talk in this Chamber about the importance of
conflict prevention. The risks in Burundi are huge, and
the case for preventive diplomacy is overwhelming. We
therefore join the Peacebuilding Commission's call to
the international community to pay close attention to
the situation in Burundi, and we strongly encourage the
Burundian Government, the East African Community
and the African Union to vigorously pursue inclusive
dialogue and preserve the gains of the Arusha Accords,
which is the only way to ensure peace and security in
the country.

