Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, and Special Representative De Mistura
for his comprehensive briefing.
10

Let me start by underscoring my Government's
continued full support for the critical role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan. We are deeply grateful for the
continuing determination and courage of the men and
women of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), who have demonstrated their
deep commitment to helping Afghans achieve stability
and build democratic institutions in the face of
enormous challenges. Our gratitude is all the greater
for having seen their work and those challenges first
hand on the Security Council's trip to Afghanistan last
week.

Our trip reinforced our strong support for Special
Representative De Mistura and his team, who are
helping the Government of Afghanistan to face its most
important and difficult challenges. Their vital work
needs resources, especially experienced and capable
staff with a wide range of technical expertise. I am
grateful to the Special Representatives in the
Secretariat for their work in ensuring that priority
positions in Afghanistan are filled. I urge the United
Nations system as a whole to continue to move
energetically and creatively to deploy the needed staff
to Afghanistan.

During our three-and-a-half-day trip, the Security
Council saw a proud and determined Afghan people
working together across economic and social sectors
and Government ministries to build a durable future for
their country. When we sat with young Afghan students
in a refugee resettlement camp, they described their
painful inheritance from three decades of war, but they
also spoke compellingly about their ability to shape
Afghanistan's political and economic future. Their
resilience was inspiring, and such resilience will be
Afghanistan's crucial reserve as the country faces this
year's challenges.

Afghanistan and the international community are
entering a new phase of our partnership on the way to
full Afghan ownership. As a result, the Security
Council focused its trip on those elements that will
allow the Afghan people to exercise full control over
their destiny, choosing their Government, beginning a
dialogue on the conflict, strengthening their ability to
provide security and fostering economic and political
development.

As part of these consultations, the Council looked
in depth at the ongoing preparations for the legislative
elections scheduled for September. We welcome the
10-42978
new leadership at the Independent Electoral
Commission and the reconstituted Electoral
Complaints Commission. The Independent Electoral
Commission leadership spoke of the lessons learned
from the 2009 election and its determination to
improve the upcoming election's credibility. The
Commission also emphasized the need for increased
security for polling sites, noting that they did not plan
to open polling stations in insecure areas. Similarly, the
Electoral Complaints Commission's leaders
underscored their commitment to act independently.
The United States, for its part, reinforced the
importance of the United Nations being prepared to
provide enough technical and operational support to
meet the needs of both Commissions.

Afghan representatives and Government leaders
briefed the Council on Afghan-led reconciliation and
reintegration efforts designed to pull insurgent
commanders and flghters off the battlefield. President
Karzai and others emphasized in this context the
importance of removing names from the list pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999). In consultation with other
Committee members, we are thoroughly reviewing
each and every individual and entity on the list and
determining on a case-by-case basis whether the
listings remain appropriate. The United States
continues to support de-listing reconciled Taliban who
cut their ties to Al-Qaida, lay down their arms and
accept the Afghan Constitution. The United States also
continues to work with our partners on the Committee
and in the Afghan Government to ensure that the 1267
regime can effectively and accurately list individuals
and, when appropriate, remove them.

During the trip, Security Council members
underscored to our Afghan partners that the
Government of Afghanistan's providing credible
information on each individual being considered for
removal from the consolidated list by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) is vital
and urgent. We look forward to receiving that
information.

The Council also saw the extensive efforts of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
NATO to build a multi-ethnic national army. The
Council visited the Kabul military training centre to
talk to ISAF and Afghan trainers. We had the
opportunity to see new Afghan National Army recruits
from across the country. We learned that recruiting has
increased, as has the number of international
10-42978

instructors. Moreover, Afghan soldiers are now being
trained and tested against concrete standards. The
crucial non-commissioned officer corps is being
strengthened.

But much more work remains to be done. More
trainers are needed, both to fulfil existing NATO
pledges and to fill gaps. Building self-sustaining,
capable Afghan security forces is crucial to a
meaningful and sustainable transition to Afghan
leadership on security.

Council members also witnessed United Nations
efforts to help returning Afghan refugees at the Sheikh
Mesri resettlement camp. We were briefed by the
provincial reconstruction team in Jalalabad on the ways
that civilian officials are partnering with Afghans to
develop and implement important initiatives on
governance, economic development, the rule of law
and agriculture. These multilateral and bilateral efforts
to build economic and political momentum following
military actions are crucial to our strategy's long-term
success. To ensure that the international community's
efforts are effective, the United Nations should
continue to promote coordination and unity of effort.

The United States expresses its gratitude to
Special Representative De Mistura, the United Nations
team and the Turkish delegation for organizing an
effective trip to Afghanistan, and to ISAF-NATO for its
support and security assistance. We look forward to
continuing to work closely with the Special
Representative to achieve our shared goal of helping
the people of Afghanistan transform and strengthen
their own society and ensure their own security.

Finally, let me underscore our profound thanks to
President Karzai, Ambassador Tanin and the rest of the
Afghan Government, including the Afghan security
forces, for hosting such a productive visit and
extending such warm hospitality.

