Mr. Mahamat (Chad) (spoke in French): As this is
the first time that I have taken the floor in this Chamber,
allow me to welcome my colleagues and ministers. I
would like to thank the ambassadors representing our
States and the Secretary-General and those working
with him on the excellent work that they do on a daily
basis to maintain peace and security.

Peace and security remain dangerously threatened,
in particular by terrorism. In that regard, I refer to the
type ofinternational terrorism represented by Al-Qaida,
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and Daesh, to mention but a few.

I would also like to thank Secretary of State John
Kerry for holding this open debate, which comes at the
right time, given the grave situation in which Iraq finds
itself. I also take the opportunity to welcome the United
States presidency of the Security Council during the
month of September and I assure it of our full support.
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, and
our colleague Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, for their briefings.

The political situation in Iraq is critical and has
been for several months now. The political upheavals in
the region, the disintegration of the States and foreign
interference have exacerbated internal conflicts.
For that reason, Al-Qaida and other assimilated and
affiliated terrorist groups, in particular Daesh, have
found fertile ground in which to spread their form of
transnational jihadism, thereby threatening peace and
stability in Iraq and beyond. Chad remains profoundly
concerned by the prevailing climate today in Iraq
following the large-scale offensives launched by Daesh,
which still control localities in the country. Daesh is
spreading terror and committing unparalleled atrocities
in Iraq and Syria. It is a real threat, not only to those
two countries, but also to the international community
as a whole.

That is why Chad, which treats the fight against
terrorism as a top priority, is playing its part, in
particular in Mali, where it has paid and continues
to pay a heavy price in the fight against terrorism.
Hundreds of Chadian soldiers have fallen - five just
yesterday - and dozens have been injured. We are
providing our unflagging support to the United States,
the States of the region, France and other partners,
which are doing all they can to prevent the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, or Daesh, from being able to
cause harm.

We believe that the fight against the terrorist groups
cannot be waged only through wide-scale military
action. There is also and above all a need to focus on
the deep-seated root causes of the Iraqi crisis. As we
know, Daesh has benefitted from fertile ground, which
has promoted its apparent expansion and has exploited
the feelings of frustration, injustice and despair
within a significant group of Iraqi society, which feels
discriminated and excluded from the management of
the country. Reconquering the Daesh-controlled areas
in Iraq will be possible only ifthe Sunni issues are taken
into account. Therefore, we believe it is necessary to
combat Daesh politically, militarily and ideologically
by integrating the local and regional complexities into
the strategies of an international coalition.

With that in mind, the international community
needs to support the Government of the new Prime
Minister Haider Al-Abadi in order to enable him to
establish an inclusive policy, breaking with the past,
bringing together all Iraqis around a social project,
free from the ethnicity- and sectarian-based conflict.
We call on all religious and civilian sectors in Iraq
to demonstrate their cohesion in order to turn a new
page in their history. Furthermore, we believe that the
involvement of militias within the Government's armed
forces might exacerbate intercommunity tensions and
perpetuate the political polarization.

Once again, we stress the need to address the
root causes of violence in Iraq and to accelerate the
political process by an inclusive national dialogue in
order to establish democratic governance, the rule of
law, social justice and equal opportunity. The people
of Iraq deserve to live in stable, prosperous and secure
State where all groups, including religious and ethnic
minorities, can participate in the political process and
have the opportunity to develop a sense of belonging.

I would like to most firmly condemn the attacks
perpetrated recently by Daesh against religious and
ethnic minorities in Iraq, as well as the beheading of
journalists and humanitarian workers. The authors of
those hateful crimes must be found so that they can
answer for their acts in court.
In conclusion, I think that in order for us to have
the greatest chances of overcoming what I have called
"the international terrorist", we must act. We must act
in solidarity and in a coordinated manner at all times
and in all places.

