Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Allow me to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Nicholas
Haysom for their briefings. I also take this opportunity
to say how much we have appreciated Mr. Haysom's
dedicated efforts and contributions on the issue of
Abyei over the past two years.

We are pleased to note once again that the
security situation in Abyei remains generally stable.
Indeed, Abyei has become a Vibrant hub between the
Sudan and South Sudan and an area of sanctuary for
refugees coming from various communities. That is
a direct result of the stability created by the presence
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) in the area. It is a stark contrast to
the situation of six or seven years ago, and UNISFA
deserves to be commended for what it has been able to
accomplish - essentially, maintaining a peaceful and
stable situation in the Abyei Area.

That, however, should not lead us to let down
our guard. We can have no doubt that the continued
presence of UNISFA is absolutely critical to
maintaining that general stability. Without the presence
of UNISFA, there is still a very real risk of resumption
of intercommunal Violence. As the Secretary-General
has said, the success in keeping relative calm in Abyei
and along the border should not be taken as sign that the
issues have been resolved. They have not.

The Sudan and South Sudan may have made
significant progress towards activating the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (J BVMM).
However, little has been done to implement the 20 June
2011 Agreement between the Government of Sudan and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area. That includes the failure to form the
joint interim institutions that were supposed to be put
in place pending the final resolution of the Abyei issue.

Given that reality, it makes sense to consider
reconfiguring the mission in order to increase its
ability to assist the parties in fully implementing their
agreements. That, after all, was the main reason for the
deployment of UNISFA in the first place. We appreciate
the Secretary-General for taking the initiative in
that regard. We share most of the assessments and
recommendations in his report.

We agree that the tasks of UNISFA along the border
should be aligned and complement what it does in the
Abyei box. We consider JBVMM. to be intrinsic to the
mandate of UNISFA. Indeed, what UNISFA has been
able to achieve in maintaining peace and stability in
the Abyei Area has much to do with what it does in
preventing confrontation along the border through the
J BVMM. That should serve as a platform going forward.
Altering those arrangements would have serious
implications on the ground for wider regional stability.

We also concur with the Secretary-General that
the J BVMM. remains a Vital part of the framework that
regulates the relationship between the two countries.
There has not been a single confrontation between their
armies since the inclusion of the JBVMM. as part of
UNISFA's mandate in 2012. That is a clear testament to
the importance of the operation and functioning of the
Mechanism. We would therefore support the Secretary-
General's recommendations for the Mechanism to be
deployed fully and for the 2012 agreements on security
arrangements and the border to be implemented.

However, we do not think that transferring troops

from the Abyei box to the J BVMM. is the right approach
to making the Mechanism fully functional. Reducing the
troop levels in the box would have serious implications.
We strongly advise that the troop levels remain
unchanged. Additionally, we find it difficult to support
the proposal to deploy police forces at the expense of
troop levels. Certainly, there is merit in the deployment
of police, especially in the absence of the envisaged
Abyei Police Service, but we believe that it is premature
to reduce troop levels in the box in the absence of the
full implementation of the 2012 agreements.

The proposed reinforcement and reconfiguration
of the civilian capacity of the mission are certainly
timely. The population has high expectations that
UNISFA can deliver humanitarian and development
assistance now that it has secured the stability of
the area. A strengthened civilian component could
relieve the troops from taking on additional civilian
responsibilities in the absence of basic administrative
structures. We strongly support the establishment of a
dedicated civilian programme and echo the Secretary-
General's call for donors to finance projects focusing
on reconciliation and development and tailored to the
needs of the two communities.

All of this, I must say, strongly underlines the
importance of continuing to engage fully with all
relevant stakeholders, particularly the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan. The consent of
concerned parties is a basic principle of peacekeeping,
and the agreement of both Governments is critical to
any adjustment of UNISFA's mission concept. That
is all the more important given the unique nature of
UNISFA's deployment.

I can say with confidence that UNISFA has become
one of our most effective peacekeeping missions. It has
made impressive and hard-won gains. Nevertheless, we
can all recognize the fragility of the relative stability
along the border and in the box. Whatever decisions we
take, we should ensure that they do not negate UNISFA's
work. We must continue to develop and advance on the
basis of the progress already achieved.

