Mr. Zuma (South Africa): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for affording me the honour of once
again addressing the Security Council. It has been
exactly one year since I was last afforded this privilege,
having made a presentation to the Security Council on
4 December last year.

The twentieth summit of the Great Lakes
Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi, which was held
on 16 November 2003 in Tanzania under the leadership
of President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, Chairperson
of the Regional Initiative on Burundi, and President
Joaquim Chissano, Chairperson of the African Union,
has mandated me, as facilitator, to report to the
Security Council again and to request urgent direct
assistance for the Burundi peace process. That
assistance will help to consolidate the gains already
made, prepare the ground for successful democratic
elections in 11 months' time and firmly place Burundi
on the road to lasting peace and stability.

We are pleased to report that tremendous progress
has been made over the past year, and that we are
ending 2003 on a positive note due to the significant
developments that have taken place. Those have
included the establishment of the African mission in
Burundi, the conclusion of outstanding negotiations
and the implementation of various agreements,
including with regard to power-sharing and the
transformation of the security apparatus.

The African mission, which was just a concept at
this time last year, was successfully established in
March 2003, and has worked tirelessly to fulfil its
mandate. It was founded in terms of a decision of the
nineteenth Summit Meeting of the Heads of State and
Government of the Regional Peace Initiative on
Burundi, which was held in Tanzania in December
2002. The establishment of the African mission was, in
our View, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which supports the establishment of
regional initiatives for the resolution of conflicts,
provided such arrangements are consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.

Reference is also made to such initiatives in
Chapter VI, which provides for the use of regional
initiatives for the resolution of disputes without the
active, direct involvement - but with the full
support - of the United Nations.

The objectives of the African Mission are to
oversee the implementation of the ceasefire
agreements - a task it continues to undertake
effectively, to our satisfaction; to support the
disarmament and demobilization initiatives and advise
on the reintegration of ex-combatants - a task it has
begun to execute efficiently, as will be reported on in
this presentation; to contribute to political and
economic stability in Burundi - a responsibility it has
executed exceptionally - in assisting the
implementation of all agreements and preparing the
groundwork for the social and economic reconstruction
of Burundi; and to work to achieve conditions that are
favourable for the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission - again, a task executed
professionally and successfully - leading to our
presence here today to say that the time has come for
the United Nations to become actively involved.

The African Mission is headed by Ambassador
Bah, the Special Representative of the African Union
in Burundi, who is assisted by three deputies from
South Africa, Tanzania and Uganda. It integrates a
military component, under the command of Major-
General Sipho Binda of South Africa, comprising
contingents from Mozambique, Ethiopia and South
Africa. It also has a military observer component of 43
members from Burkina Faso, Gabon, Mali, Togo and
Tunisia. The Joint Ceasefire Commission of the
African Mission in Burundi is led by General Alioune
Samba, of the United Nations. As of the end of
November, the total strength of the force stood at 2,656
men and women. The Mission is widely regarded as a
shining example and model of African solutions to
continental security challenges.

With regard to ceasefire agreements, in my report
last year, I indicated that at the signing of the
agreement between the Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratie - Forces pour la defense de
la democratie (CNDD-FDD) of Mr. Nkurunziza and the
Transitional Government, certain outstanding issues
still needed to be negotiated. They included the
participation of the former armed movements in the
transitional institutions of the State and Parliament, as
well as issues relating to disarmament and
demobilization and the building of a new inclusive
security apparatus in Burundi. The negotiations on
those issues have been successfully concluded, leading
to the signing of the two Pretoria Protocols of 8
October and 2 November 2003 and the comprehensive
ceasefire agreement signed in Dar es Salaam on 16
November 2003, which was a consolidation of all
agreements between the CNDD-FDD of
Mr. Nkurunziza and the Transitional Government.
It is important to emphasize that since the signing
of the first Pretoria Protocol between the Burundi
Government and the CNDD-FDD on 8 October 2003,
the level of violence was reduced drastically, bringing
peace to at least 95 per cent of the territory of Burundi.
The celebrations by Burundian refugees during the
signing of the comprehensive agreement in Dar es
Salaam was to us an indication of the genuine desire
for peace of the people of Burundi.

We can therefore say without fear of
contradiction that the Burundi peace process has
entered a decisive and irreversible stage. This is more
so because the implementation of all the ceasefire
agreements and the Pretoria Protocols has been swift,
and change is evident. Those developments have
significantly boosted the implementation of the Arusha
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation of August
2000, which guides the transitional period.

The Transitional Government now includes
representatives of the three movements which have
signed ceasefire agreements with the Transitional
Government. Among the key new members of the
Burundian cabinet is Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, leader of
the CNDD-FDD, who was recently appointed Senior
Minister of State and Good Governance. Members of
the CNDD-FDD who are to join transitional
institutions have returned to Burundi, and
Mr. Nkurunziza is expected to return to Bujumbura on
Saturday. The return of Mr. Nkurunziza and his
delegation to public life in Burundi is another critical
milestone in the peace process.

Another practical demonstration of the
commitment of the Burundians to peace was the
smooth and proficient manner in which the presidential
alternation took place in May this year. President Pierre
Buyoya, from the Tutsi political family, vacated office
and was replaced by President Domitien Ndayizeye,
from the Hutu political family, in line with the Arusha
Agreement of 2000. The country has therefore been
consistently moving forward. It must also be noted that
Burundi has successfully completed the first two thirds
of the transition period, at the end of which - in ll
months - a democratically elected legislature and
executive should be in place to replace transitional
institutions.

We are of the view that because of these positive
developments, Burundi is today closer to lasting peace
than ever before in its 10 years of conflict.

The fact that the Parti pour la liberation du
peuple hutu - Forces nationales de liberation
(PALIPEHUTU-FNL) of Agathon Rwasa is currently
outside the peace process is regrettable. However, that
does not present an obstacle to the peace process,
taking into account that the majority of parties are part
of the process.

The November Summit issued a clear message to
the FNL to join the peace process within three months.
According to the Summit, after that deadline, or in case
of a categorical refusal to join the negotiation process,
the FNL would be considered an organization that is
against peace and stability. The heads of State urged
the support of that position by the United Nations and
the international community as a whole in order to put
pressure on the movement.

We appreciate the consistent public call made by
the Security Council to the FNL over a period of time
for that movement to join the peace process without
delay. We note, for example, the 14 August 2003
statement by the President of the Security Council
inviting member States of the Great Lakes region to
use all their influence and pressure to compel the FNL
to engage in peace talks.

The Summit mandated me to continue attempts to
bring the FNL into the process. I have sent a
communication to them and hope for a positive
response. In my last meeting with them, last year, they
reaffirmed their willingness to join the peace process
but imposed pre-conditions. I shall continue to try to
engage the movement, and I am still optimistic that a
solution can be found.

While we celebrate the tremendous achievements
of the past year, much work remains to be done.
Burundi faces serious challenges in the weeks and
months ahead. Part of that includes the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of returning
combatants, as well as the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The CNDD of Jean Bosco
and the PALIPEHUTU-FNL of Alain Mugabarabona
have begun to canton some of their combatants in the
cantonment site at Muyange. They have indicated that
they had more combatants who would be cantoned
soon. The combatants of the CNDD-FDD of Pierre
Nkurunziza are already proceeding to various assembly
points to be cantoned. In early November, I took a
CNDD-FDD delegation - led by its Secretary-
General, Hussein Rajabu - to Burundi so that it could
begin preparations for participation in the African
mission. The visit once again indicated to the
Burundian population that the peace process is moving
forward. It is important to note that many refugees,
mainly from Tanzania, began to move into Burundi on
their own when the final agreements were signed. The
mood is therefore one of optimism and great
expectations.

The African mission, which is responsible for the
cantonment and disarmament of the combatants prior
to demobilization, requires resources to carry out its
mandate effectively. And, most important, the African
mission requires resources to maintain the African
mission force. Very soon, the mission will be required
to take full responsibility for the maintenance of the
troops, as the period allocated for self-sustenance by
the respective troop-contributing countries will come to
an end. It is extremely urgent that financial resources
be found without delay. I must emphasize that we
appreciate the assistance pledged by the Security
Council in the statement of 18 December last year -
relating to, among other issues, facilitation of logistical
assistance for the deployment of the African
Mission - and the consistent calls for support from the
donor community.

We wish to reiterate that the continued success of
the Burundi peace process requires more direct United
Nations involvement. The African Union, the Great
Lakes Regional Initiative, the facilitation team, the
African Mission and Burundian parties have made their
contribution and have brought Burundi this far. The
international community must now help to consolidate
those positive gains.

We believe processes should now be put in place
to look into how the United Nations can become
actively and directly involved in the Burundi peace
process. It is our well-considered view that conditions
are now conducive for the United Nations to express its
support and solidarity by taking over the African
mission in Burundi, re-hatting the existing military
contingent and deploying a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. The other, more immediate,
relief measure is to provide material, logistical and
financial support to the African mission to enable it to
continue with its work while preparations continue for
more robust involvement on the part of the United
Nations.

We should like to express once again our
gratitude to the United Nations for the support it has
provided thus far in many respects, including the
invaluable contribution of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Burundi, Ambassador
Berhanu Dinka. We hold the view that, for Africa to be
at peace with itself, we should all work together to
support nations that are moving towards peace and
stability. We are humbled by the knowledge that the
Security Council is fully behind that African position
and that it has always been prepared to lend its full
support so that we may achieve the noble objective of a
peaceful and prosperous Africa.

