Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks the
presidency for having organized this meeting and for
allowing us to participate in it. We also welcome the
presence among us of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, His Excellency
Mr. Jorge Arreaza.

We will not tire of repeating that Latin America and
the Caribbean is a peace-loving area that has ratified
its commitment to the pacific settlement of disputes in
order to forever banish the use and threat of the use of
force in our region, as well as strict compliance with its
obligations not to intervene - directly or indirectly - in
the affairs of any other State. That includes observing
the principles of national sovereignty, equal rights and
the self-determination of peoples within the framework
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law.

The situation that Venezuela is experiencing
demands the attention of the Security Council, not
because that country constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, but because the actions that have
been taken against Venezuela indeed pose a very
serious threat to peace and stability within our region.

During the past weekend, an operation directed
by the United States Government was deployed, with
the aim of using humanitarian aid as a Trojan Horse
to achieve its political objective: regime change in
Venezuela. Despite ideological bombardment and the
massive media campaign deployed around the so-called
"delivery of humanitarian aid", neither the United
Nations nor the International Committee of the Red
Cross nor the Catholic Church allowed themselves to
be instrumentalized in such a way, because that so-
called help violates the principles of independence,
impartiality, neutrality and humanity. Today, as
reported by the media, the Deputy Secretary-General
of the United Nations indicated:

we have very clear principles regarding
humanitarian aid and, in the case of Venezuela,
there have been attempts to politicize it".

The debate we are having today is important and
timely, especially when various officials of the United
States Government have spoken about the situation
in Venezuela and are constantly repeating the slogan
that "all options are on the table". We, and the Council,
should pay a lot of attention to those words and gauge
their gravity. My region and the world have suffered the
tragic consequences of"all options being on the table".

How many massacres do the countries of Latin
America have to take when all the options are on the
table? How many invasions such as those suffered by
the Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Panama or Haiti
must be endured when all the options are on the table?
We remember Operation Condor, the School of the
Americas, the forced disappearance ofpersons, torture,
murder when all the options were on the table. The
Iran-Contra affair in relation to the war in Nicaragua
also comes to mind. In this regard, let me read what the
ruling ofthe International Court of Justice in Nicaragua
v. United States ofAmerica of 27 June 1986 says:

"The Court decides that the United States of
America, by training, arming, equipping, financing
and supplying the contra forces or otherwise
encouraging, supporting and aiding military and
paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua, has

acted, against the Republic of Nicaragua, in breach
of its obligation under customary international law
not to intervene in the affairs of another State."
When all options are open, when "all options are on
the table", what comes to mind is the Monroe Doctrine,
the National Security Doctrine and the internal enemy
doctrine. What also comes to mind is the unconditional
support of the United States to the dictators Somoza,
Stroessner, Pinochet, Videla and Banzer. Let
me digress - a result of those situations whose
consequences we still support is the rise of caravans of
migrants and refugees fleeing Central America.

The dramatic story that is unfolding before our eyes
is the new version of many others. In this case, not only
is the macabre script ofinterventionism and policies of
regime change being repeated, but some of the most
important actors in the aggressions against Nicaragua,
Guatemala, Honduras or Iraq are the same ones that are
playing a leading role in this tragedy.

It is possible that we are being told that we are
bringing to the Security Council issues from an outdated
past and that we are only motivated by resentment we
have not gotten over. Let us talk about what happened
in this century. Does the illegal aggression against Iraq,
based on lies, and leading to a million deaths and the
destabilization of an entire region for decades, not haunt
the conscience of humankind and the Council itself?
Have we forgotten so quickly the 500,000 dead in Syria,
a situation also caused by a policy of regime change?

Via Twitter, the Venezuelan Foreign Minister
has shown photographs from the United States of the
assassination of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, which is very
revealing gesture of its intentions. Libya is a matter
of debate on a regular basis in the Security Council.
I have a few questions about that country. How was
humanitarian aid delivered in Libya? Where are the
billions of dollars in Libyan international reserves?
Who benefits from Libya's natural resources? Is it the
Libyan people? Is there peace, democracy and freedom
in that beautiful country?

We do not want Venezuela to suffer the same
fate as Libya. We do not want the Venezuelan people
to suffer what the Libyan people are suffering today.
Furthermore, we do not want South America or Central
America endure what the Sahel region is enduring
because of the policies implemented against Libya.
The Security Council has an obligation to prevent this
from happening.

Given its history of having organized, financed
and promoted coups d'e'tat in my region, it is clear that
the motivation of the United States is not the defence
of democracy, nor is it freedom, human rights or the
prosperity of Venezuela. In addition to geopolitical
control and the punishment of those that are not aligned
with their plans, the true motivation of this onslaught
is oil. The invasion of Iraq was for the same reasons.
The hostility towards Iran now is for the same reasons.
I am sure that all of us understand that Venezuela's oil
reserves are vast as those of Iraq and Iran combined.

If it is true, as the Charter of the United Nations
says, that we are determined to preserve succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, then not all
options are on the table. If the effort made to uphold
the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
is of any use, then not all the options are on the table.
If we support multilateralism rather than unilateral
actions, if we prefer international law to barbarism, if
we defend peace rather than war, then not all options
are on the table.

In this regard, Bolivia salutes the efforts of the
Montevideo Mechanism based on the principles of the
Organization, as well as the Lima Group declaration
and statements by several members of the Security
Council specifically referring to the use of peaceful and
diplomatic methods, without the use of force. However,
the country that made the threats has not yet ruled out
the use of force. To resolve this critical situation, our
options are in the use of all diplomatic resources and in
the primacy of policy.

If we truly want to support the Venezuelan people
we must, first, respect the principles and purposes
of the United Nations Charter; secondly, lift all
unilateral sanctions as being contrary to international
law, including the financial and economic blockade;
depoliticize and demilitarize humanitarian aid;
eradicate any possibility of a violent output to this
crisis; and support the initiatives to promote a process
of dialogue by and for the Venezuelans, in respect of
their sovereignty and self-determination.

