Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): Before I proceed to make
my statement, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay my respects to one of our own. Yesterday,
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, Permanent Representative
ofthe Russian Federation to the United Nations, passed
away in his office, hard at work representing his
country and promoting the great causes of the United
Nations. A stalwart of our Organization and a friend,
he will be missed by all of us and we all owe him our
utmost respect and gratitude. Our condolences also go
to his family and colleagues from the Russian Mission.

At a time when the world and Europe are facing
multiple and complex threats and challenges, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia continues to
render a maximum contribution to the efforts invested
by the international community in maintaining
international peace and security. In doing so, my
Government proceeds from the conviction that
multilateralism is the best response to all the risks
that aggravate international relations. In this context,
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as
defined in the Charter, continue to be just as important
as they have ever been. Serbia supports the joint efforts
of the United Nations and its Member States, as well
as those of regional organizations, aimed at reaching
acceptable and sustainable solutions through dialogue
and cooperation to the conflicts and crises, including
those in Europe.

The national priority of the Republic of Serbia
remains the quest for a political solution to the question
of Kosovo and Metohija. In this way, my country
continues to uphold international law, the Charter of
the United Nations and the supreme authority of the
Security Council in safeguarding international peace
and security and defends its national and historical
identity. In these efforts, we are supported by many
countries that continue to stand with us in their common
struggle for respect for international law and refuse to
accept the unilateral declaration of independence of
Kosovo, which is a serious threat to the international
legal order and the key principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

For that reason, we attach priority importance
to the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
consider that a status-neutral presence of UNMIK in
its undiminished scope is of paramount importance
for stability and the creation of conditions conducive
to a durable and sustainable solution to the question
of Kosovo and Metohija under resolution 1244 (1999).
Consequently, we expect UNMIK to continue to carry
out its mandate under the resolution, especially in the
areas that are essential for the survival and normal and
dignified life of the Serbs and the members of other
non-Albanian communities.
My country is firmly committed to the political
dialogue conducted between Belgrade and Pristina
with the facilitation of the European Union and the
implementation of its agreements. In doing so, we shall
make every effort to protect the interests of the Republic
of Serbia and its citizens, as well as peace and stability
in the region. In that context, the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
continues to be the priority issue. The signing of the
Brussels Agreement was motivated, first and foremost,
by the aspiration to find proper modalities for systematic,
institutional protection of the Serbs in Kosovo and
Metohija because of the lack of adequate institutional
mechanisms in that area. Under the Agreement, this
is to be carried out by the said community, whereby it
is substantively linked to the spirit of resolution 1244
(1999).

The support of the international community
is of paramount importance for the success of this
dialogue. The change of position with respect to
the non-recognition of the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo would have a negative effect
on the continuation of a constructive approach by the
parties to the dialogue and the implementation of the
agreements reached thus far. This is our basic request:
dialogue and agreement instead of unilateralism.

My Government will continue to strengthen
regional cooperation and remain a constructive,
committed and active partner in the promotion of
relations and deepening, inter alia, the concretization
of that cooperation, both in its bilateral ambit and
within regional initiatives and mechanisms. To that
end, we have invested many efforts and endeavours
in stabilizing the situation in the region and we shall
continue to do so to ensure that the future of the
region is second to none. Working on its stability and
cooperation is an investment in a better life for all of us.

Serbia's readiness to overcome the negative legacy
of the past and to commit to our common future, based
on principles of mutual respect, is unquestionable. We
are partners and we shall continue to be partners to all
our neighbours and other countries of the region and
beyond which are ready to share with us the burden
and responsibility of furthering the joint historical
undertaking of building a developed, stable and
prosperous region as an integral part of Europe.

In that context, I would like to point out the
importance that my country attaches to the stability
and prosperity of its first neighbour, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. More than 20 years have elapsed since the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement, which made it
possible to end the suffering and establish peace after
the tragic conflict in that country. The Agreement is
on the cusp of its third decade, and, throughout its
implementation, it has made an important contribution
to reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
entire region. It has provided a basis for rebuilding
confidence among that country's three constituent
peoples and two Entities and continues to be of crucial
importance for the country. As a signatory party to the
Dayton Peace Agreement, Serbia supports each and
every agreement adopted by the two Entities and the
three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My country also supports good-neighbourly cooperation
based on close relations with the central authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will continue to promote
and intensify cooperation with the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and deepen and enrich its special
relations with the Republic of Srpska.

The European perspective of the countries of the
Western Balkans serves the common denominator for
regional cooperation and a contribution to the resolution
of many outstanding issues in the region through
dialogue. My country believes that the European Union
is the best framework within which all of the countries
of the region can realize their individual interests. The
reforms that we have carried out over the past several
years have demonstrated that we perceive our future
to be in the European Union. The process of European
integration will not be complete until the entire region
joins the Union. It is a historic undertaking and calls
for exceptional efforts, sacrifices, maturity and reason
on the part of all actors involved in order to overcome
the legacy of the past. My country has demonstrated,
on many occasions, that it has the courage to act
dynamically and responsibly. That gives us the right to

expect that all other neighbours and our partners will
act in the same manner in the interest of the future
progress and prosperity of the entire region and Europe
in general.

