The President: I thank the representative of
Cameroon for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan.

At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General and to the
experts invited to this meeting - Sir Brian Urquhart,
Ambassador Jamsheed Marker and Judge Nabil
Elaraby - for their important statements.

The United Nations Charter begins with the
words:

"We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war...".

The central purpose of the United Nations is therefore
to promote and preserve peace. Yet peace, as the
Charter recognizes, is to be based on justice.

The Charter charges the Security Council with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In this regard, Chapter
VI of the Charter defines the Council's role in the
pacific settlement of disputes. We have heard this
morning thoughtful statements from eminent experts
and Council members on the successes and failures of
the Security Council and the United Nations in
maintaining and promoting peace and security and the
extent to which the provisions of Chapter VI have been
fully implemented.

This meeting was designed to discuss how the
Security Council could do more to promote peaceful
solutions in accordance with its Charter obligations.
We have a long and abiding association with the
Security Council in this regard. Our involvement with
the Council came very early in the history of the
United Nations. It was intensified when the dispute
over Jammu and Kashmir was referred to the Security
Council.

The Prime Ministers of Pakistan and India have
recently taken the initiative to reduce tension in South
Asia and reverse the negative trends of the recent past.
Today, therefore, I do not wish to say anything that
would vitiate the atmosphere for the resumption of
bilateral talks with our neighbour, India. However, it is
a historical fact that one of the earliest applications of
Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter was in the
Kashmir dispute.

Following negotiations and agreements among
the parties, the Security Council adopted resolution 47
(1948), of 21 April 1948, which promised a free and
fair plebiscite under United Nations auspices to enable
the people of Jammu and Kashmir to determine
whether they wished to join India or Pakistan. Before
and after that resolution, the Security Council instituted
a series of mechanisms - including the establishment
of the United Nations Commission for India and
Pakistan, the deployment of a military observer group
and the appointment of eminent special representatives
of the United Nations, who consulted the two parties
and submitted extensive reports on how to resolve the
dispute in accordance with provisions of the Security
Council resolutions.

The process ran aground due to the cold war,
when the Security Council could no longer act to
persuade the parties to implement its resolutions. The
Simla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration support
solutions through bilateral discussions. At the Agra
summit, in July 2001, Pakistan and India almost
succeeded in launching a framework for revived talks.

Today, despite the discouraging record, Pakistan
is hopeful that we can revive the process of dialogue
for which we have been pressing consistently, before
and after the Agra summit. A peaceful solution to
Jammu and Kashmir is possible if both sides display
flexibility, goodwill and wisdom. It is, however,
obvious that there can be no durable solution unless the
aspirations of the people of Jammu and Kashmir are
taken into consideration. We are confident that the
international community, and especially the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, will extend their
full support to Pakistan and India in their fresh
endeavours for peace.

Palestine is another historical issue that remains
outstanding on the Council's agenda. On this issue, the
Council has acted under both Chapter VI and Chapter
VII of the Charter. In recent years, efforts for peace in
the Middle East have proceeded mostly outside the
Council. These endeavours, including the mechanism
of the Quartet, reflect the spirit and substance of
Chapter VI of the Charter. The Quartet has proposed a
road map for steps towards durable peace based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002) and aimed at the creation of two
States - Palestine and Israel - living side by side
within secure and recognized borders. What is now
required are determined measures to implement the
road map. The Security Council can support and
strengthen the process of implementation.

Some commentators have proclaimed that the
Security Council "failed" when it could not agree to a
resolution to authorize the use of force against Iraq. On
the contrary, the outcome emphasized that the Security
Council sets a very high bar for the authorization of
enforcement action in accordance with Article 42,
Chapter VII, of the Charter. Efforts at conflict
resolution must go through the stages of pacific
settlement encouraged in Chapter VI, and thereafter to
the more coercive measures outlined in Articles 40 and
41 of the Charter under Chapter VII, before any final
recourse to Article-42-type enforcement action. The
Security Council's demurral with respect to authorizing
force against Iraq notwithstanding, the previous
regime's flagrant violations highlight the need to do
everything possible to succeed in resolving conflicts
through the processes set out in Chapter VI of the
Charter.

In this debate we have heard many different
suggestions on how the Security Council can more
efficiently utilize and support such Chapter VI
instrumentalities for peace. These include calling on
parties to negotiate agreements for dispute settlement;
authorizing the Secretary-General to increasingly
utilize all the modalities at his disposal for the peaceful
resolution of disputes; the appointment of commissions
of inquiry and conciliation; and more frequent requests
to the International Court of Justice for advisory
opinions.

The Security Council could also use its
mandatory enforcement authority under Chapter VII to
persuade parties to disputes to engage in the processes
for the peaceful settlement of disputes envisaged under
Chapter VI of the Chapter. The Council could,
moreover, through a decision adopted under Chapter
VII, refer a dispute to the International Court of
Justice, whose determination would thereafter be
binding on the parties, irrespective of whether or not
they had accepted the jurisdiction of the Court.

The United Nations remains an indispensable
forum in spite of the enormous asymmetry of power
among its Member States. It is in the interest of all
Member States, including those that have the capacity
for unilateral action, to address issues through the
Security Council and the United Nations. This is the
only institution that offers international legitimacy,
credibility and acceptability for the actions and policies
of individual Member States or groups of States. Those
assets of legitimacy, credibility and acceptability must
be more vigorously utilized by the Security Council to
prevent armed conflicts and to settle disputes
peacefully. In this age of nuclear weapons and
advanced conventional means of destruction, the
Security Council must give life to the central
obligation of Member States under the Charter to
refrain from the threat or use of force, to avoid war and
to seek and build peace, if necessary slowly and
peacefully, through the vast spectrum of modalities
envisaged in Chapter VI and other provisions of the
Charter.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are still a number of speakers remaining on
my list for this meeting. I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3.15 p.m.

The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.
