I just want to say a special thanks to my friend Mark for giving me the latest update and what is on the ground in Syria. As you well know, I am always eager to know everything I can from you and I really appreciate the time that you always take to fill us in. As well as Geir, thank you so much. And also, for the Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive, nationwide ceasefire, especially, more important, in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic. We have all seen how disruptive and deadly this virus can be, which is why there is no place where the calls for mercy and restraint are more urgent than in Syria. We reaffirm our full support for you, Geir, as you launch this effort to implement the ceasefire requested by the Council in its resolution 2254 (2015). In order to make good on this timely call, all combatants must freeze ground operations that place civilian populations under threat. The Syrian people need the kind of ceasefire called for in resolution 2254 (2015), not another tactical pause that allows Syrian forces and their Russian and Iranian allies to rest before resuming their campaign of terror in the north-west. Such a pause would only encourage their continued pursuit of a military solution to the conflict. In meetings with United Nations officials and Syrian refugees during my trip to Turkey earlier this month, I learned, and personally saw, that the United Nations must be at the centre of any effort to monitor and verify ceasefire initiatives. On this point, I want to be clear that Special Envoy Pedersen has the authority, granted under resolution 2254 (2015), to monitor existing lines of contact to ensure that ceasefire agreements are honoured. Reports have demonstrated that hospitals, clinics and even health-care providers have been harmed by the Assad regime and Russian airstrikes. Given the tenuous status of Syria's health-care infrastructure and the onset of this global pandemic, the United Nations inter-agency monitoring missions to north-west Syria and an enduring ceasefire are increasingly important. We urge the United Nations to continue its inter-agency missions to the north-west to help to protect the vulnerable Syrians sheltering there. Just yesterday, Syria reported its first coronavirus death, reinforcing the danger faced by the Syrian people, especially those living in the densely packed camps in Idlib. Amid the growing threat of COVID-19 throughout Syria, the case for expanding United Nations cross-border aid deliveries and access only grows stronger. For Syrians in the north-east, we must push to see United Nations cross-border access restored to this area, where, with just two votes, Russia and China blocked the ability of the United Nations to deliver 41 per cent of medical supplies. The Council must begin deliberations on how to implement the recommendations of the Secretary- General's report of 25 February, including restoring life-saving, United Nations cross- border assistance to over | million people in the north-east. Because of how rapidly COVID-19 is spreading, these vulnerable Syrians simply cannot wait on arbitrary approvals by Damascus for cross-line delivery of medical supplies. We must authorize more United Nations cross-border operations, not fewer. And we must maintain function for all NGO and United Nations cross-border operations currently going into Syria by the most direct routes. The United States remains alarmed by the Assad regime's deliberate siege of the residents of the Rukban internally displaced persons camp. The regime has again blocked commercial traffic into the camp and now even refuses to allow the United Nations to provide cross-line aid from Damascus. Of course, Rukban is but one clear example of the Assad regime abjectly failing to honour its commitment to the Syrian people. A decade of such failures is precisely why the Trump Administration has no faith in the regime or Russia's promises to improve cross-line humanitarian access. Council members should take these promises with a large grain of salt. Once Syrian people in need are receiving regular, sustained, and high-quality United Nations humanitarian aid, the United States will revisit our assessment of regime and Russian promises. Until then, there can be no further reduction of United Nations cross-border humanitarian access into Syria. Such a step would immediately place millions of lives in jeopardy. Finally, as we respond to COVID-19, I want to reiterate Secretary Pompeo's call regarding thousands of civilians, including U.S. citizens, being held arbitrarily in overcrowded regime detention centers. It is past time for the Assad regime to take concrete steps to protect these individuals and to alter the inhumane conditions in which they are being held. The Trump Administration demands the immediate release of all civilians and political prisoners who have been arbitrarily detained, including women, children and the elderly.
