Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Tanin, for his briefing, as well as the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacie, and Ambassador Vlora Citaku.
Italy's investment in the stabilization of the
Western Balkans has been renewed. Our commitment
to supporting those countries along the path they have
chosen towards the European Union (EU) remains
unwavering. The outcomes of the summit held in
Trieste on 12 July under the Italian presidency of
the Berlin process attest to the priority we attach to
keeping the European perspective in focus and to
encourage Western Balkan countries to consistently
deliver on their own reform agendas in order to bolster
regional cooperation as a conclusive, complimentary
step towards their European integration.

We firmly believe that the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina is an essential
element of that picture and a landmark building block
of durable stability and prosperity for the entire
region. Against that backdropt, we welcome the
meeting between President Vucic' and President Thaci
held on 3 July under the auspices of the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, who has our full support. We
also take note of the internal dialogue underaken by the
President of Serbia on the matter and look forward to
its development. We urge both Belgrade and Pristina
to do their utmost to revitalize the dialgoue, starting
with the implementation of the agreements already
concluded. I recall in particular the issues pertaining
to the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities, which we will continue
to follow closely.

We welcome the conduct of the June election in
Kosovo, which took place without major incidents
and in line with international standards, as assessed
by the European Union election observation mission.
We regret the incidents that occurred in certain Serb-
majority municipalities during the election campaign.
A solid Government must now be urgently formed
in order to achieve meaningful progress in the EU-
facilitated dialogue and to adopt the policy priorities
that are vital for Kosovo, including on financial
stability, economic development and the rule of law. We
call on all political actors to do their parts to achieve
that goal, swiftly complete the constitutive session of
the Assembly, appoint a new executive and contribute
to establishing a constructive dynamic between it and
the new opposition.

I would like underscore the importance of
consolidating the rule oflaw,justice and the fight against
corruption - a sector on which Italy is ready to share
its experience. The attainment of operational capacity
by the Specialist Chamber is a welcome development.
It is now important that it receive full cooperation
from all parties and accomplished its task. Likewise,
protecting vulnerable groups and minorities and respect
for human rights are crucial for reconciliation and for
preventing radicalization. We appreciate the endeavour
of the authorities to uphold them and encourage them to
redouble their efforts. In that regard, we also welcome
the initiative of the Secretary-General to assist the
communities that suffered from lead poisoning as
a result of their relocation to camps for internally
displaced persons in northern Kosovo.

In addition to the bilateral ties of friendship and
solidarity that link us to the region, Italy maintains
long-standing support for the work of UNMIK and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
which we strongly commend, as well as being a major
contributor to the Kosovo Force, whose leadership
recently passed to an Italian commander.

With that in mind, allow me to highlight that the
Secretary-General has documented all the strides made
in Pristina over the years. At the same time, we are
also aware of the road ahead and the efforts required
to overcome challenges that continue to evolve. We
therefore believe that, in coordination with other
international actors, in line with the broader review
of peacekeeping operations, it is time to make an
assessment of the United Nations presence in Kosovo
with the aim of adjusting accordingly to the present needs
of the country, We look forward to recommendations in
that regard. Furthermore, we are open to an extension
of the reporting period by the Secretary-General, one
that is more adapted to the development of the situation
on the ground.

In conclusion, I reiterate our commitment to
assist Kosovo and the Western Balkan countries in
consolidating their institutions, accelerating their
development and intensifying regional cooperation,
thereby advancing towards the European Union,
which is the real key to their long-term stability.
From that perspective, it is paramount to refrain from
inflammatory rhetoric, which belongs to the past. It is
time to look towards the future and building it.

