Mr. Bassole (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
a time when the Security Council is preparing to

consider the situation in the Republic of C6te d'Ivoire,
it is a distinct honour for me to take the floor before
the Council on behalf of President Blaise Compaore,
Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and Facilitator of the direct
inter-Ivorian dialogue, to inform members of his
assessment of the progress made in the peace process
in Cote d'Ivoire. It remains understood that that
facilitation is being carried out under the sponsorship
of the African Union.

I should like to take this opportunity to express
once again to the Security Council the Facilitator's
deep gratitude and great satisfaction with regard to the
trust that has been placed in him through the
endorsement of the Ouagadougou political Agreement,
signed under his auspices on 4 March 2007 by
President Laurent Gbagbo and Mr. Guillaume Soro. I
also wish to express to the Council and to the entire
United Nations system the Facilitator's sincere thanks
for the multifaceted support provided to him as he has
carried out his sensitive mission of following up on the
Ouagadougou political Agreement. Here, I must pay a
well-deserved tribute to the international community as
a whole, particularly the forces of the United Nations
Operation in cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the French troops
of Operation Licorne and all donors involved in Cote
d'Ivoire.

The Ouagadougou political Agreement has led to
a fundamental change in the political situation in C6te
d'Ivoire. In addition to a general calming of the
political and social environment, it has made it
possible to reunify the country by removing the zone of
confidence and redeploying the administration
throughout the national territory. Now, military and
political tensions have given way to a genuine
dialogue, which is gradually taking root among the
various Ivorian political forces and opening the way
for national reconciliation.

With regard to the programmes aimed at the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatant forces and the disarmament and
dismantlement of armed militias, provided for in
section III of the Ouagadougou political Agreement, it
must be recognized that they have not yet been
satisfactorily carried out. Nevertheless, we can
welcome the fact that the conditions for that
achievement are gradually being put in place. Thus, the
establishment on 16 March 2007 of the integrated
command centre, which is responsible for
implementing the military aspects of the Agreement, is
a precondition for the execution of those programmes.
Likewise, the ceremony held in Guiglo on 19 May
2007 to symbolize the destruction of weapons
surrendered by armed militias and the flame-of-peace
ceremony held on 30 July in Bouake, by virtue of their
symbolic nature, have resulted in an easing of political
and military tensions, which has also promoted the
launching of those programmes.

At present, the former combatant forces are no
longer using their weapons in the political debate.
People and goods are circulating freely throughout the
national territory. The Facilitator is working to
establish the modalities for military integration -
quotas and ranks - and to ensure the beginning of the
civic service in the near future.

The implementation of the major operations
provided for under the Ouagadougou political
Agreement, such as identification and the electoral
process, have been delayed with regard to the initial
timeline set out in the 4 March Agreement. However,
we must point out that this delay is no way a reflection
of bad will from the parties or Ivorian political actors
in the implementation of the Agreement.

This general delay can essentially be explained
by the complexity of the different operations, the lack
of necessary financial resources for their
implementation and administrative and technical
difficulties inherent in the post-conflict situation of
Cote d'Ivoire. The security problems, illustrated
specifically by the 29 June attack against Prime
Minister Guillaume Soro, are also obstacles to the
implementation of the Ouagadougou political
Agreement according to the initial timeline. The
Government of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, the
Evaluation and Monitoring Committee and UNOCI are
working on removing the obstacles that mark the
process of emerging from the crisis.

The Facilitator welcomes the fact that the peace
process that started on 4 March 2007 has been warmly
embraced on a national level, including by political
actors and civil society, the media and the population
itself, as can be seen in the many cultural events and
different initiatives around the return to peace.

The peace flame ceremony organized in Bouake
on 30 July has, beyond its symbolism, significantly
contributed to an easing of national political tensions
and the strengthening of national cohesion. Similarly,

the official launching last 25 September of the mobile
court hearings, preceded by a redeployment of the
magistrates, prefets and sous-prefets in the north of the
country, as well as their continuation to date without
any obstacles show that we have crossed into a
decisive phase in the process of emerging from crisis in
cote d'Ivoire.

The holding on 4 September 2007 of the second
meeting of the Evaluation and Monitoring Committee,
with the participation of all members of the
consultative organ, the establishment of which was
supported by resolution 1765 (2007), has given an
additional push to the process of implementing the
Ouagadougou political Agreement. The same applies to
the effective presence of the Special Representative of
the Facilitator in Cote d'Ivoire since 10 September
2007.

The activities of the Special Representative of the
Facilitator, which deserve to be supported and
encouraged, given the scope of the task, will soon be
strengthened by the dispatch of a team of experts in
different fields that will help him in his daily
facilitation, conciliation and mediation tasks. Thus, he
will be able to better help the parties to overcome the
obstacles and bottlenecks in implementing the
Ouagadougou political Agreement and help in finding
solutions to the various difficulties that might arise in
that process.

The Facilitator's work covers the entire scope of
the task that remains to be completed to achieve peace
in Cote d'Ivoire. He is aware of the multiple
difficulties that beset the different operations provided
for by the Ouagadougou Agreement. However, the
Facilitator continues to have faith in the Ivorian parties
and their ability to overcome their differences to
consolidate peace and national reconciliation.

Cote d'Ivoire still needs, I am convinced, the
support of the international community and especially
of the Security Council to complete the peace process.
That is why the Facilitator believes that the United
Nations should continue to play an important role in
Cote d'Ivoire's process of emerging from conflict,
specifically through the certification functions of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
reassuring activities of the impartial forces of UNOCI
and Licorne.
In this regard, the Facilitator welcomes the
appointment of a new Special Representative of the

Secretary-General, Mr. Choi Young-jin. I am sure that
this appointment will contribute in giving a new
dynamic to the peace process in C6te d'Ivoire. I would
like to express my congratulations to Mr. Choi and my
wishes for every success in this new mission. I also
assure him that the Facilitator is available to work with
him.

The signatories of the Ouagadougou political
Agreement have agreed to establish an institutional
framework to implement the Agreement, in order to
organize presidential elections that will be open, free
and transparent, according to the agreed timeline
covering the period from March to December 2008.
The Facilitator requests that the Security Council
accompany commitments undertaken by President
Laurent Gbagbo and Prime Minister Guillaume Soro,
so that they can create the conditions for a democratic,
fair and peaceful election. The Facilitator also wishes
that during the first semester of 2008 the operations
linked to identification and voter registration processes
can be completed according to a new timeline that will
take into account the technical and organizational
needs.

Aware of the relatively fragile character of what
has been gained by the implementation of the
Ouagadougou political Agreement and the difficulties
of all types that intervene in the peace process, the
Facilitator will push Ivorian actors and their technical
and financial partners to carry out essential operations
to guarantee credible elections, in particular, the
identification of populations, the establishment of a
reliable electoral list, disarmament, and security for the
electoral process.

The certification function that from now on will
be carried out through all stages of the electoral
process by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as well as the arbitration function that the
Facilitator will undertake with his support, will
reinforce confidence and support of Ivorians, upon
whom the building of peace and national reconciliation
depends.

In view of the efforts already undertaken on the
ground and the sustained will of Ivorian political
actors, the Security Council should examine with
special attention any requests from the Ivorian parties
with respect to peacebuilding and national
reconciliation.

In spite of the slowness in the implementation of
the Ouagadougou political Agreement, and in spite of
the difficulties that have come up here and there in the
process of emerging from the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire,
hope for true, lasting peace in this country is within
reach. Ivorian political actors will absolutely have to
fully live up to their respective responsibilities in
carrying out the peace process. It is also necessary for
the international community to support the Ivorian
efforts to find a permanent way out of the crisis.

I can assure the Council that the Facilitator will
spare no effort in continuing to accompany Ivorians
toward peace. He counts on the decisive support of the
United Nations and in particular that of the Security
Council.

