Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): A little
more than a year ago, here in New York, the first
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was held.
The Programme of Action that emerged from that
landmark meeting shows the international community's
determination to eradicate the scourge of light
weapons. It identifies the responsibility of a variety of
players in the illicit manufacturing, transfer and
circulation of these weapons.

It was along those lines that the Security Council
rightly organized a public meeting on 2 August 2001
that allowed us to engage in a substantive debate of the
question and to make the appropriate
recommendations. My delegation would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the quality of his report, and
to convey our appreciation to Mr. Jayantha Dhanapala
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs for
his statement.

There is no doubt that the end of the cold war and
the negative effects of globalization have promoted the
proliferation of light weapons. The widespread and
uncontrolled use of those weapons has seriously
affected the development of our States. It has
intensified violence and crime, provoked an escalation
in internal conflict with catastrophic humanitarian
consequences. While the impact of war on civilian
populations and the development of our States is
obvious, the impact of small arms once a conflict is
over is a source of growing concern.

In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
Security Council's adoption of a number of measures
as part of the fight against the proliferation and illegal
trade of small arms in all its aspects. These include
imposing sanctions and embargoes; establishing
monitoring mechanisms; involving the relevant
international organizations and institutions and non-
governmental organizations, at all levels, in the
implementation of weapons embargoes; developing
appropriate strategies to confront the links between the
illicit exploitation of natural and other resources, and
the illegal acquisition of and trade in arms; and
communicating information on financial and other
transactions which feed illicit arms flows into conflict
areas.

Nevertheless, we must point out that
implementing light weapons embargoes is the most
complex and delicate of tasks given the difficulties
involved in identifying the individuals involved and the
services they provide.

As members know, my country belongs to a
subregion that suffers particularly acutely from the
proliferation and illegal circulation of light weapons.
Therefore, my delegation remains convinced that in
order to overcome this scourge, it is more necessary
than ever to continue to close ranks in order to develop
cooperation among States and to strengthen national,
regional and international measures. We welcome the
July 2001 renewal of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) moratorium on light
weapons, and we call upon the international
community to provide its full support in the
implementation of that subregional initiative.

In the spirit of that moratorium and of the
Bamako Declaration, my country, Guinea, has
established a national commission against the
proliferation and illicit circulation of small arms and
light weapons. Reporting to the Ministry of Defence,
this commission includes representatives of various
ministries and civil society, and has local offices; it
enjoys technical cooperation with the competent bodies
and subregional, regional and international
organizations, including the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development, in the context of strengthening peace and
security in West Africa.

In addition, my delegation is pleased with the
quality of support given to States by the Secretariat
through the Department of Disarmament Affairs. That
department is playing its role fully as a coordinating
centre for all the activities of United Nations bodies on
light weapons. We should point out, however, that
those activities need to be supported through the
provision of sufficient financial resources. Otherwise,
the implementation of all post-conflict activities, such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, will be impossible.

My delegation would like in conclusion to
suggest that - in the context of an in-depth
consideration of the recommendations of the Secretary-
General and of the follow up of measures taken by the
Council on the illicit trade of light weapons in all its
aspects - we include in the mandate of the Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa
the coordination of initiatives to draw up a clear road
map that can strengthen the current machinery and
guarantee the involvement of all actors at all levels.

