Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing and for his work as Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank Mr. Dacie,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ambassador
Citaku of Kosovo for their statements.

Like others, I would like to begin by once again
recalling our wish to see the timetable for the Security
Council's consideration of the situation in Kosovo
reviewed. At a time when the Security Council is
dealing with a constantly increasing workload, there
can no longer be any justification for maintaining
quarterly briefings on Kosovo, whose situation does
not compare to the crises where the Council's intensive
engagement is essential. We also believe that the
positive developments in institution-building in the
past few years in Kosovo are grounds for refocusing
UNMIK's work and coordinating it with that of other
international stakeholders in Kosovo. The current stasis
is unsatisfactory given that it is our responsibility, as
members of the Security Council, to ensure that United
Nations efforts are fully adapted to the situation on
the ground. Unfortunately, that is not the case in
Kosovo today.

France welcomed Kosovo's recent peaceful
holding of parliamentary elections in the presence of
many international observers. It is another successful
element in the country's efforts to build a peaceful
parliamentary and democratic culture and another
illustration of the considerable progress that has been
made since independence. While the elections were
transparent and peaceful in most of the country, they
were marred by irregularities in places, showing
that the electoral system needs further improvement.
We also deplore the atmosphere of intimidation and
violence directed at some candidates and voters in the
Serbian municipalities of Kosovo.

Once the new Government is in place, it
should immediately resume the implementation
of the reforms that are vital to Kosovo's future:
strengthening the rule of law - a sine qua non for
European integration - economic development and
full implementation of the European reform agenda.
It is equally crucial to ensure that the political parties
that are not part of the new Government engage
in constructive opposition and embrace a spirit of
compromise. After the episodes of tension that erupted
between Belgrade and Pristina in the past few months,
we expect all stakeholders to work harder than ever
to show responsibility and restraint. The resurgence
of nationalist discourse, sometimes coloured by
community references, is a danger to the stability in the
region that the peoples of both Kosovo and Serbia desire.

France firmly believes that Kosovo's future should
no longer be a priority for the Council but that it belongs
in the framework of a political dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina conducted under the auspices of
the European Union. The European Union is very clear
on this point. European integration for both countries
is conditional on the normalization of their relations
with each other. In that regard, it is important that they
demonstrate goodwill and proactive commitment at the
highest levels. Beyond simple declarations of intent, we
expect all the agreements concluded in 2013 and 2015
to be put into effect as soon as possible, including that
on the establishment of an association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities, which is a key element in
their dialogue.

We welcome the mediation efforts that the European
Union and its High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, have
been making since the beginning of the year, and we
hope that the meeting on 3 July of Presidents Thaci and
Vucic' will genuinely revitalize the dialogue. We urge
the Kosovo and Serbian authorities to intensify their
efforts to achieve more concrete results in this area in
the next few months. All sides must do their part by
adopting a constructive attitude and refraining from
any unnecessary provocations that could endanger the
stability of the region.

Lastly, a continued effort to consolidate the rule
of law in Kosovo must remain a priority. It is a very
firm European requirement, one that we support, and
there is still a great deal to be done where strengthening
administrative capacity and justice and combating
corruption and organized crime are concerned. It also
involves fighting radicalization in all its forms, and we
welcome Kosovo's unconditional commitment in that
regard, both locally and as part of the international
coalition against Da'esh.
