Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to express our
appreciation to Argentina for organizing this open
debate on a very relevant issue, thereby giving us
another opportunity to provide input for the Secretary-
General's upcoming report on the subject. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
representatives of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
remarks.

On this tenth anniversary of the heinous terrorist
attack on the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad,
our thoughts are with the survivors and families of the
victims. We take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
brave men and women serving under the United Nations
flag across the world.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
shared concern and a top priority for the international
community. Unfortunately, the vast majority of
casualties in armed conflicts continue to be civilians.
We condemn all attacks on civilians and are deeply
concerned about their destructive effects, particularly
on women and children. More effort must be made to
enhance compliance with international humanitarian,
human-rights and refugee law so as to protect civilians
more effectively. Furthermore, the principles of
distinction and proportionality must be upheld. At
the same time, we should always strive to provide
humanitarian aid to affected populations, and the
parties involved in conflicts should take all necessary
measures to ensure unimpeded and safe humanitarian
access. Accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian and human-rights law must
be strengthened in order to bring the perpetrators to
justice and prevent future crimes.

There is no doubt that the primary obligation
for protecting civilians lies with States. However,
the international community also has a shared
responsibility to help protect civilians in situations
where States clearly fail to do so. The Security Council
has a particular and inevitable obligation in that regard,
which has direct consequences on the ground.

Syria is a case in point for all the issues I have
just raised. The humanitarian situation in Syria is
grimmer every day. The regime, which has tried to
suppress the legitimate demands of its people through
the indiscriminate use of force, has failed to fulfil its
responsibility to protect its civilians. The bloodshed
there must be ended with a political solution and a
meaningful transition.

Unfortunately, the work of the humanitarian
institutions trying to provide assistance to Syrian
internally displaced persons is being severely hampered
by the bureaucratic hurdles created by the Syrian regime
and confirms the relevance of the calls for unhindered
access to all areas by the most convenient and effective
routes. New and creative methods are needed to ensure
safe and sustainable humanitarian access, including for
cross-border operations. Turkey is doing its utmost to
respond to the consequences of the Syrian crisis. We
are currently hosting more than 200,000 Syrians in
20 camps, maintaining decent living conditions and
providing for their health, education and social needs.
The total number of Syrians who have sought shelter
in various parts of Turkey now exceeds half a million,
and the resources allocated to Syrians in need have
surpassed $1.5 billion. Turkey will continue to stand by
the Syrian people.

However, as we have said on numerous occasions,
the principle of burden-sharing should not be
disregarded and the international community, and
the Security Council in particular, should shoulder
its responsibility to act urgently, resolutely and
collectively. That being said, I would like to emphasize
that this platform has been abused once again by one
delegation making baseless allegations that Turkey has
already categorically rejected. That cannot dissuade
us from standing firmly by the Syrian people, whose
voice, unfortunately, cannot be heard here.

With reference to some of the issues highlighted in
the concept note for today's debate (S/2013/447, annex),
and in view of the Secretary-General's upcoming report
on the subject, I would like to underline three additional
important issues.

First, with regard to the application ofthe concept of
the protection of civilians, let me reiterate our position
that counter-terrorism efforts do not constitute armed
conflict and cannot be considered as such. We should
make a clear distinction between counter-terrorism
efforts by law enforcement agencies and armed conflict.
But we must also be cautious about deliberate attempts
to portray legitimate popular movements as terrorism.
Turkey strongly condemns all acts of terrorism and
acknowledges the legitimate right of Governments to
combat them.

The second point we would like to raise relates to
the issue of dialogue with non-State armed groups. We
uphold the principle of humanitarian access to civilians.
However, we also believe that in doing so we should be
extremely careful not to give terrorist organizations any
sense of legitimacy. Terrorist organizations in various
parts of the world attempt to exploit humanitarian
approaches in order to gain international acceptance
and recognition.

Thirdly, we believe that United Nations documents
should not refer positively to non-governmental
organizations that are known to have been exploited by
terrorist organizations.

