Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate the French football team
on their World Cup victory and the Croatian team on
an excellent game. I would also like to commend the
Russian Federation on its superb organization of the
World Cup. It was a very interesting time, and everyone
very much enjoyed it.

We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame and Carl Orrenius Skau for
their comprehensive updates on the situation in Libya
and on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya.

My delegation expresses its concern about the lack

ofprogress in finding solutions for a political settlement
through dialogue among the main stakeholders in Libya.
That has a serious negative impact on the economic,
social and humanitarian situation in the country. The
recent escalation of the situation in Libya's oil crescent
is a clear indication of such developments. We join the
Secretary-General's call for all natural resources, as
well as their production and revenues, to be under the
control of the recognized Libyan authorities.
Developments in the oil crescent have proven once
again that efforts should be aimed at establishing a
lasting political dialogue among all Libyan stakeholders
aimed at seeking a political settlement to the crisis by
implementing confidence-building measures. Those
efforts should contribute to the unification of Libyan
Government institutions, including its security and
armed forces. The absence of such a dialogue will
continue to create a breeding ground for the emergence
and illegal activities of terrorists, extremists and other
destructive forces in Libya.

Our delegation believes that the adoption of a
new constitution will create the legal framework
necessary for generating the institutional and
administrative structures needed to build lasting peace
in Libya. Special attention should be paid to adopting
appropriate electoral legislation, which along with
voter registration, will create the necessary conditions
for holding general elections.

The international community and the Council in
particular should place a greater focus on the situation
in Libya, along with the Syrian and the Yemeni
crisis among others. The instability in Libya has had
a significant impact on the situation in the region of
the Middle East and North Africa. All the efforts of
the international community to resolve the situation
in Libya should be conducted under the leadership
of the United Nations. My delegation reiterates its
support for the action plan of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salame' and commends the
committed work of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya on the ground.

