Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I would like to thank
Senegal for organizing this debate. I also thank the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Jean, Mr. Fedotov,
Mr. Laborde and Mr. Boutellis for their briefings.

Peacekeeping operations should be primarily a
political instrument in support of peace processes, as
highlighted in the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations.

Brazil fully agrees with the need and urgency
to combat the scourge of terrorism. Brazil's own
Constitution enshrines the repudiation of terrorism as
one of the guiding principles of our foreign relations.

Experience has proved that short-sighted policies
and a single-minded focus on the use of force have
often made matters worse. The Sahel continues to
face the consequences of an ill-fated intervention in
Libya, which contributed to the increase in the illegal
trafficking in weapons and to the spread of the activities
of terrorist groups in the region, as the situation in
Mali exemplifies. The multidimensional threats we
face today will be more efficiently countered only if
prevention is prioritized and underlying causes are
taken into consideration.

Although peacekeeping scenarios have changed in
the past decades, we should not be tempted to make
flexible interpretations of the foundational principles
of peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-
defence and in defence of the mandate. That is of
particular relevance in cases of asymmetrical threats
posed by terrorist networks with an increasingly global
reach. Excessive militarization of the United Nations
response in such cases not only increases the exposure
of Blue Helmets, but it also endangers the security
of the civilian component of the missions. Fulfilling
a mandate to protect civilians from imminent threat,
wherever it comes from, should not be confused with
direct involvement in, or support to, offensive counter-
terrorism operations.

We regret that the use of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and suicide attacks continue to
increase the number of casualties among United
Nations personnel. Asymmetrical threats also limit
the interactions with locals and make it difficult for
peacekeeping missions to carry out critical elements
of the mandate. The United Nations must ensure that
also under these conditions everything will be done for
a safe and secure the implementation of the mandate,
as well as the safety and security of its personnel. In
that regard, it is crucial to establish a comprehensive
response to IEDs, thereby maintaining the military and
civilian components fully prepared to accomplish the
mission's mandate. Many casualties could have been
avoided with the use of mine-resistant vehicles.

Further guidance and support is needed in the
use of certain modalities, including new technology,
intelligence gathering, standby and quick-reaction
capabilities and force enablers. We encourage the
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, chaired by Senegal, to deepen discussions
on how to better implement those innovative projects.

We must do much more to prevent conflicts and
situations that place civilians at risk. We must also
consistently remind parties to armed conflict of their
obligations to uphold international law and to respect
and protect all civilians, including humanitarian
workers. It is equally important that the Council take
a strong stance against the continued channelling of
weapons to zones of conflict, including those affected
by intense non-State activities. The Council should
continue to emphasize the importance of the processes
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform.

We expect United Nations peacekeeping missions
to remain a cooperative endeavour at the service of
peace, political stability and sustainable development,
with an emphasis on the primacy of politics and on
prevention, as wisely proposed by President Jose
Ramos-Horta and the High-level Panel he chaired.
In that regard, we should strive to follow up on the
High-level Panel's recommendation to preserve a
clear distinction between the roles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and non-United Nations
military counter-terrorism operations, rather than blur
the lines between peacekeeping and counter-terrorism
in ways that can worsen even further the plight of
civilians on the ground.

