The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

I would first like to thank General Lamine Cisse
for his presence here, for his presentation and, above
all, for the work he has done since arriving in Bangui
on 29 July with General Amadou Toumani Toure.
Outstanding work has been done since the end of July
to help the Central African Republic and Central
Africans to deal with the disastrous consequences of
the attempted coup d'etat of 28 May.

I would also like to thank the representative of
the World Bank, Mr. Robert Calderisi, for being here
and for his statement. It is both good and essential that
the Bretton Woods institutions be involved in our work
and in our deliberations. I think this is an example that
should inspire us when we deal with other items before
us.

In a case such as that of the Central African
Republic, we cannot deal with the political and military
aspects separately from the economic situation. We
must be able to have a global approach. The
representative of the European Union, the Ambassador
of Belgium, will speak on behalf of the 15 members of
the European Union; so, I shall limit my statement to
four brief remarks.

My first remark concerns the regional dimension
of the Central African crisis. Ambassador Christine
Lee quite rightly spoke of refugees that have come
from the neighbouring countries of Congo, Rwanda,
Chad and the Sudan, further upsetting a fragile society.
I would like to mention another consequence of the
crisis in a neighbouring country: the closing of the
Oubangui river, a river that enabled a more or less
adequate provisioning of necessities, including oil. The
Central African Republic is obviously the victim of a
crisis that has stricken all of Central Africa.

My second remark concerns the commitment of
the international community. In the context I have just
mentioned, it is absolutely necessary and good that, in
spite of the disappointing recent months, the Bretton
Woods institutions, primarily the World Bank, remain
committed to the Central African Republic.

The third remark concerns the responsibility of
the Central African authorities. If the international
community can and must assist, nothing can or will be
done if the Central African authorities do not commit
themselves to a policy of national reconciliation and
realistic economic development, giving priority to joint
efforts with financial donors, but first and foremost, to
national dialogue.

We welcome the progress already achieved in this
field, especially the resumption of dialogue with the
trade unions. We encourage the Central African
authorities to give a strong political signal in order to
reassure the population and to permit the return of the
refugees to their country. We feel that the establishment
of a genuine dialogue among all the political forces, as
well as completion of the disarmament process and the
continuation of the restructuring of the armed forces,
are absolutely necessary.

My final comment concerns the role of the United
Nations. France, too, unreservedly supports the
strengthening proposed for the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office (BONUCA), especially in the
area of monitoring human rights and early warning. We
think that one of the lessons we have learned in recent
years from our experience in Central Africa is that,
after a major effort that was crowned with success, we
withdrew the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINURCA) as planned, but perhaps
we reduced the international presence excessively by
going from almost everything to close to nothing,
perhaps we did too much. We should draw a lesson
from past episodes and, in fact, strengthen BONUCA.

From this standpoint, I propose a rather symbolic
gesture, which has the advantage of having no cost:
recognize General Cisse's accomplishments by giving
him the title of, not simply "the Representative", but
"the Special Representative" of the Secretary-General.
We could make this proposal to Kofi Annan. It is a
proposal that will both recompense the unequalled
action performed by the Representative and will
encourage him in his dialogue with the Central African
authorities.

As today's meeting draws to a close, a rather
broad agreement has emerged around this table to take
note of the main recommendations made in the
Secretary-General's report. To implement these
recommendations, a decision of the Security Council
will be necessary. In the light of discussions to date and
consultations in our Council, we will discuss the
possible contents of a presidential statement in order to
respond to the completely legitimate request of
Ambassador Granovsky. I would ask the Secretariat to
prepare for us a budgetary cost estimate for the desired
strengthening of BONUCA.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.

