Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, the Chinese delegation thanks the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr.
Guehenno, for his analysis of the situation in Kosovo.
The Chinese delegation wishes also to express
appreciation to Ambassador Chowdhury for his
introduction of the report of the Security Council
mission to Kosovo (S/2001/600).

Under Ambassador Chowdhury's outstanding
leadership, the mission completed its task in a most
efficient manner, and was successful in sending to all
sides an important message on rejecting violence and
terrorism, and on the need to respect the rights of
minority communities. The report of the mission is
balanced and frank, and points the way for the future
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR); it also sets out clear demands. In the next
phase, whether or not those demands are met will
provide a benchmark for evaluating the work of
UNMIK and of KFOR. In that sense, the mission's visit
played a positive role.

As the report notes, since his appointment to lead
UNMIK, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, along with UNMIK
under his leadership and KFOR, have done a great deal
towards carrying out their tasks, and have achieved
some positive results in a number of areas. We
appreciate their hard work.

Yet the security situation in Kosovo needs to be
further improved. We note that the security of minority
ethnic communities, particularly Kosovo Serbs, has yet
to be guaranteed; they have returned in very small
numbers, and their reintegration into society and their
participation in the UNMIK-led political process has
been minimal. The Chinese delegation has always
stressed that, without broad participation by all ethnic
communities, the outcome of elections cannot be fair
but will, to the contrary, only further exacerbate inter-
ethnic tension. In that connection, we note that the
report indicates that the top priority now is to
encourage all Kosovo communities, particularly the
Serbs, to participate in the process. It also underscores
the importance of dialogue and cooperation with the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
That is crucial. We encourage UNMIK to continue and
further enhance its cooperation with the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and to create a
mechanism for regular dialogue, so as to ensure that
the views of the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia are fully heard and that its reasonable
proposals are accepted.

They should together foster a multi-ethnic,
multicultural, richly diverse society in Kosovo, a
society characterized by equality and mutual
assistance.

At the same time, we hope that the minority
communities in Kosovo will actively participate in the
general elections. Needless to say, the precondition
is that the security situation must be fundamentally
improved and the plight of the minority communities,
as well as the question of their property, must be
satisfactorily addressed. In this regard UNMIK
and KFOR should take further steps, including
combating extremism, encouraging moderates on
all sides, establishing inter-communal confidence,
facilitating economic development and promoting
stability, so that the findings of the mission may be
translated into concrete action and so that resolution
1244 (1999) may thus be fully and effectively
implemented.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that the
accomplishment of national reconciliation in Kosovo
will be a long, ongoing process and will require
sustained and indefatigable efforts on the part of the
international community.

However, the international community cannot
remain passive in the face of attempts to undermine
national reconciliation. Any efforts to nudge Kosovo
towards independence, or attempts to condone
extremist forces that advocate the dissolution of other
ethnic communities, are extremely dangerous and will
lead to new upheavals in the Balkans, whose ultimate
victims will be the peoples of that region.

The Security Council is duty-bound and, with the
rest of the international community, must endeavour to
stem this tendency so as to avoid history repeating
itself.

Here I should like to emphasize that our efforts to
resolve the Kosovo question must be taken in the
context of the situation in the entire region. The
political situation in Macedonia is very unsettling. The
situations in Kosovo and in Macedonia are closely
interrelated, and they will impact on each other. We
hope that the Security Council will closely follow
developments in the entire region.

