Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Like my
colleague who preceded me, I, too, will read a shortened
version of my text. I refer participants to the full written
statement. However, allow me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, in particular for holding this
debate. We especially appreciate its open format, which
allows all Member States to publically reaffirm their
commitment to the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict and to make recommendations to the
Security Council.

Like preceding speakers, we highly value the very
important work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and support
the joint campaign to end the recruitment and use of
children by government security forces in conflict by
2016, launched yesterday by the Special Representative
together with UNICEF.

Despite the repeated calls of the international
community to put an end to grave violations of
children's rights in situations of armed conflict, a
number of parties to armed conflict still recruit or
use children. The list established by the Secretary-
General contains more than 50 perpetrators, 46 of
which are armed non-State actors. The representative
of New Zealand also referred to that fact. Despite the
praiseworthy efforts of the Special Representative to
engage with a number of those non-State actors to end
grave violations against children, the commitments
from armed non-State actors remain very limited and
a number of challenges continue for the conclusion
of action plans with those groups, namely, because of
their ephemeral nature, Government opposition or the
difficulty in getting in contact with them.

In that regard, Switzerland supports a project on
improving accountability for children in situations of
armed conflict, which is being implemented by the
Liechtenstein Institute on Self-Determination and the
Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict. The project
will, in particular, focus on facilitating information
exchange and dialogue between armed non-State
actors, the United Nations and civil society as a step
towards increased implementation of action plans with
non-State actors that are still committing violations
against children.

Furthermore, we will also continue to support the
non-governmental organization Geneva Call, which
has access to armed non-State actors and engages them
to sign deeds of commitments to prevent and put a ban
on the recruitment and use of children in hostilities.
Geneva Call's approach is complementary to the work
undertaken by the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders.

Training and capacity-building for the personnel
responsible for child protection are of the utmost
importance. The pre-deployment training in child
protection for peacekeepers is essential. Police officers,
military personnel and civilians need specialized
training on child protection. Switzerland will financially
support the mainstreaming of the protection, rights
and well-being of children affected by armed conflict
within United Nations peacekeeping operations. Also,
we are of the view that Government armed forces listed
in the annexes to the Secretary-General's reports on
children and armed conflict should be prohibited from
participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations
until they have adopted and fully implemented action
plans to end violations against children.

Finally, Switzerland encourages States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

