Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): 1 thank Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller for updating the Council on
the current humanitarian situation in Syria.

Indonesia is following very closely developments
on the ground across northwest Syria. My delegation
believes that when civilians have been killed and
injured, the Council really needs to act. That is not
something new. Many of us have repeatedly voiced the
need for the Council to prevent the further deterioration
of the humanitarian suffering in Idlib. Indonesia would
like to highlight three points.

First, respecting and upholding the ceasefire
agreement is of crucial importance. Fully implementing
the September 2018 memorandum of understanding on

Idlib is essential. We appreciate the ceasefire that began
on 31 August and encourage all parties to respect it. We
regret to note the shelling that reportedly continues to
affect civilians in southern Idlib. More than 630,000
individual displacements were also reported. Those
people are fighting for their lives. They need to
survive. Again, to immediately cease hostilities in Idlib
governorate is the priority.

Secondly, pursuing a peaceful resolution should
be the priority, with the aim of achieving concrete
results so as to alleviate the suffering of civilians on
the ground. In that regard, the Council should spare
no effort in creating a conducive atmosphere and in
avoiding further humanitarian catastrophe.

We note the most recent joint statement of the
tripartite summit held in Ankara, which agreed to
take concrete steps to reduce violations in the Idlib
de-escalation area and to ensure the protection of the
civilian population, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

Thirdly, my delegation would like to urge all
parties to facilitate immediate, safe, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access for the United Nations
to the requested areas and populations in need.

The Council is scheduled to take action today on
draft resolutions S/2019/756 and S/2019/757 regarding
the humanitarian situation in Idlib. My delegation
wishes to emphasize that it is indeed important for us,
the Council, to truly focus on the humanitarian aspect
and to ensure that we are not too late in responding to
the humanitarian situation in Idlib.

