Mr. Molnar (Hungary): It gives me great pleasure to
be at this table today and to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council. Let me offer you my congratulations and
wish you continued success for the remainder of your term
in office. Allow me also to thank you and the other
members of the Council for the opportunity to present
Hungary's views concerning the important issue on the
agenda.

I do not intend this morning to set out the full range
of Hungary's views on the main issue, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons, on which the international community
has been focusing its attention for some time. Our Foreign
Minister will do that soon - in fact, exactly a week from
today - in the general debate of the Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Instead, I wish to
make but a few comments on a major step taken by five
States - the five permanent members of the Security
Council - as well as on the draft resolution which they
have submitted and which the Council is expected to adopt
today.

This statement is not the first a Hungarian delegate has
made before the Security Council on the same subject.
Twenty-seven years ago, when for the first time my country
held a non-permanent seat in the Council, the Hungarian
Permanent Representative stated:

"The provisions of the draft resolution do
constitute an important step in applying the Charter to
the realm of nuclear weapons that could not have been
foreseen at the time the Charter was drafted. By
adopting the draft resolution before us the Council
will contribute to a large extent to the meaningful
implementation of Charter provisions to maintain
peace and security all over the world. It provides for
immediate action on the part of the Security Council
and, above all, its nuclear-weapon-State permanent
members. The draft resolution puts a potential nuclear
aggressor in a position where he must be aware that
his actions will be resisted effectively and
immediately." (S/PV.]431, para. 39)

Nobody would deny that the world has dramatically
changed in the 27 years since the meeting of the Security
Council was convened to act on that draft resolution. For
example, the draft before the Council today has been
placed before it not by three, but by all five permanent
members, and the difference goes far beyond mere
numeric quantifications. Hungary therefore welcomes this
draft resolution as a most significant step forward in
providing security assurances to all non-nuclear-weapon
States parties to the Non-Proliferation Treaty by all the
five nuclear-weapon-States which are also Parties to the
N on-Proliferation Treaty.
This step is not only a step forward; it is also a step
of great historic significance. For the first time, the
permanent five, acting in a most welcome manifestation
of unity, are offering positive assurances in a Security
Council draft resolution, and, also for the first time, they
have elaborated measures, including the restoration of
international peace and security, which the Council would
take in the catastrophic event of nuclear aggression.

Nuclear aggression is, most unfortunately, not yet a
forgone option. It is still a possibility - maybe a remote
possibility, but still a contingency. Contrary to all
reasonable expectations and all the major historic changes
of recent years, a non-nuclear-weapon State may still find
itself the subject of aggression, or the threat of
aggression, involving nuclear weapons.

That is why Hungary, a small non-nuclear-weapon
country, appreciative of meaningful action, attaches great
importance to the security assurances thus given. We feel
that the draft resolution will provide us, as it does all
other non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT, with
genuine guarantees. In addition, the draft resolution, by
virtue of expressing a unity of intent by the five nuclear-
weapon States, introduces a powerful element of
deterrence against nuclear aggression or blackmail.

Before concluding this statement, I also wish to pay
tribute to the declaration made in Geneva on 6 April
before the Conference on Disarmament by France, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom and the United
States concerning the provisions of Article VI of the Non-
Proliferation Treaty. We find it reassuring that those four
permanent members of the Security Council clearly
indicate that the draft resolution which is soon to be
adopted is not the end of the road.

We are, therefore, ready to record the forthcoming
resolution as a positive development and thus a most

 

significant milestone in the effort to address in a serious
and action-oriented manner the important issue of averting
the dangers of a nuclear conflict.

