Mr. Bebars (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on the
assumption of your country, Singapore, to the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I should like also to congratulate your country
and the other new members of the Council and to wish
them success in the discharge of their mandate over the
next two years.

Let me also thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting in order to address
the urgent issue of enhancing the relationship and
consultations between the troop-contributing countries
and the Security Council, as this is a key element that
must be addressed in the context of ongoing efforts in
order to enhance the role and effectiveness of the
United Nations in the area of peacekeeping.

This meeting, in our view, has a special
significance, not only because it is the first of its kind,
but also because it is being convened in the wake of the
issuance of the Brahimi report and of the experience of
many troop-contributing countries with the Council
with respect to the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone during the crisis that erupted in Sierra Leone last
May.

The delegation of Egypt would like on this
occasion to make the following remarks regarding the
issue under discussion today, especially in view of
Egypt's longstanding and far-reaching experience in
the area of contributing to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which it has been doing since
1960.

First, the goal of strengthening the relationship
between the troop-contributing countries and the
Security Council must be approached with a view to
achieving optimum streamlining and harmonization in
the work of the Organization with respect to the
settlement of disputes. It is therefore necessary, as we
have indicated in more than one forum, to
institutionalize the consultation process between the
troop-contributing countries and the Council at all
stages of the evolution of an operation's mandate and
in all steps taken by the Council to amend, review,
extend or terminate such mandate and the functions
that accompany it.

These consultations must apply to the potential
troop-contributing countries at advanced stages,
following the submission by the Secretary-General to
the Council of his proposals on the establishment and
deployment of a peacekeeping operation. This would
be more likely to ensure a clear and implementable
mandate.

Secondly, the ultimate goal, which we are all
trying to attain, should go beyond merely listening to
and exchanging views with the troop-contributing
countries, even if that process takes place through the
institutionalized modality that we are calling for.

The agreed measures to strengthen the
relationship between the troop-contributing countries
and the Security Council should lead to the
participation by those countries in the Council's
decision-making process at all stages of the
establishment, deployment and withdrawal of a
peacekeeping operation, especially when the use of
force is involved, as provided for clearly in Article 44
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Regrettably, a wide gap remains between the
demands of the troop-contributing countries, which
insist on this position, and the stance taken by the
Security Council, which remains convinced that the
purpose of consolidating consultations is - and I
quote here from resolution 1327 (2000) -

"to foster a common understanding of the
situation on the ground, of the mission's mandate
and of its implementation" (S/RES/I327, annex, part I, fifteenth paragraph).

Thirdly, when the Security Council understands
that it cannot continue to refuse the legitimate requests
of the troop-contributing countries to participate in the
decision-making process within this forum, and when
the Council recognizes that it can no longer disregard
the views of countries that are willing to put the lives
of their children in harm's way in order to implement a
military mission which, as defined by the Council,
involves a high level of risk and the use of force -
only then can we establish the kind of relationship to
which we all aspire between the Council and the troop-
contributing countries. This would avert repetition the
consequences that the absence of such a relationship
has had in the past. Only then will we be able to
overcome a most negative aspect that casts its shadow
on the world Organization's discharge of its
responsibilities in the area of peacekeeping.

Fourthly, despite the fact that the Council has
recently developed the notion of holding "private"
meetings with the troop-contributing countries as an
innovative mechanism to listen to their views and
observations, nonetheless we maintain that well-
established modalities must be institutionalized to
regulate these consultations. Such meetings should not
be convened only when the Council decides to dispatch
a mission composed of its members to a country that
hosts a peacekeeping operation, or merely to brief the
troop-contributing countries on the outcome of such a
mission upon their return to Headquarters.

Furthermore, we demand that the Council
respond to any request by a troop-contributing country
to convene such a meeting, especially in cases where
the Council is considering the amendment or review of
a given peacekeeping mandate, or when there is a
significant deterioration of security conditions in the
region where the mission is operating that would
jeopardize the safety and security of its personnel.

The delegation of Egypt believes that Security
Council resolution 1327 (2000) represents a positive
step forward in this context. It hopes that the Council
will take the subsequent logical step of agreeing on
well-defined modalities that govern the way these
consultations are conducted as well as take into
account the aforementioned points and put them into
practice.

We commend you once again, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for allowing the troop-
contributing countries to make their observations
before Council members speak. Allow me in closing to
stress that strengthening the relationship between the
troop-contributing countries and the Council is but one
of the key elements that must be addressed in the
framework of our collective efforts and shared
responsibilities with a view to reforming peacekeeping
operations.

Now that the General Assembly has adopted
specific recommendations to reinforce the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and other divisions within
the Secretariat that are concerned with the maintenance
of international peace and security, two main issues
remain that require adequate attention.

First, all States must pay their assessed dues and
arrears to the United Nations budget, so that
peacekeeping operations will stand on a solid financial
basis that will ensure the provision of the necessary
military and logistical requirements for troops
participating in operations.

Secondly, the major Western Powers should
reconsider their position of abstaining from
participation in certain peacekeeping operations,
especially in the African continent, under the pretext
that such operations, from their perspective, involve an
unacceptable level of risk.

