Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting on the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC). I would also like to thank
UNODC Executive Director Fedotov for his thorough
briefing and to welcome him back to the Council.

The World Drug Report 201] , released yesterday,
underscores the threat of illicit drug use and
trafficking. The report states that 200,000 people die
every year from using illicit drugs, that drug traffickers
are working to circumvent traditional routes and
expand illicit drug markets and that defeating the
scourge will require transnational efforts.

We believe that we as a body are already on the
right track. Over the past several years, we prioritized
the important role of the United Nations in assisting
States in implementing the three United Nations drug
control conventions that form the backbone of our
common approach.

International organizations such as UNODC
make substantial contributions to the fight against
transnational organized crime and drug trafficking. In
2010, the United States provided $34 million to
support UNODC activities. We are committed to
continuing our support in 2011. Such efforts act as a

force multiplier and complement the work of bilateral
programmes.

On a bilateral and regional level, the United
States has expanded cooperation with our neighbours
in Mexico and Central America. This year, we will
deliver $500 million in equipment, training and other
expertise to support Mexico's strong law enforcement
response to the threat posed by drug cartels and other
criminal groups. The United States is also committed to
helping the nations of Central America to combat drug
trafficking, transnational gangs, organized crime and
related violence through initiatives such as the Central
American Citizen Security Partnership.

The United States supports regional efforts, such
as UNODC's Paris Pact, to combat the Afghan opiate
trade and its links to insurgency, instability and
organized crime, as we have heard. The United States
is also committed to partnering with West African
nations to enhance citizen security and address the
significant threat of increased drug trafficking and, as
Mr. Fedotov pointed out, the increasing use in the West
African nations, which had previously not been a
significant threat.

We are trying to strengthen criminal justice
systems and control and prevent the diversion of drugs
while still ensuring their availability for medical and
scientific purposes, which is a long-term process that
requires a continued commitment to reducing
transnational crime. To that end, the United States
commends UNODC's capacity-building efforts in its
decade-long work to provide technical assistance to
help States with the practical application of the
provisions of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. The United States is
committed to continuing its support for efforts to
develop a peer review mechanism that helps State
parties identify challenges and successes in
implementing the Convention. The United States also
believes that these long-term anti-crime efforts must
attack the corruption that makes such criminal
activities possible.

The United States is pleased to be one of the
countries that will be reviewed during this first year of
the United Nations Convention against Corruption peer
review mechanism, which was launched in June 2010.

In conclusion, the collective action of concerned
Member States is critical to addressing the threat posed
by transnational crime and drug trafficking. The United

States looks forward to continued cooperation with
other nations committed to this important effort, as
well as with UNODC.

