Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Allow me, Madam
President, first of all, to take this opportunity to
express our solidarity with the Government and the
people of the United States on this day, which marks the
commemoration of the tragic events of 11 September.
My country was among the first to face the scourges
of terrorism and knows at first-hand its devastating
effects. We in Ethiopia in particular cannot forget to
commemorate that horrific event, as it unfortunately
coincides with the celebration of the Ethiopian New
Year. Our thoughts and prayers will forever remain
with the victims and their families.

We thank the delegation of Russia for its briefing
on the outcome of the Astana summit. The importance
of that meeting was clearly underscored last week in
its role to finding a sustainable solution to the Idlib
situation (see S/PV.8345). With the civilian casualties
being reported, we continue to remain concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Idlib. As we have stated
repeatedly, further military escalation in Idlib could
aggravate the humanitarian crisis and negatively affect
the humanitarian assistance programme upon which
millions of people depend for their existence.

We note that Iran, Russia and Turkey have agreed
to continue their trilateral coordination and decided
to address the Idlib situation in a spirit of cooperation
according, to the joint statement issued following
the summit. Conditions on the ground are difficult
and require urgent and coordinated action. It is vital
that the Astana guarantors continue to abide by the
de-escalation agreement and find a sustainable solution
that would protect civilians and civilian facilities.
Facilitating safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access remains critical to ensuring that
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners are
able to deliver aid to all in need.

The joint statement also underlined the fact that,
in the fight against terrorism, the separation of United
Nations-listed terrorists from the armed opposition
would be of the utmost importance. In that regard,
the proposal that Special Envoy De Mistura presented
on Friday could be considered positively, with the
objective of ensuring the safety of civilians and civilian
infrastructure. We hope that this will be discussed in
the ongoing consultations with the Astana guarantors
in Geneva.

Finally, we stress that there is no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. Hence, all Syrian parties and those
States with influence should engage in and support
the continued efforts of the Special Envoy to establish
and launch the constitutional committee. Ultimately,
it is a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political dialogue,
facilitated by the United Nations, that could sustainably
address the suffering of the Syrians.

