Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this open debate because this is an
important subject which needs to be discussed. However,
we strongly believe that today's debate should focus on
demining in the context of United Nations peace-keeping
operations, as the President himself emphasized at the
outset. The Security Council is not the forum for the
discussion of general land-mine issues. There will be a
number of opportunities for that in the coming months,
such as the meetings of the First Committee during the
fifty-first session of the General Assembly and the Ottawa
Conference in October.

 

But just to be quite clear on this, let me state that the
United Kingdom supports a total ban on anti-personnel
land-mines. We have announced that we shall destroy
almost half our stocks as soon as possible, without
replacement, and we have recommitted ourselves publicly
to a complete ban on exports of anti-personnel land-mines.

The United Kingdom is committed to reducing the
danger that anti-personnel land-mines pose for civilians and
those who serve in peace-keeping operations throughout the
world. It is clear that substantial support for humanitarian
demining efforts continues to be essential. The United
Kingdom is one of the largest contributors to these efforts.
Since 1993 we have donated, bilaterally and through the
European Union, a total of £175 million to humanitarian
mine clearance and mine awareness programmes.

We fully support the United Nations mine clearance
policy, which is based on the fundamental principle that the
primary responsibility for taking action must lie with the
host country and not, therefore, with an individual peace-
keeping operation. We also support the role of the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs in providing assistance
and training to build up the host country's capabilities and
to take on demining operations. But we believe that the
United Nations must draw a clear distinction between mine
clearance for the operational needs of peace-keeping
operations, which is the responsibility of the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations, and other humanitarian demining
requirements, which fall under the responsibility of the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs. It is also important to
distinguish between mine clearance and activities such as
training and mine awareness. The difficulties encountered
in establishing viable national solutions to mine pollution in
countries such as Angola and Cambodia resulted, in part,
from the ambiguities in mandates between peace-keepers
and humanitarian agencies.

We question therefore whether the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations should be the focus for
humanitarian mine clearance and mine awareness, given the
coordinating role now undertaken by the Mine Clearance
and Policy Unit of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs.
It is clear that there should be close coordination between
the two organizations, but their tasks are not the same.

The United Kingdom armed forces have undertaken
mine clearance training for the United Nations in countries
such as Pakistan and Cambodia. But, in common with the
forces of a number of other European nations, they
undertake mine clearance work only where it is necessary
for the success of the military operation in hand: their aim
is to clear sufficient mines to allow them to complete
their mission. Humanitarian demining, on the other hand,
requires the methodical removal of all mines in a given
area. It seeks to reduce risks to civilians, enables local
populations to become more self-sufficient, helps the
displaced to resettle, and promotes the resumption of
normal development. Responsibility for establishing such
humanitarian clearance programmes must, in our view,
remain with the humanitarian and development agencies,
under the overall guidance of the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs.

The military undoubtedly has a valuable contribution
to make to mine clearance, but the precise nature of this
contribution needs to be defined at the outset of a
particular peace-keeping operation. Demining as
undertaken by the military may not be the most cost-
effective means of humanitarian land-mine clearance, and
military clearance standards and techniques may not be
compatible with the humanitarian standards recommended
by the Department of Humanitarian Affairs. Humanitarian
mine clearance is a slow, painstaking and methodical
process. There are many non-governmental organizations
and private companies which, under the coordination of
the Department of Humanitarian Affairs, are better suited
to the task of humanitarian demining.

Wherever there is a serious mine threat to United
Nations peace-keepers, adequate detection, clearance and
protection capabilities must be urgently provided to
enable them to fulfil their mandate. But not all United
Nations peace-keeping operations face similar mine
threats. Demining might not always be necessary, and in
some circumstances the premature removal of long-
established minefields might even add to instability. But
in all cases it is essential that the parties to a conflict
should guarantee that they will desist from further mine-
laying once a peace-keeping operation is established.

We understand that some speakers today will
suggest that there is a case for the establishment of a
demining stand-by force. For our part, we rather question
this. The international community is normally aware in
advance of the need for mine-clearance operations, which
are usually undertaken only when a conflict is over.
Donor countries are unlikely, in our view, to be willing to
designate equipment or facilities which, if they are to be
available at short notice, would sit idle in the meantime.
The United Kingdom would not be able to put mine-
clearance trainers on permanent stand-by, but we do
remain ready to consider each request on its merits.
 

During his statement, my colleague the Ambassador of
Egypt referred to the problem of Second World War
minefields in the Western Desert. The United Kingdom has
handed over to the Egyptian Government all maps and
other information in our possession about Second World
War minefields in Egypt. When he visited Egypt in
November 1995, Mr. Rifldnd, the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, offered our assistance
in clearing Second World War land-mines. As a result of
subsequent discussions, we have provided a substantial
package of assistance which includes mine detectors.

Finally let me thank you, Mr. President, for giving us
the opportunity to discuss this important issue. We hope
that what we and others have to say today will provide food
for thought for the Department of Humanitarian Affairs and
the Department of Peace-Keeping Operations. The
humanitarian disasters caused by the indiscriminate and
irresponsible use of land-mines are, of course, of concern
to us all. This problem fully deserves the increased
attention of the international community, and the United
Kingdom is committed to ensuring that we address these
issues urgently and effectively.

