Mr. Husain (Canada) (spoke in French): We
thank the United States for having organized today's
debate and the journalists who shared their personal
experiences.

Too often, journalists can find themselves in harm's
way due to their profession. Today's debate serves to
remind us of that reality. Cases involving Canadian
journalists include Michelle Lang and Zahra Kazemi.
In 2009, Canadian journalist Michelle Lang, of The
Calgary Herald, was killed by an improvised explosive
device in Afghanistan alongside four members of
the Canadian Armed Forces. In 2003, Canadian
photojournalist Zahra Kazemi died as a result of the
injuries she sustained while in custody in the Evin
Prison in Iran, after having been arrested for taking
photos outside that prison in Tehran.

Looking at the current situation in Syria, the
Syrian Journalists Association has documented the
deaths of 153 professional or citizen journalists since
the uprising began. We condemn the intentional
targeting of journalists, media professionals and
associated personnel, and recall that media equipment
and installations constitute civilian assets under
international law, as affirmed by resolution 1738 (2006).
We must pursue our efforts to bring the perpetrators
of such heinous acts to justice. Those who deliberately
target civilians must be held to account.

(spoke in English)

Each State needs to ensure a safe and enabling
environment in which journalists can perform their
work independently and without fear of violence. The
burden, however, does not rest solely on States, as
non-State actors such as terrorist groups and criminal
organizations pose an ever-growing threat. Journalists,
too, have responsibilities in this regard. They
must ensure that they report events without taking
unnecessary risks to themselves or to other civilians.
They must be responsible and take safety precautions.

Canada has worked with independent media groups
to provide security skills training to journalists so that
they can protect themselves. We have also contributed
funding towards training Syrian activists and j ournalists
to document violations against media activists in Syria,
so that one day the perpetrators of these crimes can be
brought to justice. We will continue to work with key
partners in an effort to support freedom of expression
around the world.

