Mr. ihsanoglu: On behalf of the members of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the
OIC General Secretariat, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Mr. President, your
team and your country on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council and on your successful steering
of the work of the Council this month, including the
holding of this important open debate.

It is quite unfortunate, and in fact unacceptable,
that throughout the world civilians endure the heaviest
cost of armed conflicts, no matter the scale, nature
or location of those conflicts. Civilians, be they men,
women, children or elderly, suffer from unspeakable
hardships and violations of human rights on account
of acts of violence carried out by States and non-State
armed groups alike. As expressed earlier by the
Council, it is deeply regrettable that civilians account
for most of the casualties in armed conflicts, including
as a result of deliberate targeting, indiscriminate or
disproportionate attacks and sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as other acts that violate international
humanitarian and human rights law.

Ever since the Council took up the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict in 1999 with
its adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) and various
others thereafter, an international normative framework
has emerged. However, ongoing armed conflicts,
perpetuated by one State's illegal occupation of
another's territory, and their impact on civilians show
that there is still much more to do in order to tackle
the core challenges outlined in the Secretary-General's
report (8/2012/376).

The Council is expected more than ever to assume
its responsibility for spearheading the international
community's efforts to enhance the compliance of

parties to conflict, States and non-State armed groups
alike, with international law, and to enhance the United
Nations peacekeeping missions' protection capabilities
while respecting States' sovereignty, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Improving humanitarian
access to victims of armed conflict and ensuring
accountability for violations of international law, as
well as international humanitarian and human rights
law, are also among the challenges that the Council has
to tackle on behalf of the international community.

Aside from legal, structural and operational
challenges, the real and grave challenge that needs the
urgent action of the Council is the ongoing violence
in Syria, which has cost the lives of more than 60,000
Syrians and displaced more than 700,000 others. As
a matter of fact, the conflict in Syria puts the ability
of the Council and the international community to
protect civilians in armed conflict to a clear test. It is
regrettable that neither the Council nor the international
community has passed that test yet, although so many
civilians have died and many others have been maimed
or displaced. I am particularly disappointed that the
Syrian leadership has perpetuated violence against its
own people.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation has
been actively involved from the very beginning in
every effort to provide humanitarian assistance to the
Syrians victimized by the ongoing conflict. In that
regard, we are closely cooperating with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The OIC
Department for Humanitarian Affairs is working to
provide assistance to Syrian refugees in neighbouring
countries. On 30 January, the United Nations held a
very successful fund-raising conference in Kuwait, to
which the OIC contributed and by which the United
Nations managed to raise around $1.5 billion, mainly
from OIC countries.

Here once again, I reiterate our call on the Security
Council to assume its responsibility to do its utmost to
protect the Syrian people and bring a peaceful solution
to the Syrian conflict through political dialogue.

Ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law is a
sine qua non for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. As encouraged by the Secretary-General
in his 2012 report, the Council is expected to ensure
such accountability for each and every Member State
without exception. Yet Israel continues to enjoy
impunity despite its flagrant violations of international
law, as well as international humanitarian and human
rights law.

The Palestinian people, be it in the West Bank or
Gaza, continues to suffer under the illegal measures
imposed by the Israeli occupation. The Palestinian
people's aspirations to realize its legitimate right to
freedom, sovereignty and self-determination in its own
independent State and in its own homeland, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, should no longer be denied.
The ongoing confiscation of Palestinian properties
and construction of illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories should be seen as the biggest
challenge to the credibility of the Security Council.

The General Assembly's recognition of Palestine as
a non-member observer State constitutes a timely and
fundamental opportunity that should be utilized in full
in order to give renewed momentum to the currently
deadlocked peace process. Both the Palestinian and
Israeli people deserve permanent peace. It is long
overdue for the Israeli and Palestinian people to live
side by side and in peace and security.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
represents only one aspect of the challenge of
protecting civilians. Civilians are also increasingly
becoming targets of terrorism and extremism, as well
as, maybe ironically, of counter-terrorism measures.
Certainly, nobody can deny the right of States to
undertake counter-terrorism efforts through law
enforcement agencies to combat terrorism. However,
the utmost should be done not to harm civilians and
reduce them to collateral damage. Civilians also suffer
during eruptions of violence due to simmering and
unaddressed situations of intercommunal hatred and
resentment, as was recently witnessed by the Muslim
Rohingya minority in Rakhine state, Myanmar.

Speaking of unaddressed problems, I should stress
the importance of responding to the needs of refugees
displaced by armed conflict. In this regard, the OIC
is particularly concerned about the continuing plight
of Azeri refugees forced to leave their homes in the
Nagorno Karabakh region and seven adjacent regions
of Azerbaijan.

We are also concerned about the deliberate targeting
of certain groups of people by non-State armed groups
or terrorists. The targeting and kidnapping of United
Nations or other international staff, humanitarian
assistance workers and volunteers, or health workers
and teachers are unacceptable. In this regard, I strongly
condemn the killing of health workers engaged in
national polio vaccination campaigns. I also condemn
the killing of worshippers in places of worship as
abhorrent, inhuman acts. I also condemn and reject the
arguments of those who distort the teachings of Islam
by killing, kidnapping or harming innocent civilians or
by undermining their security.

Finally, I would like to express the commitment of
the OIC General Secretariat to work with the United
Nation for the protection of civilians. In this regard, we
highly appreciate in particular the dedicated efforts of
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, UNICEF, OCHA and the International
Committee of the Red Cross in this field. I would also
like to pay tribute to all United Nations peacekeeping
personnel and to unarmed civilian peacekeepers who
are protecting civilians in a variety of trouble spots
around the world.

