Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you and your delegation, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. My delegation will render its full
support.

As this is my first engagement with the Security
Council as Permanent Representative of my country, I
would like to assure the Council of my cooperation and
support in tackling issues that pertain to my country.

At the outset, I would like to express my deep
condolences with regard to the United Nations
peacekeepers and personnel who lost their lives during
the unfortunate event in Juba. I would like to inform the
Security Council of the commitment of the Transitional
Government of National Unity to fully implement the
Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in South
Sudan. The Transitional Government of National Unity
remains on course to implement the Agreement despite
the numerous challenges we face. It is unfortunate
to note that the few achievements of the Transitional
Government of National Unity have been severally
impacted by the events of the past few days in South
Sudan. Nevertheless, the Transitional Government
remains committed to the implementation of the
Agreement and considers the setbacks as a learning
curve.

As members are well aware, over the past few weeks
some major towns in South Sudan were attacked by
unknown gunmen, which resulted in displacement and
loss of property and lives among many of our citizens.
In Raja, the capital of Lol state, on 15 June the house of
the Governor was attacked and the town was overrun
by unknown gunmen, before they were repelled by
the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA). Wau,
the capital of Wau state, was attacked on 24 June, also
by unknown gunmen. The Council released a press
statement that called for calm and restraint.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
acted swiftly on both occasion to protect civilians
and their property. Human casualties were minimized
and further loss of property was avoided through
the imposition of a curfew in the attacked towns.
Humanitarian access was allowed unhindered by the
states' Governments, and the new Governors of the
two states called for calm and asked the people to work
together in getting to the root cause of what happened.
Furthermore, the Transitional Government of National
Unity set up an investigative committee under the
chairmanship of Mr. Riek Gal Kok, the National
Minister of Health. He visited Wau, and his findings
will be made public once completed.

From 7 to 10 July, Juba, the capital city of the
Republic of South Sudan and the seat of the Transitional
Government of National Unity, experienced the most
difficult challenge to the Peace Agreement so far. On
7 July, at approximately 8.30 p.m., a force from the
headquarters of the First Vice-President, commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel David Rieu, attacked a checkpoint
at Gudelle, a neighbourhood in Juba. The checkpoint
was run by an integrated force from the SPLA and other
organized forces. The attack resulted in the deaths of
two SPLA soldiers, two national Security personnel and
one medical doctor, who was caught in the crossfire.

On 8 July, President Salva Kiir Mayardit called
First Vice-President Riek Machar and Vice-President
James Wani Igga for a meeting to discuss the security
situation and the shooting of the night before and to set
up a committee to investigate that unfortunate incident.
As the President was about to complete their meeting,
the First Vice-President's huge protection force - in
21 mounted vehicles accompanied by an ambulance,
in which ammunition was concealed - arrived at the
main gate of the Presidential Palace as a response to
false breaking news posted by the Press Secretary of
Mr. Machar, Mr. James Gatdet Dak. The false report
stated:

"Fighting erupted inside Jl, President Salva
Kiir's palace in the national capital, Juba. The
President and his commanders attempted to arrest
the First Vice-President, Dr. Riek Machar Teny.
This came after the President called for a meeting
of the presidency in his Office with Dr. Machar
and Vice-President James Wani Igga. This turned
out to be a set-up to arrest and possibly harm Dr.
Machar. Fortunately, Dr. Machar's bodyguards
have managed to fight vigorously and rescued Dr.
Machar. He is now safe. Meanwhile, fighting has
continued."

In the midst of all that chaos, the President
protected and facilitated the safe passage of the First
Vice-President back to his residence. He, at the same
time, constituted an investigation committee headed by
the Minister of the Interior, Lieutenant General Alfred
Lado Gore, which is expected to report within the next
10 days.

On 10 July, at around 8 a.m., a force from the
headquarters of the First Vice-President attacked and
overran a checkpoint on the Juba to Yei road. SPLA
forces responded immediately and protracted fighting
continued throughout the day around the checkpoint
area. SPLA forces eventually regained control of the
checkpoint. On 11 July, in the morning, forces of the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement in Opposition
forces attacked the checkpoint again; that time they
were repulsed and pursued into their camp, which they
abandoned.

Based on that narrative of events, the President
reiterated his commitment to the continued
implementation of the Agreement in letter and spirit,
and therefore issued a Republican Order for the
cessation of hostilities with immediate effect from the
date of signature, as from 6 pm. Greenwich Mean Time
on ll July.

In conclusion, the Transitional Government of
National Unity is the only viable mechanism to fully
implement the Agreement. We call on the Security
Council to collaboratively work with the Transitional
Government of National Unity on how best we can
together deliver peace and security to my people.
We call on the Council to engage all parties to the
Agreement to redouble their efforts to implement the
Agreement to allow the people of South Sudan to start
building a better future for the next generation.

