Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abadallah for his briefing on the situation in Somalia
and express our appreciation for the presence of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia. We also thank
Commissioner Lamamra for his very informative
statement.

Reading the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/132), we can only conclude that the general
situation in Somalia is still a source of great concern,
notwithstanding the significant progress that has been
recorded, in particular since the signing of the Djibouti
agreement. That is certainly true, especially with
regard to the current security situation.

However, in our opinion, we find ourselves today
in the presence of a new and determined Somalia, with
a Government based in Mogadishu and a clear overall
vision of how to emerge from the situation. That is
why, following the example of the meeting of heads of
State of the African Union, we should welcome the
new Government and, above all, help provide it with
all necessary assistance for it to meet its obligations.
More precisely, we would like to urge the international
community to continue to assist the parties, in
particular the new authorities, to help them bolster
their efforts to strengthen political cooperation and to
integrate, restructure and train the Somali Police Force.

As we are aware of the difficulties linked to the
scope of the task, it is only right that we congratulate
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the country team, all United Nations agencies and
Somalia's bilateral partners for their tireless efforts. We
support the conclusions of the International Contact
Group on Somalia, which met on 16 December 2008,
on the need to immediately strengthen the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Despite positive political progress, the security
situation has greatly deteriorated, particularly since the
withdrawal of the Ethiopian troops. Both in Mogadishu
and in other areas, a stronger presence of militias and
other insurgent forces has spread violence throughout
the country. There are more and more victims, both
within the civilian population and among humanitarian
and peacekeeping personnel.

Given that fragile security situation, we think that
the security aspect of the Djibouti agreement must be
rapidly implemented, in particular with regard to the
Joint Security Committee, the Joint Security Force and
the Somali Police Force. We believe that sustained
support to those three security bodies is the first step
that the international community must take to help
Somalia today. That will enable the authorities to
strengthen their own security, to protect the civilians
and to secure the supply of humanitarian assistance.

Here, we would like to congratulate Burundi and
Uganda for their commitment and their spirit of
sacrifice, which was further affirmed by their
respective decisions to deploy an additional battalion
each to strengthen AMISOM. Saying that, we strongly
condemn the attacks against AMISOM, and we
reiterate our commitment to the security and integrity
of the African force. The recent murderous attacks of
which AMISOM. soldiers were victims raise the urgent
issue of strengthening that Mission.

My delegation believes that at this stage of the
developing situation, we should attach particular
importance to the strengthening of AMISOM, with a
View to a future deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, as recommended by resolution
1863 (2009). AMISOM. represents the achievement
upon which the United Nations can build a future
international presence in Somalia and must be
strengthened as rapidly as possible and brought up to
United Nations standards.

We therefore congratulate the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for its diligence and its
comprehensive evaluation of the needs of AMISOM.
The proposals and recommendations made there are, in
our opinion, realistic, given that the analysis by the
technical assessment mission concluded that the
existing logistical support to AMISOM. consists of
basic equipment and services that do not meet United
Nations standards.

The international community must therefore
firmly support the Secretary-General's plans and make
every effort for their success. In that regard, we await
with interest the results of the donor conference to be
held on 22 April in Brussels.

The already deplorable humanitarian situation
runs the risk of worsening, given the drought in certain
regions. Moreover, the slowing down of humanitarian
operations owing to the insecurity is an issue that must
be dealt with quickly, at a time when displaced persons
are gradually returning to Mogadishu, a city that lacks
basic infrastructure, drinking water and health services.
Moreover, the civilian population remains exposed to
the threat of unexploded ordnance and mines. Burkina
Faso condemns violence against humanitarian
personnel. We congratulate the humanitarian agencies
on their efforts and encourage them to pursue their
activities, despite those difficult conditions.

Burkina Faso firmly believes in the possibility of
a comprehensive and lasting solution to the Somali
crisis. The country's political actors have made
significant progress and displayed a resolve that the
Secretary-General himself describes as encouraging.
That is why we urge the international community to
overcome its hesitations and to increase its assistance
with a view to the development and strengthening of
Somalia's new institutions.

