Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank Ambassador Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
for his report, and to say how much we appreciate his
work as Chairman of the Committee.

I endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.

Terrorism is one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security, as the High-Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change reiterated in
its report to the Secretary-General. France is actively
participating in the fight against that scourge and is
working for effective United Nations action to that end,
and in particular for effective action by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). I wish in that regard to
stress the following aspects of recent developments in
the Committee's work.
The Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate is
now being set up, consistent with resolution 1535
(2004), and will soon be fully operational, pursuant to
the Council's request in resolution 1566 (2004). I
should like to thank Mr. Ruperez once again for his
resolute work to that end and to pay tribute to the
States Members of the United Nations that have given
the Executive Directorate the resources necessary to
carry out its mission.

Turning to the Committee's new programme of
work, I should like to underscore a number of goals
stressed therein, to which France attaches priority.

First, as I have said in the past, France is gratified
that the organization of visits to the field has been
recognized as one of the Committee's new priorities,
allowing it to become more operational and useful. The
visits will enable us more accurately to assess how
States are discharging their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). They will result in
recommendations, including on technical assistance
where necessary in order to help States to comply. The
first visit will take place in the coming months, which
is a very positive development.

The programme of work also emphasizes
strengthened cooperation between the CTC and the Al-
Qaida sanctions Committee, as well as with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We fully support that objective. I would add
that cooperation between the CTC and the Working
Group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004)
offers further potential for strengthening United
Nations counter-terrorism activities.

France is also gratified that the CTC has begun to
consider the increasingly worrisome phenomenon of
States' delaying the submission of their reports to the
Committee. Such tardy reports are evidence of the
frequent difficulties involved in their compilation,
which, if undertaken in earnest, can be quite onerous.
However, the Council cannot accept that the
obligations incumbent under resolution 1373 (2001)
are not fully met. We must therefore remedy the
situation by identifying the type of assistance that
States may require. The Global Programme against
Terrorism of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) provides advisory services that can
be useful in the preparation of reports. Above and
beyond respect for the formal obligations involved in
reporting, France hopes that the CTC will soon get to
work assessing the requirements for technical
assistance to States.
Cooperation between the Committee and other
United Nations bodies, as well as with international
and regional organizations, is stressed most
appropriately in the Committee's programme of work.
Within the Organization, we believe, rapprochement
and close cooperation with UNODC is of great
importance. As to international organizations, France
also hopes that the CTC will be able to work more
effectively with the G-8's Counter-Terrorism Action
Group, because we believe that the Group can provide
meaningful support to the CTC's mission. As to
regional organizations, the Committee is about to
convene an important concertation and information
exercise in Almaty. The programme of action and
follow-up to be presented there enjoy our support, and
we hope that the organizations invited to the meeting
will fully endorse the document's orientations.

Over and above the work of the CTC under
discussion today, everyone is mindful of the
recommendations of the High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change. We await with great interest
the global strategy to be prepared under the Secretary-
General's guidance. We share the hope that an
agreement will emerge on the definition of terrorism,
thus strengthening the consensus that must underpin
our activities. The September summit, we hope, can
produce great progress on those issues, but we must get
down to work forthwith and consider how we might
give new momentum to United Nations counter-
terrorism activities.

France believes that the Working Group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) could
contribute to that ambitious exercise.

