Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation welcomed with great satisfaction
the news of the initialling yesterday in Dayton, Ohio, of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace and the Annexes
thereto by the leaders of the Republics of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, which is to put an end to more than three years
of bloody conflict that has claimed almost a quarter of a
million lives in that part of the world. The imminent formal
signing of the Peace Agreement and the fulfilment of the
commitments envisaged will undoubtedly lead to the
establishment of a lasting peace in the Balkans region and
to a new era in which trust and mutual cooperation will
erase forever the anguish and suffering caused by the war.

The delegation of Honduras has on a number of
occasions stated in the Council its position in favour of a
negotiated political settlement to the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia that would preserve the territorial integrity of all
the States of the region within their internationally
recognized borders. Accordingly, we welcome the Peace
Agreement's provision that the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to be a sovereign State within
its existing international borders. But we have all the
more reason to hail the parties' agreement to guarantee
the utmost respect for human rights and their decision to
cooperate fully in the investigation and punishment of war
crimes, which we have unswervingly condemned.

Now that the parties have succeeded in arriving at a
lasting peace settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, this
will for peace must be translated into specific actions, in
full compliance with the provisions of the Peace
Agreement and the Annexes thereto. In this respect, we
believe that the decisions that the Council will soon have
to take will assist in this process. However, we recognize
that the situation in the region still constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. For this reason, we
support the ending of the embargo on arms and military
equipment imposed by resolution 713 (1991), on the
conditions stipulated in the draft resolution that we will
be adopting, and an indefinite suspension of the measures
imposed by the Council, in particular on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and on the Bosnian Serb party, on
the conditions that are also spelt out in the pertinent draft
resolution.

Honduras hopes that the commitments reached in
Dayton, Ohio, will be successfully fulfilled, for the sake
of peace in the successor States of the former Yugoslavia
and in the world. As a sponsor of both draft resolutions,
we will be voting in favour of them.

We wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Contact Group - and in particular to the Government of
the United States of America - for its tireless diplomatic
efforts to bring about a negotiated peace for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also appreciate the important
contribution made by the Mission of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
intergovernmental missions.

