Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I would like to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
Jeremic', and the Foreign Minister of Kosovo,
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and to thank them for their
interventions. I also wish to express my appreciation to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier for his work in Kosovo, and I
wish him well in his new office.

I would like to focus my statement on some
specific issues. First is the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, which has already produced some
important results in the fields of freedom of movement,
civil registry and academic diplomas. It continues to be
the most important setting for achieving a mutually
agreed solution for the outstanding issues.

Under the auspices of, and at the incentive of, the
European Union, the parties are sitting at the same
table discussing issues with an impact on the daily
lives of people in Serbia and Kosovo. That is a process
that can go forward only if there is good faith, good
will and a spirit of compromise on both sides. I believe
we would be taking a significant step backwards if this
process came to a halt because the hope of a mutually
agreed settlement had been lost. If we are to expect
positive developments, if the negotiations process is to
move forward in a meaningful way, concessions are
needed from both sides. I will return to that point
further on.

Now I wish to bring up some of the issues
referred to in the report of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The continued
efforts by this Mission to uphold the rule of law and
law enforcement in Kosovo should be duly
appreciated. High-profile cases continue to take a
prominent place in the report on EULEX activity.
Allow me to refer once more to the investigation of the
allegations made regarding the trafficking in human
organs that may amount to war crimes in Kosovo, with
ramifications in other countries.

A considerable amount of new staff and resources
have been assigned to the EULEX special task force to
investigate the allegations in Senator Dick Marty's
report, which is now in the last stages of preparation.
We welcome the fact that the mission has successfully
established jurisdiction regarding certain crimes
committed outside the borders of Kosovo. That is an
important development in the endeavour to uncover the
whole truth behind the allegations, which must remain
our ultimate goal. It is important that the members of
this Council are kept fully updated on the progress of
the EULEX investigations concerning the Senator's
allegations.

The current situation in Kosovo offers ample
opportunity for attempts to force a change of
circumstances on the ground, hoping that they may
become permanent. Such actions or initiatives by
whatever party are unacceptable. It is up to us to make
sure that nothing is to be gained by straying from the
diplomatic track - as narrow and winding as it may
look.

In this framework, the work of the international
forces and bodies and the reinforcement of their
capacities are to be welcomed. In that regard, I wish to
commend the operational and tactical skills shown by
KFOR during the events we are discussing.

EULEX is also playing a key role in several
fundamental aspects of the normalization of life in
Kosovo. We commend its work and its commitment to
that difficult mission. We welcome the considerable
drop in violent crime described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/514), as well as the
improved professionalism of the Kosovo police.

On the other hand, we are concerned about the
sharp increase in criminal incidents affecting minority
communities in the past three months. Guaranteeing
the physical safety of minorities is one of the
cornerstones of the rule of law in any modern polity.
Also important is the fight against domestic
violence - a social phenomenon that law enforcement
agencies must not leave unpunished and should not
tolerate.

It is vital for the parties to persevere in and
intensify their diplomatic efforts, in good faith and in
transparency. That is not only possible; it is an
imperative. They all have our full support in that
endeavour.

I believe we must rely on the professionalism and
commitment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, as well as of KFOR
and EULEX and other international partners on the
ground, in continuing to carry out their mandates, as
they have done so far. My final words are words of
appreciation for and encouragement of their work.

