Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the presidency of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
for convening today's debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The Holy See believes in the
central role of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security and appreciates the
significant contribution of United Nations peacekeeping
operations to the prevention and resolution of many
armed conflicts within and among States.

In these times of shifting and changing threats
to international peace and security, it is timely
to seek together ways to further improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Indeed, today's
briefers highlighted the diverse challenges across the
peacekeeping realm, which now includes international
terrorism, violent extremism, transnational organized
crime and climate-related emergencies. They pointed to
the need for more robust, coherent and comprehensive
collective action in the context of the evolving threats
to international peace and security.

As the challenges and threats continue to evolve,
the Holy See believes that the protection of civilians
and critical civilian infrastructure, such as schools,
hospitals, religious and cultural sites and water supplies,
should remain a constant and crucial dimension of
peacekeeping. In some situations of armed conflict,
in particular when the conflict has involved ethnic
cleansing or other forms of mass displacement, it is
important that peacekeepers help to create the necessary
conditions for the safe and dignified return of refugees,
other forced migrants and internally displaced persons
to their homes and properties.

That clearly requires a holistic approach, involving
other United Nations agencies and various other
institutions and stakeholders. From the start of every
mission, the peace and security instruments of the
United Nations must therefore work in tandem with
development, human rights and humanitarian actors.
Human rights violations are drivers of conflict.
Restoring respect for human rights will often contribute
to addressing the root causes of conflicts and to
sustaining peace.

Another significant element in our common search
of ways to improve United Nations peacekeeping
operations is to identify the best times to deploy and
to end a peacekeeping mission. Making the right
decision in those critical areas has become all the
more challenging of late as calls for the continuous
engagement of a peacekeeping operation, from the
early signs of conflict to the post-recovery phase,
increase. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding have become
so interwoven that many now expect them to routinely
overlap in United Nations operations. My delegation
trusts that the United Nations will always listen to and
consult with the Governments and populations directly
affected on the ground.

The challenge of making the best decision at those
two critical moments of a peacekeeping operation is
made more acute by the fact that no two conflicts are the
same. It is therefore necessary to refrain from taking a
one-size-fits-all approach and to tailor a peacekeeping
operation in accordance with its specific purpose
and context, including the cultural and religious
sensibilities of the peoples directly affected by the
conflict. In that regard, my delegation believes that the
active participation of host countries in the orientation
and training of peacekeepers before they are sent into
the field is an important component in order to ensure
the success of the mission.

My delegation has noted of the serious efforts
aimed at setting new policies to strengthen the rules
that govern the conduct and discipline of personnel.
For example, strengthening norms for the prevention
of sexual abuse against women and children by
peacekeeping personnel is a necessary collective action
to improve the credibility and acceptance of United
Nations peacekeeping missions in their respective
areas of operations and beyond. In that regard, the roles
and responsibilities of the troop-contributing countries
and the United Nations offices directly responsible for
the oversight of peacekeeping operations should not
be underestimated.

In the same vein, in the light of the worsening
security situation prevailing in many field missions, the
safety and security of United Nations personnel remain
among the highest priorities. The United Nations should
ensure that peacekeepers receive specific training for
the mission and that they are adequately equipped to
protect themselves from aggressors. The perpetrators
of attacks against United Nations peacekeepers must be
brought to justice in conformity with the provisions of
international law.

In closing, the Holy See pays special tribute to those
peacekeepers who have made the ultimate sacrifice in
the name of peace.

