Mr. Sharma (India): We offer you our warm
congratulations, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month, and wish
you success in your work.

I also take this opportunity to congratulate our
friends Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and Syria
for joining the Council, and express our appreciation to
Bangladesh, Jamaica, Mali, Tunisia and Ukraine for
their contribution during their term in the Council.

We commend your initiative, Mr. President, in
convening this open meeting of the Council on counter-
terrorism, which is the overriding concern of the
international community today. Such a meeting is
overdue after the catastrophe here of 11 September and
the resolutions adopted immediately, both in the
Council and the General Assembly, expressing outrage
and determination on the part of the world community
to extirpate this scourge from our midst.

Terrorism is the anathema of the twenty-first
century. It threatens the civil, peaceful, equitable,
democratic and cooperative global order that we wish
to see evolve in the world so as to grasp the
opportunity arising after the polarization, divisions and
surrogate wars of the cold-war era. Terrorism is the
disorder that undermines that search. Global terrorism
has turned its malign attention to many countries across
the world for decades, bringing in its wake the pain and
waste of wanton murders, human tragedy, mayhem and
mindless destruction. The social, political,
psychological and physical effects of terrorism are
destabilizing and immense, as is no doubt intended.
Peace, economic progress and development, social
harmony and political institution-building are disrupted
and retarded. Its monstrous operation must therefore be
arrested and conclusively defeated by the world
community.

We know from our experience that open, liberal
and democratic societies are particularly vulnerable.
The response of the international community to this
challenge had until recently been generally disengaged
and apathetic, and characterized largely by tokenism.
Perhaps that was because of a sense of immunity from
the worst manifestations of this phenomenon in those
societies, without whose political will and
determination the struggle against the scourge of
terrorism could not become a global reality. Without
universal ownership of the fight against terror and
shared resolve, the creeping tentacles of terrorism
cannot be blunted and destroyed.

State victims of terrorism, which have hitherto
been facing this challenge on their own, now have the
succour of a joint combat against a global evil; for
terrorism is a disease that has to be removed from the
world's body entirely before its poison spreads
unchecked. In the absence of a collective, steeled and
implacable response against this global menace, the
results will be predictable: increasingly brazen and
outrageous horrors to which no country or society will
be immune, for there is something among the deluded
perpetrators of terror that revels in anarchy and
carnage.

The international community responded to the
collective challenge created by terrorism and its
backers through resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council on 12 September. The
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) by the Council sent
an inflexible and unambiguous signal that the world
community will admit no space for terrorists or their
sponsors. It conveyed the resolve that henceforth there
would be zero tolerance for the perpetrators and
instigators of terror. The civilized world would no
longer permit such acts to be conducted with impunity.
India has unreservedly supported resolution 1373
(2001).

The dispatch with which the Council adopted
resolution 1373 (2001) and set up the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, under the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, underlines the
importance and the urgency with which the
international community has decided to combat
terrorism collectively and unitedly. The Committee has
worked tirelessly and with energy in the short period of
its existence to mount a counter-offensive on
international terrorism.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock has also set an example by
holding regular briefings and sharing with the non-
members of the Council the Committee's ideas on full
implementation of the resolution. Members of the
United Nations have responded promptly to the
resolution, judged by the number of responses already
received by the Committee, which is unprecedented by
United Nations standards. This reflects the importance
the membership attaches to the work of the Committee
and the support it enjoys across the board. Above all, it
is a tribute to Sir Jeremy's personal drive and
commitment, which we would like to commend.

India has been a victim of state-sponsored, cross-
border terrorism for two decades now, with a
horrendous toll in the tens of thousands. The anguish
and suffering caused is incalculable. We have fought
this terror, and will continue to do so, with unflinching
determination and resolve. We have also gained
valuable lessons from this tragic period. It is with this
background that we would like to share with you some
suggestions which, we hope, will be beneficial to the
implementation of the counter-terrorism resolution and
will help bring about a more effective response from
the Council and the Committee to this grave threat to
international peace and security.

We appreciate the work already done by the
Committee. The three subcommittees will soon engage
themselves in the task of examining national reports.
We trust that the Committee will identify inadequacies
in domestic legislation or in its implementation, as well
as areas for further international cooperation.

Even as the process continues, focus should be
maintained on groups that are known to perpetrate
terrorism and their sponsors. Considerable information
about them is already available in the public domain.
More information could be sought from affected
countries in a more proactive approach.

For example, use could be made of the list of
terrorist groups and their supporters drawn up by the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999). Similarly, the Council could profitably
look at lists of terrorist organisations announced by
member countries as part of their national anti-terrorist
legislation. Reports that accounts are being frozen after
allowing the terrorist organizations to withdraw funds
or transfer assets to organizations which have not been
named in the lists, and reports of banned terrorist
organizations mutating into other bodies need to be
looked into critically.

Resolution 1373 (2001), which reflects a
collective obligation on the international community,
affords no justification or excuse to any individual,
group, organization or State for perpetrating terrorism.
The Council and the Committee should, therefore, not
accept any putative justification or excuse for
terrorism. The Council should hold those who offer any
such excuses accountable and make an example of
them. This would demonstrate that the Council and the
Committee mean business.

Resolution 1373 (2001), in operative paragraph
2 (a), enjoins all States to "refrain from providing any
form of support, active or passive, to entities or persons
involved in terrorist acts". Yet statements continue to
emanate that "moral, political and diplomatic support"
will continue to be given to what is clearly terrorism.
There is nothing moral about supporting terrorism; it is
the embodiment of immorality. Nor is there anything
diplomatic about supporting terrorism; we associate
diplomacy with higher ends. Terrorism certainly cannot
be the extension of politics by other means. Extension
of support to terrorism in any form or in any manner,
including moral, political and diplomatic support, is in
clear contravention of resolution 1373 (2001). Left
unchallenged and unaddressed, statements asserting
such support and other pseudo-justifications will leave
the resolution open to mischievous and self-serving
misrepresentations and misinterpretations, undermining
its intent.

Terrorists and their sponsors have become used to
empty gestures and rhetoric from the international
community for a number of years. They will now be
testing the will and resolve of the international
community to fully and faithfully implement the
counter-terrorism resolution.

Less than three days after the adoption of the
resolution, on 1 October, the Legislative Assembly
building in Srinagar, in the Indian state of Jammu and
Kashmir, was attacked. Masood Azhar, leader of the
terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed, claimed that his
group had perpetrated this act. This was clearly in
contravention of resolution 1373 (2001). We are not
aware if any action was initiated against this group.
Emboldened, Jaish-e-Mohammed and another group of
its ilk, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, abhorring liberal
democracies and their legislatures as much as their
instigators and sponsors do, attacked our parliament in
the capital on 13 December in an attempt to decimate
our political leadership.

None of the five terrorists who attacked our
parliament were Indian nationals. While my
Government shall take whatever actions it considers
necessary to bring to an end terrorist activities directed
against India's sovereignty, security and territorial
integrity, we believe that the existence of, and support
for the activities of, terrorist groups such as Jaish-e-
Mohammed and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba after 28 September
is in direct and complete contravention of resolution
1373 (2001). The Council and the Committee should
quickly examine the need for expeditious and swift
collective response against all terrorist acts, wherever
and by whomever these are committed.

Terrorist groups are not hermetic entities. They
need sponsorship, logistical support, financial backing,
training facilities and a home. They operate from safe
havens, where Governments and their agencies harbour
them, give them the means to plan and carry out their
heinous actions and return to their sanctuary.
Requiring such Governments and their agencies
to deny to the terrorists facilities and safe havens and
to hand them over promptly to countries where they are
wanted for their terrorist activities, would help to bring
them to justice, rather than necessitate bringing justice
to them. The Council and the Committee should pay
particular attention to the effective implementation of
this dimension of the resolution.

Resolution 1373 (2001) marked a watershed in
our common combat against terrorism. In our View, it
was a most ambitious and timely undertaking of the
Security Council in fulfilment of its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. The Council
must act swiftly and resolutely to implement the
counter-terrorism resolution with neither fear nor
favour. I compliment the Council on the purposeful
start it has made and would like to assure members that
the Council and its Committee will have my
delegation's full support in their endeavour.

