Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Mr. Minister, we are happy to see you in New
York presiding over our important meeting today. My
delegation is pleased to participate, under your
presidency, in a Council debate on Afghanistan. I wish
also to thank Ambassador Kolby and his colleagues for
scheduling this meeting.

Allow me to express my deepest sorrow and
sympathy and to offer condolences to the people and
the Government of Afghanistan in connection with the
earthquake that struck last night and devastated part of
that country, causing further damage and bringing more
suffering to the Afghan people.

What the Afghan people have achieved in the
short period of time since the collapse of the Taliban
and the establishment of the Afghan Interim
Government is remarkable. The process of the orderly
transfer of power - which had had no precedent in
Afghan society for centuries - provided a glimmer of
hope at a time when chaos and pessimism reigned.
Thus far, the combination of the determination
demonstrated by the Afghans, coupled with the
assistance rendered by the international community,
has contributed to bringing about relative stability in a
country that has not seen peace and tranquillity for 23
years. The relative peace prevailing in Kabul, given
that city's national importance and the psychological
impact that this may have on the rest of the country, is
also an impressive achievement. Moreover, a peaceful
and quiet environment is imperative in order for the
Interim Government to function and to extend
gradually its authority to the provinces.

There should be no doubt that the Afghan
people- exhausted, impoverished and yearning for
peace - were the driving force behind the ultimate
collapse of the Taliban, and that it is they who have
subsequently maintained the relative peace prevailing
in the country, despite the suspicion and hostility
among ethnic communities and political groups. We are
witnessing the start of the healing process. At this
point, the Afghan people and their leaders, as well as
Afghanistan's neighbours and the international
community as a whole, should be careful not to allow
the process to reverse itself.

We agree, however, that the situation throughout
the country remains fragile and unpredictable. Reports
indicating that the Taliban and Al Qaeda elements are
regrouping are a cause for concern. Given the fact that
the Afghan political system is still at an early stage of
its development, any challenge by the near-defunct
Taliban and Al Qaeda could be all the more damaging.
In the meantime, I would like to warn that callous
military operations in which innocent Afghans are
killed and their villages destroyed are all the more
damaging, too.

There is no doubt that the continuation of
suspicion and hostility among Afghan military
commanders provides a favourable ground in which the
terrorists can operate. Mistrust and friction among
these commanders may also result in eroding the most
valuable asset: the support of the Afghan people for the
peace process and the Interim Administration.
Therefore, we believe that strengthening the Afghan
peace process by taking on board and bringing along
the competing local commanders is among the best
remedial actions to strengthen the peace process.

We believe that the responsibility for ensuring
security in Afghanistan ultimately rests with the
Afghans themselves. Therefore, the creation of an
indigenous Afghan security sector should be the top
priority of all Afghans and the various components of
such a security sector should be established as soon as
possible. In the meantime, we understand that an
appropriate dose of international assistance is
necessary to helping maintain peace on the ground. We
believe that, given the sensitivities of the Afghans and
past experience, it is in the interest of lasting peace in
Afghanistan that the foreign presence in that country
remain as minimal and as brief as possible and
necessary.

Opium poppy cultivation and trafficking in drugs
in Afghanistan have always been among the main
sources of financing for the war machine of criminal
and terrorist forces in Afghanistan. The resumption of
poppy cultivation in the southern and eastern regions of
Afghanistan, as reported by the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme (UNDCP) in
February and echoed in the latest report of the
Secretary-General, is a great cause for concern. Still
fresh in our memory is how the profit derived from
narcotics substantially fed the warmongering Taliban
and terrorists harboured by them. Drug money can still
largely benefit the remnant of Taliban and Al Qaeda
elements in Afghanistan. There can also be no doubt
that, in the current unstable Afghan environment, the
production of and trafficking in narcotics are all the
more destabilizing and can lead to further
confrontation among the local commanders, on the one
hand, and between them and the central Government,
on the other.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a country that
has been engaged for years in a costly war against
heavily armed drug traffickers on its eastern borders, is
alarmed at the pre-assessment indicating the production
of huge amounts of opium in Afghanistan this year.
While UNDCP has pre-assessed that opium production
is likely to be in the range of 1,900 to 2,700 tons this
year, the estimate carried out by the relevant Iranian
agency points to a larger production. For a variety of
reasons, anti-narcotics activities should figure
prominently on the agenda of the international
community for Afghanistan. It is imperative that this
illicit and inhumane business, of a complex and
transnational nature, and the wide-ranging organized
crime that it creates be dealt with decisively.

My Government commends and appreciates the
determination and sense of purpose demonstrated by
the Afghan Interim Administration in issuing a decree
banning the cultivation, production, processing, use
and trafficking of illicit drugs. Nonetheless, we
understand that, in the circumstances, the Interim
Administration needs the support of the international
community in this area, without which the
implementation of the decree would be almost
impossible. We also welcome the plan to include in the
new Afghan police force a strong and efficient drug-
control unit. Iran has some experience in the crop
substitution programme in Afghanistan and we are of
the view that this is one of the effective ways of
dealing efficiently with the issue. We hope that, in the
forthcoming reports of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan, the issue of opium cultivation and drug
trafficking will be adequately addressed and that the
ways and means of combating the scourge of drugs
emanating from Afghanistan, especially the ways in
which the international community could assist, will be
further elaborated.

To help stabilize the situation in Afghanistan, it is
essential that Afghanistan's neighbouring countries
build consensus and agree among themselves on how
to contribute to the peace process in that country and to
strengthen the Afghan Interim Authority. The holding
of the first meeting of the "six-plus-two" group in
Kabul on 11 March, with the Foreign Minister of the
Interim Administration in attendance, is a welcome
development. We believe that the inclusion of
Afghanistan in these discussions opens a new and
hopeful chapter in the dialogue to restore regional
peace and stability. We look forward to seeing the
group meet regularly and become more active. The
Islamic Republic of Iran, viewing the return of stability
and normalcy to Afghanistan as in its self-interest, has
already taken some steps to encourage cooperation
among Afghanistan's neighbours, especially with
regard to necessary actions to be taken to rebuild
Afghanistan.

Iranian officials, consistent in their policy, have
done their best to help the Afghans to stabilize and
rebuild their country and hosted Chairman Karzai
during his recent three-day State visit to Tehran. This
visit was successful in providing an opportunity to the
two countries' high-ranking officials to renew the
historic friendly relations between the two nations and
to lay the groundwork for the close involvement of Iran
in rebuilding Afghanistan. During this visit, five
agreements on wide-ranging cooperation between the
two parties were signed.

Despite the porous nature of our long eastern
borders, the Iranian Government has spared no efforts
in recent months in denying Taliban and Al Qaeda
elements entry into Iranian territory and the possibility
of turning it into a staging ground for regrouping and
re-entering Afghanistan. A number of Afghans and
other foreign nationals who illegally and directly or
indirectly entered Iranian territory over the past few
months have been detained by Iranian law enforcement
agencies. Some have already been handed over to their
Governments; in the case of some others, their relevant
Governments have yet to take action to receive them.
We have also managed to pass on the names of these
individuals to the Secretary-General. Likewise, the
Iranian Government has also taken effective measures
to ban any activities by Afghan nationals on Iranian
soil against the Afghan Interim Administration. The
measures include, among other actions, the expulsion
of some Afghan activists from Iran.

As Mr. Karzai admitted in his address to the
Iranian Parliament during his visit to Iran, the presence
of millions of Afghan refugees in Iran for two decades
has been a burden on Iranians' shoulders. We hope that
the ongoing dialogue between the Afghan Government
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on a programme for the
voluntary return of refugees will lead in the near future
to the start of an effective programme to that end.

Peace in Afghanistan was for centuries based on
ethnic and religious harmony and the peaceful
coexistence of different ethnic and religious
communities. Coups, occupation and civil war broke
that harmony and, hence, shattered the peace. We
believe that fostering understanding among various
segments of Afghan society is an effective way to
restore lasting peace and to deprive the remnants of the
Taliban and Al Qaeda of a breeding ground. In this
context, while we greatly appreciate the initiative taken
by Chairman Karzai to participate in and address a
gathering in Kabul on the occasion of the martyrdom of
Imam Hossein, the Third Imam of Shiites, we are very
concerned about reports in the north about harassment
of Pashtuns by other ethnic groups.

In closing, I wish to reiterate my Government's
position on the need for the United Nations to continue
its central and crucial role in assisting the Afghans to
stabilize and rebuild their country. I commend the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and their
colleagues in the Secretariat and the whole United
Nations system for the latest comprehensive report and
detailed proposed structure for a United Nations
presence in Afghanistan. The Islamic Republic of Iran
stands ready, where necessary, to extend its assistance
to the United Nations to establish its new structure on
the ground.

