Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Sccretary-General Lacroix, Commissioner
Chergui and Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka
for sharing their impressions from their October
visit to South Sudan and their perspectives on recent
developments in the country.

The United States appreciates the continued
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union on South Sudan, particularly the
emphasis on the role of women in the ongoing peace
process. We have consistently seen the marginalization
of women in South Sudan in previous peace processes.
It is time for the voices of women to be heard and for
their contributions to be genuinely taken into account.
Regarding recent developments in South Sudan, the
United States, the international community and, most
importantly, the South Sudanese people have started to
hear encouraging rhetoric from South Sudan's leaders
on some topics.

We have heard about a new era of peace and
prosperity, an admission of responsibility for actions
that spurred horrific violence and a promise of
forgiveness across party lines. We have heard leaders
commit to reconciliation and healing and pledge to
include all parties in the political process, particularly
civil society and women. We have also noted some
progress on the deliverables of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The National Pre-Transitional Committee is
now established. Permanent ceasefire and transitional
security arrangement workshops have been held, with
the promise of more to follow. Some political prisoners
and prisoners of war have been released.

While we acknowledge those initial steps, we
cannot ignore clear evidence from the ground that runs
counter to the lofty rhetoric of South Sudan's leaders.
Violent conflict continues in parts of the country
and Government and opposition groups continue to
perpetrate atrocities against civilians. Individuals or
entities who conduct those attacks against civilians or
who take any action that extends or expands conflict
should be targeted with sanctions. Many political
prisoners remain in custody, with no prospect of a
free or fair trial or any hope of release, including Peter
Biar Ajak, who was arbitrarily detained at the Juba
airport in late July. We also remain deeply concerned
that journalists and civil society organizations face
ongoing intimidation and censure. Humanitarian
workers continue to be blocked both physically and
bureaucratically from delivering life-saving assistance
through taxes and fees, expulsion, detainment and even
physical harm.

Peace in South Sudan is possible only ifits political
leaders match their actions to their rhetoric and make the
necessary commitments to following through on their
own agreements. A key component of implementing
the peace agreement is the provision of security in
Juba and creating the conditions to establish the new
Government. Security arrangements must be made
in the open and in coordination with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. We commend regional actors,
particularly the Sudan and Uganda, for their leadership
and commitment in supporting peace in South Sudan.
We are counting on them to uphold the arms embargo
that is preventing the flow of weapons into South
Sudan, which would destabilize the country and the
region. We note the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development's ongoing assessment of the feasibility of
regional support to enhance security in Juba.

We underscore that any decision to reconfigure
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is the
prerogative of the Security Council and must not impact
the impartiality of the Mission or its current mandated
tasks, which are vital to the well-being and safety of
hundreds of thousands of South Sudanese. While the
peace celebration held in Juba on 31 October delivered
to the world images of enthusiasm and joy at the
prospect of peace in South Sudan, what remains first
and foremost in our minds is the reality of the conflict-
induced suffering of the South Sudanese people. The
United States continues to support the people of South
Sudan and their aspirations to freedom, peace and
prosperity. In doing so, we continue to call on the leaders
of South Sudan to stop the violence, match rhetoric
with tangible actions and move swiftly to implement
past agreements and build on a fragile peace.

