The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Austria and Serbia in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the members of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Raskovic-
Ivic (Serbia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Jessen-Petersen to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
2
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/36l, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

As members all know, this is the last meeting of
the Security Council at which Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen will represent UNMIK as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. His work has
been remarkable; he has performed under very delicate
political circumstances with great skill. I therefore take
special pleasure, on behalf of the Security Council, in
thanking Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen for his outstanding
and tireless efforts over the past two years as the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Kosovo.

I now give him the floor.


