Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the Deputy Foreign
Minister of South Africa, Mr. Pahad, upon his
undertaking such a long journey to brief the Council on
developments in the situation in Cote d'Ivoire. China
highly appreciates the mediation efforts undertaken by
President Mbeki on behalf of the African Union (AU)
to expedite a settlement of the Ivorian question. We
look forward to positive outcomes from the meeting to
be held in South Africa at the beginning of April. We
also appreciate the efforts by Mr. Alan Doss, Principal
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and his briefing. We appreciate too the efforts
of the Secretary-General himself and of the United
Nations Operation in cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in this connection.

China has always closely followed developments
in the Ivorian situation and sincerely hopes that cote
d'Ivoire will achieve reunification of north and south
and attain peace and stability as soon as possible. We
are pleased that, thanks to the good offices of President
Mbeki, the Ivorian situation has undergone some
positive changes. The Ivorian Government has taken
necessary measures to ban street violence and establish
an atmosphere conducive to dialogue. We welcome and
appreciate these developments.

However, it must also be noted that the current
political process in C6te d'Ivoire remains at a
stalemate and that the security situation is still volatile.
In order to break that stalemate, the first imperative is
for all Ivorian parties to honour the commitments they
made to President Mbeki during his Visit to Cote
d'Ivoire and advance the peace process in accordance
with the road map endorsed by the AU. Accra III and
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement - the foundation for
a political situation of the Ivorian question - must be
fully implemented. Most important, the Ivorian parties
should remain firm in seeking to solve their disputes
through dialogue. At the same time, the international
community should continue to provide assistance to
Cote d'Ivoire.

Over the past year the Security council adopted
three resolutions on Cote d'Ivoire, which have played a
positive role in maintaining peace and stability in that
country and the subregion. The United Nations should
continue to enhance its coordination and cooperation
with the AU and with ECOWAS and other subregional
organizations, work with President Mbeki in his
mediation efforts on behalf of the AU and support the
AU's leading role.

In principle, China endorses the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the mandate of UNOCI
be extended. China stands ready to study the details
involved, together with other members of the Council.

