Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. On this occasion,
we reiterate our gratitude to him and his team for their
important and tireless work, which is consistently
constructive and thoughtful, to find a solution to the
conflict in Syria and protect civilians.

Peru is closely following developments following
the positive agreement reached between Turkey and the
Russian Federation in September on the establishment
of a demilitarized zone in Idlib. While we welcome
the decrease in violence following this agreement, we
cannot fail to underline the extremely fragile nature
of the current Syrian situation, taking into account
the diversity of actors present in the area and their
opposing positions.

We believe that we are at a critical moment in
which it is essential to act swiftly in the political sphere
and to achieve commitments and concrete progress
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). In the immediate
term, that will require the constructive participation
of the Syrian Government and opposition groups in
the establishment of a constitutional committee, in
accordance with the Sochi declaration. The drafting of
a new constitution is necessary to lay the political and
institutional foundations for sustainable peace in Syria.

We therefore welcome the commitment made in the
Istanbul communique of 27 October to convening the
constitutional committee by the end of this year. We
encourage the parties to maintain a constructive spirit
in the Special Envoy's forthcoming meetings with the
Syrian Government and the countries of the Astana
group, with a view to finding points of convergence on
the specific issue of the composition of the committee's
third list.

Peru reaffirms its commitment to Syria's
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. Without
prejudice to that, we stress that, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, every Government must
exercise its sovereignty in a manner consistent with the
legitimate efforts of the international community to
maintain international peace and security, in particular
when the responsibility to protect millions of people in
grave situations of vulnerability is at stake.

To that end, we emphasize the importance of all
parties engaging constructively in the negotiations,
demonstrating their commitment to the future and unity
of the country, and fostering the confidence required to
advance a process of national reconciliation and build
sustainable peace in Syria. In that regard, efforts should
seek primarily to avoid the further fragmentation of the
country and to achieve its long-term stability, and not
be motivated by the ulterior strategic and geopolitical
considerations that have broadly intensified the conflict
in Syria.

We consider it essential, within the framework
of those efforts, to promote the adoption of
confidence-building measures that would contribute to a
more favourable environment for Syrian reconciliation.
In particular, we expect substantive developments in
the identification of missing persons, the surrender
of mortal remains, and the release of detainees and
missing persons. It is also necessary to address the
serious humanitarian situation of millions of refugees
and internally displaced persons, and to guarantee
the availability of financial resources and, above all,
the political will to allow them a safe and dignified
return under internationally accepted parameters. In
conclusion, I reiterate the importance of establishing a
representative constitutional committee before the end
of the year and continuing to provide all the necessary
support to the efforts being taken by the Special Envoy
to achieve that end.

