I would like to thank our briefers, the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and Ms. Akbar, for their informative briefings and assessments. It is always great to see the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan in the Council. I would also like to extend a particularly warm welcome to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah Lyons in her new job. She is indeed taking up her duties in a particularly crucial year for Afghanistan. As she said, there is coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the challenge it represents to the prospect of the nascent peace talks. There is also the 2020 pledging conference, which will be so crucial. So, we wish her every success and assure her that we will do anything we can to support her in her important job. Let me start with some condolences, because the recent weeks in Afghanistan have been among the most gruesome of the last two decades. The attacks on a maternity ward and on a funeral in May were terribly shocking. We did right to condemn them as a Council. Our thoughts are with the families of the victims. The overall level of violence, with continued Taliban attacks - more than 90 attacks a day - is extremely worrying. The attacks go against the spirit of the 29 February agreement between the Taliban and the United States. Violence must be reduced and eventually end for intra-Afghan negotiations to start. We reiterate that all parties must respect their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and take immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. Recent reports have indicated that Afghanistan is the deadliest conflict for children on the globe. The perpetrators must know that they will be held accountable for their brutal, cynical acts. We also reiterate the importance of a sustainable peace, which can only be achieved through a negotiated and inclusive political settlement, owned and led by the people of Afghanistan, including its women. This will require flexibility on all sides. Any talks and negotiations need to build on what has already been achieved. Women must be equally and meaningfully represented in the negotiation team. We highly appreciate all steps taken to move that process forward, namely the direct talks between the conflict parties to implement the exchange of prisoners and hostages. While some steps have yet to be taken, we welcome the plans to start intra-Afghan negotiations soon. Such an arduous process needs a united international support effort. We need to encourage both sides to take constructive and confidence-building steps. Germany will continue its work to support the process in close cooperation with its partners, including our co-penholder Indonesia, as well as Norway, Uzbekistan and, especially, Qatar. We highly recommend the United Nations take an active role in the process. We commend the important role that the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is playing to coordinate international assistance, particularly during the pandemic, but also to monitor the situation on the ground and engage with conflict parties to bring the peace process forward. The members of the Council should continue to lend their support to this vital Mission. Germany will soon be engaging with all Council members to renew its mandate. Afghanistan is severely affected by the COVID-19 crisis. The official number of 30,000 cases can only be the tip of the iceberg. Ending the violence is of paramount importance. In March, the Security Council urged the conflict parties to heed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We reaffirm that call today. There are also worrying reports about attacks on health facilities and health workers. During the current pandemic, those facilities are even more relevant. They must not be targeted. Afghanistan needs continued and reliable international assistance to address the immediate humanitarian needs and the long-term economic and social challenges. We highly appreciate the coordinating role of United Nations organizations, through which we channel most of our immediate aid to fight the pandemic in Afghanistan. For effective implementation, the close cooperation of the Government of Afghanistan with the United Nations and other international agencies is paramount. We urge all sides to cooperate with the relevant United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders in the COVID-19 response. The 2020 Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, co-hosted by Finland and Afghanistan, is a milestone for the continuous support to the country. Continued funding is vital if we want to minimize the risk of jeopardizing the progress achieved over the past 19 years. Such a commitment will be based on the joint understanding that Afghanistan will continue on the path of reforms.
