The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council recalls its presidential
statements of 3 August 2011 and 21 March 2012
and its press statement of 1 March 2012.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, and to the
purposes and principles of the Charter.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the 2 April 2012 briefing of the
Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, Kofi Annan. The Security
Council notes that the Syrian Government
committed on 25 March 2012 to implement the
Envoy's six-point proposal.

"The Security Council calls upon the Syrian
Government to implement urgently and visibly its
commitments, as it agreed to do in its
communication to the Envoy of 1 April, to
(a) cease troop movements towards population
centres; (b) cease all use of heavy weapons in
such centres; and (c) begin pullback of military
concentrations in and around population centres,
and to fulfil these in their entirety by no later than
10 April 2012.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties,
including the opposition, to cease armed violence
in all its forms within 48 hours of the
implementation in their entirety by the Syrian
Government of measures (a), (b) and (0) above.
The Security Council further calls upon the
opposition to engage with the Envoy in this
regard.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of an effective and credible United
Nations supervision mechanism in Syria to
monitor a cessation of armed violence in all its
forms by all parties and relevant aspects of the
Envoy's six-point proposal. The Security Council
requests the Secretary-General to provide
proposals for such a mechanism as soon as
appropriate, after consultations with the
Government of Syria. The Security Council
stands ready to consider these proposals and to
authorize an effective and impartial supervision
mechanism upon implementation of a cessation
of armed violence in all its forms by all parties.

"The Security Council underscores the
central importance of a peaceful political
settlement to the Syrian crisis and reiterates its
call for the urgent, comprehensive and immediate
implementation of all aspects of the Envoy's six-
point proposal. The Security Council reiterates its
full support for the Envoy's six-point proposal
aimed at bringing an immediate end to all
violence and human rights violations, securing
humanitarian access and facilitating a Syrian-led
political transition leading to a democratic, plural
political system, in which citizens are equal
regardless of their affiliations, ethnicities or
beliefs, including through commencing a
comprehensive political dialogue between the
Syrian Government and the whole spectrum of
the Syrian opposition.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the Syrian authorities to allow immediate, full and
unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to all
populations in need of assistance, in accordance
with international law and guiding principles of
humanitarian assistance. The Security Council
calls upon all parties in Syria, in particular the
Syrian authorities, to cooperate fully with the
United Nations and relevant humanitarian
organizations to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance. To this end, the Security
Council calls on all parties to immediately
implement a daily-two hour humanitarian pause,
as called for in the Envoy's six-point proposal.

"The Security Council requests the Envoy
to update the Council on the cessation of violence
in accordance with the above timeline, and on
progress towards implementation of his six-point
proposal in its entirety. In the light of these
reports, the Security Council will consider further
steps as appropriate."
12-28494
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/ 10.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.55 a.m.
