Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I will not comment on what has been said by
the colleague who just took the floor; I will, however,
comment on similar statements. Despite the fact that
the crisis in my country has entered its fifth year, the
minarets of mosques and bells of churches still call out
for peace and love in the cradle of civilizations and
religions that is Syria.

The former director of the Louvre museum, Andre'
Parrot, called Syria the homeland of civilized men.
For thousands of years Syria has woven, on its pure
soil, a diverse social fabric threaded through with
love, mutual respect, brotherhood and coexistence in
a manner unparalleled in human history. The main
objective of the plot against Syria is to tear that fabric
and divide the country into city states and entities
that can then be devoured by the viruses of ethnic and
sectarian affiliations. That fabric, with all the warp and
woof of its national character, has thwarted all such
designs against Syria, although the terrorists, who have
no principles, spare no effort to undermine the country.
This is terrorism of an unprecedented nature, which has
emerged and thrives with the help of certain Member
States, some of which are members of the Security
Council. Those States are known by all. They take
pride in publicly training, arming and financing the
armed terrorist groups, be they Daesh, the Nusra Front,
the Jihadis of the Free Army or the so-called armed
moderate opposition.

The crisis has once again proven that there are no
minorities in Syria, but rather national and socially
coherent segments who oppose anyone who targets
them. They refuse to be tampered with, whatever
their names, their minority affiliation or the divisive
denomination they belonged to prior to the formation of
the modern State. Some try to distort the tolerant image
of Islam through brutal terrorist organizations such
as Daesh or seek to create imaginary fronts. The only
purpose of such acts is to buttress Israel's objective of
establishing a racially distinct State for the Jews on
Palestinian land. Those ethnicities lived in peace for
decades, even centuries, jointly facing their common
enemies.

Whoever is keen, in deed and not simply in words,
to protect those segments of Syrian society must first
and foremost deal with the root causes ofthe problem of
the terrorism that has been targeting all Syrians for over
four years now. That must be done through the serious
implementation of all Council resolutions on combating
terrorism, in particular resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178
(2014) and 2199 (2015). It is not possible for some States
to continue to hold meetings and deliver statements
about protecting certain segments of society in Syria,
Egypt and other countries while they simultaneously
support those who engage in terrorism. Those who
continue to finance, arm and train the terrorists are
their partners and are thus responsible for the suffering
of the Syrian people. They cannot be part of any effort

to alleviate our suffering as long as they continue such
practices.

In addition to trying to contain the terrorists'
activities, we must combat and eliminate radical
thinking in the region, in particular the Wahhabi
Takfiri thinking. There are specific Governments, in
particular those of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey,
who sponsor and propagate that lethal, cancerous
thinking. They attempt to export that exclusionist
thinking, which is alien to our tolerant society. Anyone
who thinks that Daesh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other
terrorist organizations emerged out of the blue is
blind. There have been precursors to that emergence,
in particular Zionism, ignorant fatwas and the radical
educational curricula that are employed to carry out
their sinister political agenda in Syria and other States.
That runs counter to international law, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the most basic values
of civilization and humankind. In addition, we should
not allow those terrorist organizations to transmit their
poisonous rhetoric and recruit people through social
networks. That option could be denied them, provided
those supporting terrorism have the moral will to do so.

In conclusion, I would like to comment on the
content of some statements by permanent members of
the Council. It seems difficult for them to understand
the situation, let alone distinguish between the terrorism
that they themselves are supporting with a View to
undermining legitimate Governments, on the one hand,
and the gargantuan efforts deployed by those legitimate
Governments, including my country's Government, to
protect the people from their own Arab Spring and their
own terrorism, on the other.

I would like to draw the attention of Member States
to the fact that the so-called moderate armed opposition,
which was trained in Israel and Jordan, invaded Bosra
al-Sham, the historic Roman World Heritage Site, and
targeted one of the segments of the Syrian people, as
has happened in other parts of Syria and Iraq. That is
glaring proof that Daesh and the Nusra Front are allied
with Israel and its partners inside and outside the region.

