Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I should like at the outset to thank the Secretary-
General for his report as well as Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen for his supplementary briefing. We wish to
express our regret at Mr. Jessen-Petersen's upcoming
resignation. Over the past two years, he has made an
outstanding contribution to the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). China would like to express its appreciation
for all his efforts.

We welcome also the presence of Ms. Sanda
Raskovie-Ivic', President of the Coordination Centre for
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and
the important statement she made.

In recent years, Kosovo and the Balkan region
have undergone a series of political changes and are at
a critical and historic juncture. China has always
followed very closely the situation in the region, and
we hope that the situation in Kosovo will remain stable
and that new uncertainties will not arise in the Balkan
region.

We have noted that, thanks to the concerted
efforts of UNMIK and of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, considerable progress has been made
in the implementation of standards. However, many
challenges still remain in the economic, social and
cultural fields and with respect to the problem of
refugees.

The progress achieved in standards
implementation will serve as a basis for the future
status of Kosovo. It reflects the need to build a
harmonious society in Kosovo in which all ethnic
groups can coexist.

We welcome the will expressed by the
Provisional Institutions and their leadership to
implement the standards, and we hope that
thoroughgoing efforts will be made and progress
achieved. Members of the ethnic majority in Kosovo
should assume primary responsibility for creating a
social climate marked by security and tolerance; all
others should cooperate with them in a positive
manner.

The process to determine the status of Kosovo
began last year. Since then, with the good offices and
coordination of Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the future status process for
Kosovo, the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo have
held many rounds of direct negotiations and have
reached some consensus. China welcomes the
continuation of such dialogue, which can help enhance
mutual understanding and the search for common
ground and can move the question of Kosovo onto a
positive track. China supports all efforts to find a
sustainable solution acceptable to both parties, through
peaceful negotiations. The question of Kosovo is rife
with very specific characteristics and complexities, and
the international community should demonstrate great
resolve and patience with respect to its resolution.

China has always respected the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the countries in the Balkan
region. We have consistently held that an appropriate
comprehensive resolution of the question of Kosovo
should be based on the provisions of Security Council
resolutions and that all the standards should be
implemented. Both parties should be encouraged and
assisted to reach compromise through a process of
consultation. In a sincere and pragmatic spirit, all the
parties concerned should promote the political process
in Kosovo. Only with the attainment of economic
development, social stability and ethnic harmony in
Kosovo can the question of Kosovo be resolved
satisfactorily.

