Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to extend my congratulations to the Ambassador of the Russian Federation on his assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We wish him and his friendly delegation every success. We also wish everyone good health and safety. The Government of Yemen, under the leadership of His Excellency President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, continues to work towards ending the war imposed on the Yemeni people by Houthi militias since 2014. The main task for the Government and the people of Yemen is to achieve fair, lasting and sustainable peace based on the terms of reference for a political solution, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular resolution 2216 (2015). Peace is an irreversible option, but it will materialize only through ending the coup and restoring the institutions of the State, which looks after the interests of all its citizens. In order to achieve that sublime goal, the Government has spared no effort to provide support for the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and has engaged positively with all options for peace. Recently, the Government of Yemen displayed additional flexibility and made further compromises to respond positively to all calls and suggestions aimed at achieving progress in the comprehensive peace process, including the draft joint declaration. Unfortunately, however, as always, the Houthis have continued to come up with new conditions and preconditions. The Government of Yemen welcomes the Secretary- General's call for a ceasefire and has unilaterally observed one, so as to provide an opportunity for Mr. Griffiths' efforts to arrive at a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire and resume the political process. We have extended our hand and shown all possible flexibility in dealing with peace options. We have made many compromises, for we want to save our war- and disaster-ravaged country - our humane and historic civilization. Our hand is still extended for peace. However, unfortunately, it is met only with impertinence and intransigence by the MHouthi militias towards all agreements and understandings, as always. This is in addition to the obstacles they create and their insistence on subversion and taking advantage of the suffering of the Yemeni people and blackmailing the international community. All of that has amplified the suffering of the Yemeni people. The intransigence of the Houthi militias is evident in the absurdity whereby the economic issue is manipulated and the national currency is undermined. Added to that is the stealing of civil servant's salaries, the weaponization of humanitarian assistance, the blackmailing of the international community through the FSO SAFER tanker issue and military escalation in densely populated cities, in addition to disrupting agreements and seizing resources. The Houthi militias do not believe in peace or dialogue. Why do I say that? Because we have experiences with these militias. There was a political process in Yemen. The was a transition period in Yemen in 2011. There was the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism. The Houthis participated in the Comprehensive National Dialogue. Unfortunately, however, they took advantage of the peaceful atmosphere to mobilize and take control of several areas, including Sana'a, thereby actually rebelling against the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and the aspirations of the Yemeni people. President Hadi and all the political segments of Yemeni political society tried as much as possible to salvage the political process and the transition period, spare Yemeni blood and avoid plunging Yemen into war, as is the case now. As all members are aware, the partnership and peace agreement was signed, and the Houthis participated in the Government. However, they controlled all Government institutions because they are armed - they never gave their weapons - and they rebelled against the Government, putting the President under house arrest. They continued war and escalation. They are the cause of all of the suffering of the Yemeni people today. The Houthi militias did not stop with those violations. They continue to tear apart social cohesion along abhorrent sectarian and ethnic lines. They disrupt State institutions and target the education sector. The Yemeni Government upholds the Stockholm Agreement and has responded positively to all calls and initiatives throughout the past five years, so as to achieve peace and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. However, the results on the ground since the Stockholm Agreement clearly point to the indifference of the Houthis to the implementation of the agreement. They are even indifferent to the timelines and deadlines of the agreement, so much so that it became meaningless. They continue to pursue military escalation in the Al-Durayhimi district of Al-Hudaydah, and prior to that in Ma'rib, Al-Jawf and Taiz. They work to pre-empt this agreement, and in particular Al-Hudaydah agreement. They continue to violate the ceasefire. They use Al-Hudaydah as a platform to launch rockets and booby-trapped drones against civilian neighborhouds. They launch barbaric attacks against public and private economic institutions, lay mines, target shipping routes, smuggle weapons and steel humanitarian aid. All of this is taking place in flagrant violation of the Stockholm Agreement. The recent shelling by the Houthis of an economic or industrial complex in Al-Hudaydah, and the resulting aggravation of the humanitarian crisis, are yet further evidence of the disregard of the Houthi militias for the lives and livelihoods of the Yemeni people. They also obstruct the work of the United Nations Mission in Support of the Hodeida Agreement. For that reason, we again call for relocating the Mission to an area not under the control of the Houthis. Under the guidance of His Excellency President Abdrabbuh Mansur Hadi, and with the support of our Saudi brethren, the Yemeni Government has made strides in the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, which aims at achieving stability and restoring State institutions, as well as unifying national efforts to put an end to the militias' coup and the Iranian project in Yemen and the region. From the very outset, the Yemeni Government has been quite willing to provide all the necessary support for the implementation of the agreement, for we believe in the importance of concerted efforts towards reconstruction and development under the authority of the State. The consultations carried out by the interim Head of Government, Mr. Maeen Abdulmalek, with the various political stakeholders have resulted in progress towards forming a new Government that will uphold - not undermine - national values, foremost among which are the unity, stability and territorial integrity of Yemen, along with a focus on providing basic services, safeguarding the national currency and implementing the necessary reforms for the functioning of State institutions. We have incurred great economic losses due to the coup by the Houthi militias. It has hampered the development process and reversed decades of gains, destroyed the private sector, causing the worst humanitarian crisis, and pushed millions of Yemenis to the brink of famine and poverty. It has also created the largest wave of internal and external displacement, the likes of which Yemen has not seen in its modern history. The outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic has aggravated the humanitarian crisis and put further pressure on the health sector, which was already vulnerable and lacking the resources to address the pandemic. Notwithstanding the efforts by the Government to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people, the challengesremain enormous. We call on the international community to support the Government's efforts to address the economic and development challenges and bolster the national currency in order to stabilize livelihoods. The Government of Yemen stresses its commitment to the implementation of the agreement recently concluded in Switzerland and to release the first group of prisoners and detainees. We believe in the importance of releasing all prisoners, detainees, forcibly disappeared persons and those under house arrest, including the four covered by Security Council resolutions. The Government emphasizes the principle of all for all under the Stockholm Agreement, given the humanitarian importance of the matter. We call upon the Special Envoy, the International Committee of the Red Cross and all international mediators to uphold the Stockholm Agreement and hasten its implemention. The subversive acts and piracy of the Houthi militias and their use of the FSO SAFER oil tanker as a ticking time bomb threaten both Yemen and the region. The Houthis have repeatedly denied the United Nations team access to the tanker to assess its condition and carry out initial repairs and offload its contents in order to avert an environmental, economic and humanitarian catastrophe in the Red Sea and the region. That is further egregious defiance of the international community and the Security Council's determination to avoid an impending catastrophe, one that draws closer with each passing day. We reiterate our call on the Council to shoulder its responsibility and adopt a strict position in order to spare Yemen and the region a catastrophe whose effects could last for decades. The Council should exercise pressure on the Houthis, who continue to procrastinate and to manipulate the situation to use this issue for political blackmail. In response to what my friend the representative of Germany said, I would reiterate that the Government of Yemen is a Government of all Yemenis. The Government spares no effort, within the available resources, to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people throughout all governorates - _ without discrimination - including those controlled by Houthi militias. The Government provides all the facilities necessary for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need throughout Yemen. Unfortunately, it is the Houthis who are obstructing and withholding aid in the areas they control. They also misuse oil products to sell on the black market. They are pillaging port revenues to finance their futile war and for personal gain. They are trying to create shortages of fuel products in the areas they control. They are also depriving civil servants of their salaries and causing food prices to soar. We reiterate that we in the Government stand ready to take all the measures necessary to provide unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance and alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people. In conclusion, our great people look forward to an end to this unjust war, the alleviation of the people's suffering and the achievement of fair, equitable, comprehensive and sustainable peace, which they well deserve, and which is enshrined in all regional and international terms of reference.
