The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.

I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing. What we
know about the humanitarian crisis in Yemen is
horrifying, but truthfully what is even scarier is what
we do not know. Recently, journalists visited a remote
village in northern Yemen. They found families wasting
away, surviving - if you can call it that - on a diet
of sour green paste made of leaves from a local plant.
One mother of a seven-month-old was so malnourished
that she often could not feed her baby, and she had no
other means. She told the journalists, "Since the day
she was born, I have not had the money to buy her
milk or buy her medicine". The pictures of the village's
starving babies captured by the journalists are almost
too much to take. These kids were wasting away off
the grid. Their parents cannot even afford the cost of
transporting their kids to clinics for help.

Families in Yemen rely on outside aid to survive.
Yet the needs are so vast and the obstacles so tough that
it is hard to figure out who needs help and actually get
it there. That is despite the best efforts of so many brave
aid workers, who struggle to deal with officials on the
ground blocking access and interfering with relief
efforts. In the end, we may never know how many kids
are dying in these remote villages. Parents rarely report
their deaths and they never get counted in the already
dire statistics of the United Nations.
Stories like those are overwhelming, but the
Security Council is not helpless in the face ofthis crisis.
There are things that the international community can
do to help these starving children and their mothers.
We just have to have the will to do them. The last time
the Council met on Yemen (see S/PV.8348), we all
urged the parties to de-escalate and go back to talks.
But as we heard today, the opposite has happened. So
the United States calls on all parties to take precautions
to protect the grain mills and food storage facilities
around Al-Hudaydah. Yemen cannot afford any more
close calls with fighting around these warehouses.
Fighters must not enter United Nations facilities, which
must be protected from attack.

This is not rocket science. The minimum that the
Security Council can demand of the fighters from
all sides is to allow humanitarian relief to reach the
starving people of Yemen. Recent fighting is making
the main road from the port much harder to use and the
parties should work with the United Nations to get aid
moving around without interference. Finally, the parties
must avoid moving ahead with any new restrictions
on imports of foods, fuel and other lifesaving goods
bound for Yemen. Those are things that the parties can
do immediately.

In the longer term, everyone around the table today
knows what must be done. All of us support the efforts
of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths to find ways to
reduce the Violence and return to talks. The tragedy that
is building in Yemen is almost beyond comprehension,
but we are not helpless in the face of it. Everyone - the
Security Council, the warring parties in Yemen and
their partners - should be focused on negotiating an
end to this war, not making the suffering of Yemeni
children worse.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

