First of all, I would like to thank the Special Adviser of the Investigative Team established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017), Mr. Karim Khan, for his briefing and commend all the work conducted in recent months under difficult circumstances. I also welcome the presence of the Iraqi Ambassador, which is a sign that the international community and Iraq work hand in hand to fight impunity, in response to Iraq's request to the Council. I would like to begin by reviewing the progress made by the Team over the past few months. As we can see, the Investigative Team is fully capable of conducting the task entrusted to it by the Council in resolution 2379 (2017) - to collect, preserve and store evidence in Iraq of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide committed by Da'esh in Iraq. As stated by the Special Adviser, despite the Team having to work under the difficult circumstances caused by the health crisis, interviews with witnesses and survivors continued via video-teleconference. And, thanks to digital technology, secure tools, such as the platform allowing witnesses and survivors to submit information remotely, were developed, which is a positive step forward. The continued digitization of evidence is equally crucial. Lastly, it is also important that work on the exhumation of mass graves, in particular at the sites mentioned, be able to continue, following the suspension of activities at the beginning of the year due to the coronavirus disease. The analysis on mass graves is essential in order to shed full light on the facts and hold accountable those responsible - before Iraqi courts or in third countries. France will continue to support these efforts to enable victims to obtain justice, while being protected. We also welcome the important and good cooperation between the Investigative Team and the Iraqi authorities, in particular the Iraqi judicial authorities. The dialogue initiated with the Iraqi authorities is very positive. We hope that it will enrich the Team's database. Progress on national legislation to enable the prosecution of members of Da'esh suspected of committing international crimes is essential and demonstrates the commitment of the Iraqi authorities. The ultimate goal is the use of evidence in trials involving the members of Da'esh, in accordance with United Nations principles and best practices. In this respect, it is important to recall the consistent position of the United Nations regarding the non-transmission of evidence in judicial proceedings that could result in the death penalty, regardless of locale. Cooperation is also crucial with the relevant United Nations mechanisms, in particular the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, which has an important expanded mandate to strengthen the rule of law and the protection of human rights. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that France remains fully committed, alongside Iraqis, in the fight against Da'esh in all its aspects, including within the global coalition against Da'esh. The fight against the impunity of all perpetrators of crimes must be fully integrated into efforts to stabilize, rebuild and reconcile all components of Iraqi society, which are the key to preventing any resurgence of Da'esh. The creation of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)-Non-Governmental Organization dialogue forum, which allows for the involvement of all communities, is essential in this regard. The Council must remain mobilized to prevent the resurgence of Da'esh in all its forms, by continuing its support for the efforts of the Iraqi authorities to meet these challenges and by helping UNITAD to make its work sustainable.
