Ms. Marsudi (Indonesia): First of all,
congratulations, Sir, on your able presidency of the
Security Council. Iwish to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his briefing. I also wish to warmly congratulate
Palestine for assuming the chairmanship of the Group
of 77. It shows the international community's vote of
confidence in Palestine.

My presence here today is intentional. It is to show
Indonesia's consistent support for the Palestinian cause.
It is a natural and legal right of Palestine to be a full
Member of the United Nations. The road to Palestine's
membership has been, and will remain, bumpy.
Everybody knows that. But I am sure that bumpy road
will not stop Palestine and the international community
from fulfilling that right. Palestine deserves the
Council's full attention. The Palestinian question
defines the credibility of the Council. In that context, I
wish to underline three main points.

First, all sides must comply with international law
and the relevant resolutions, in particular 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016), as a matter of urgency. Continued
violence and the violation of international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions reduce the Council's
credibility. That must be stopped and credibility must
be restored. Compliance with international law also
includes refraining from provocative actions or rhetoric.
Two days ago, the Israeli media circulated news of the
planned closure of schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) in East Jerusalem next year.
I truly hope that such news is a hoax. If not, it amounts
to provocative action as well as a violation of Israel's
responsibilities under various international agreements.
Furthermore, we reject the continued expansion of
illegal settlements. It is provocative, not to mention
morally and legally wrong. Palestinian families are
driven unjustly from their homes. It has to end.

Secondly, the peace process requires legitimacy,
and legitimacy comes when the process is under
the guidance of a multilateral mechanism based on
internationally agreed parameters. Any peace plans
that fail to accommodate such parameters will not
succeed. What we are witnessing now is disturbing, as
agreed parameters have been undermined, including
the attempts to move away from the two-State solution.
Let me reiterate loud and clear: the two-State solution is
the only option for solving the Palestinian issue. Unity
and reconciliation are also of paramount importance.
Therefore, I commend Ambassador Riyadh Mansour
for his statement on Palestine's determination to pursue
unity and reconciliation. Moreover, we commend
countries that have upheld principled positions in line
with many United Nations resolutions, including on the
status of Jerusalem.

Thirdly, humanitarian collapse, especially in Gaza,
must be stopped. The 11-year blockade is unjust. It
does not contribute to solving the problem and must
be lifted. We appreciate those who have provided
generous contributions to fill the UNRWA budget
deficit and improve conditions in Gaza. Indonesia, too,
has significantly increased its contribution to UNRWA,
and we will step up our humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people. Let me emphasize that UNRWA has
a humanitarian mandate and is not a political agency.
The plight of5.4 million Palestinian refugees is at stake.

With regard to Syria and Yemen, continued efforts
towards peaceful and inclusive political solutions
must be further encouraged. Syria has seen more than
a decade of suffering. We condemn the recent series
of bombings that led to a number of casualties. We
therefore welcome the latest efforts towards advancing
a credible political process. We call on all parties to
ensure the success of that Syrian-led, Syrian-owned
United Nations-facilitated process, which would lead
to a concrete pathway to peace.

Regarding Yemen, Indonesia welcomes the
various United Nations-led processes, including the
establishment of the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement. The Mission is a critical step
towards establishing peace and facilitating humanitarian
access. Indonesia stands ready to contribute.

With respect to Lebanon, we pay tribute to the
excellent work of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in keeping peace. We are honoured
that 1,308 Indonesian peacekeepers, 45 of whom are
women, are part of UNIFIL.

Finally, any violence and disproportionate use of
force against civilians by anyone, anywhere, must be
rejected. All parties must exercise maximum restraint
and continue working in good faith to move the
peace process forward. I underline that the spirit of
multilateralism must be revived.

