Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Zerihoun for
his briefing this morning.

A single statistic suffices to explain the timeliness
of this debate: more than 20 per cent of maritime crime
takes place in the Gulf of Guinea - in all its guises,
from piracy and armed robbery to all forms of illegal
trafficking. In addition, from last year to the first few
months of this year, we have witnessed an increase in
attacks in that maritime zone. In 2015 there were 48
attacks and 33 boardings, and thus far in 2016 there
have been 30 attacks, 73 per cent of which took place
just off the coast of Nigeria. Those figures, however,
are just the tip of the iceberg because it is believed that
only half of such incidents are actually reported.

The amount of maritime traffic in that area means
that this poses a serious threat not just for Africa but
also for global security. The Security Council grasped
that point in its resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012).
Off the back of those two resolutions, in 2013 the
Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea took place
in Yaounde, which laid the foundation for a maritime
security architecture in the Gulf of Guinea. The
Yaounde Summit also recognized that the main players
in that architecture needed to be not just the signatory
States, but also the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.

The Yaounde process, as the development of the
agreements at the Yaounde Summit is known, has the
support of the international community as a whole,
including of the United Nations, the European Union
and the Group of Seven Plus Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea. The participation of Spain in those three
forums is ongoing and very active. It is complemented
by intensive bilateral activity with neighbouring
countries on maritime safety. We work with them
closely in providing training, capacity-building and
police and customs cooperation, among other things.
The Spanish support is the result notjust of our physical
and historical proximity to the region, but to a firm
commitment to peace, security and development in the
African continent, as expressed by His Majesty King
Felipe in January 2015 in Addis Ababa when addressing
the annual session of the African Union.

Despite the initial vigour in the direct aftermath of
the Yaounde Summit and the international mobilization
that accompanied it, the truth is that much needs to
be done, as is proved by the annual figures on the
number of incidents of maritime crime. It is essential
that cooperation among the countries of the region
and among interregional organizations run more
smoothly. Similarly, the principle of ownership is not
yet fully assumed by many of the coastal States, and
the differences among their legal systems means that
legal and police cooperation is further hampered.
With regard to the valuable concept of ownership, we
should commend such inititives as the conference on
maritime safety and energy that took place in Luanda
in October 2015. The Luanda Declaration reiterates
the important need for a comprehensive and integrated
African maritime security strategy and the need to
prioritize partnerships in Africa that promote regional
organizations.

Apart from the issue of ownership, Spain is also
a supporter of a global approach. That means not just
clamping down on attacks committed at sea, but also
working to prevent them while addressing the root
causes thereof, such as endemic poverty and insecurity.
There is no problem at sea that does not have its root
cause on dry land. For that reason, we believe that
today's debate is extremely timely, as it gives us an
important opportunity as the Security Council to send
a clear message and signal of support to the African
Union initiative to hold an Extraordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government on maritime security
next October.

Finally, Spain aligns itself with the statement that
the observer of the European Union will deliver later.

