Ms. L¢j (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries of the
European Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.

Until a few days ago, six weeks had gone by
without Israeli civilian casualties inside Green Line
Israel. This period of calm was shattered by renewed
acts of terror. The European Union condemns
unreservedly the suicide bombing attacks in Umm el-
Fahm and Tel Aviv, in which six Israelis were killed
and many more injured.

Likewise, our hearts go out to the Palestinian
children - and to their parents - who suffered a
bomb attack in the schoolyard of Zeif Yatta elementary
school in Hebron. Deliberately targeting children in
their schools is a particularly odious act.

The European Union deplores the fact that
civilians on both sides continue to suffer from
violence: horror and terror for ordinary people in the
streets of Israel, and the brutality of occupation for the
ordinary people in the Palestinian territories.

The European Union is deeply concerned by the
deployment of Israeli tanks in Ramallah and in the
north of the Gaza Strip, and by the Israeli Defence
Forces (IDF) shelling and destruction of Chairman
Arafat's headquarters. Restricting the freedom of
movement of the Palestinian leadership does not
contribute to fighting terror, to Israel's legitimate
security concerns, or to the necessary process of
Palestinian reforms supported by the international
community, including, not least, the Quartet. Israel
must stop the occupation of Chairman Arafat's
headquarters, and Chairman Arafat must do his utmost
to stop the terror.

These events take place at a time when there had
been some hope that resumed contacts between the
parties could restart the political process. The European
Union strongly calls on both sides to show their
commitment to peace by acting with maximum
restraint. Force cannot defeat force.

The European Union has therefore welcomed the
promise by Fatah that it will prevent any attacks
against Israeli civilians and the fact that it has called on
other Palestinian groups to do likewise. We strongly
reiterate that call. The terrorists must not be allowed to
derail the aspirations of the many who support peace in
the Middle East.
The European Union recalls the recent statement
by the Middle East Quartet, at its meeting on 17
September in New York, in which the violence and
terror in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was deplored
and condemned, and in which the expectations of the
international community with respect to the return to
the path of peace in the conflict were laid out.

The European Union once again confirms its
strong will to stand by those who seek permanent peace
and security. We will continue to work relentlessly with
the regional parties and within the Middle East Quartet
towards that goal.

