Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me say up front that the concerns of the United States
about the Rome Statute and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) are well known and have not changed. In
spite of those concerns, we very much appreciate the
report of Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo with respect to
his work pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

The United States has consistently supported
bringing to justice those responsible for crimes, human
rights violations and atrocities in Darfur. The violence
in Darfur must end. Those who have committed
atrocities in Darfur must be brought to account.

We share the Prosecutor's assessments that the
ongoing situation in Darfur is alarming and that justice
for crimes against the people of Darfur is needed to
enhance security and send a warning to individuals
who might resort to criminality as a way of achieving
their aims.

The United States is particularly troubled by the
Prosecutor's report that the Government of the Sudan
is still not cooperating and has taken no steps to arrest
and surrender the two individuals that are subject to
ICC arrest warrants, namely, Ahmad Muhammad
Harun, current Minister of State for Humanitarian
Affairs, and the Janjaweed leader known as Ali
Kushayb. We call on the Sudanese Government to
cooperate fully with the ICC, as required by resolution
1593 (2005).

As we noted following the Prosecutor's last
briefing to the Council on Darfur, the United States has
imposed targeted economic sanctions against certain
individuals responsible for the violence, a transport
company that has moved weapons to the Janjaweed
militia and Government forces, and companies owned
or controlled by the Government of the Sudan.

We also share the Prosecutor's concern about the
increasing number of attacks, not only on displaced
persons and other innocent civilians but also on
personnel of the African Union and the United Nations
and international aid workers. Violence and criminality
against those who came to help the suffering people of
Darfur are intolerable. Impunity for such acts must
end.

The United States continues to be deeply
committed to peace, stability and the provision of
humanitarian aid for the people of the Sudan.
Presidential Special Envoy Natsios and Deputy
Secretary Negroponte have both visited the Sudan the
past year to consult with all parties to stress our
continued support for the Darfur Peace Agreement and
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur as mandated by resolution
1769 (2007). We also continue to urge those who have
not signed the Darfur Peace Agreement or agreed to
participate in the peace process led jointly by the
United Nations and the African Union to do so quickly,
so that efforts to rebuild Darfur may accelerate.

The United States believes strongly in the need
for accountability for acts of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed in Darfur. We look
forward to continuing to work with other members of
the Council on constructive steps to achieve that
important objective.

