Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his briefing this morning, and I
welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Mr. Duale, in today's
Council meeting.

One of the many negative consequences of the
conflict in Somalia and of the absence of strong
institutions in the country is piracy. It started around
the coast of Somalia, but it has now expanded further
out, to international waters. Piracy is negatively
impacting international trade and tourism, fuelling the
illegal arms trade and the financing of insurgents and
terrorism in Somalia and beyond.

Given the disruptive nature of piracy, it is only
fitting that the international community responds to the
problem appropriately. In that regard we support
multinational and regional efforts aimed at combating
and suppressing piracy and armed robbery at sea.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2009/590)
outlines the measures in place or being put in place and
those proposed to address the problem of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. The deployment of naval assets,
including those under the European Union's Operation
Atalanta, NATO's maritime forces, the United States-
led Combined Maritime Forces and those of individual
States, have all contributed to checking the incidences
of piracy in the coastal region neighbouring Somalia,
thus affording some level of protection for
international trade and delivery of humanitarian
supplies to Somalia. Furthermore, the creation of the
Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia to
help coordinate the various efforts is a notable
contribution in the fight against piracy.

Commendable as these efforts may be, the
struggle against piracy will be won not on the high seas
but on land, in Somalia. The amount of resources that
have been deployed either directly on the high seas or
indirectly through targeting off-shore solutions to the
problem of piracy is enormous and must be running in
billions of dollars each year. Yet, much as the
incidences have been checked, piracy persists and will
persist for as long as the instability on mainland
Somalia remains and State institutions remain fragile.

As outlined in Secretary-General's report, there is
a big difference between, on the one hand, the robust
and concrete responses by States acting either
individually or in cooperation with others in deploying
resources at sea and, on the other, the cautious and
incremental stance by the international community
when it comes to addressing the root causes of piracy
on mainland Somalia.

While we support the measures that have been
deployed at sea by Member States to deal effectively
with the problem of piracy, equally robust measures
should be put in place on mainland Somalia, backed by
similar, or more, resources. Such measures should
include enhancing support to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to enable the force to
effectively implement its mandate and providing it
with additional personnel so that it reaches its
authorized capacity of 8,000 troops in preparation for
its eventual re-hatting. Equally, it is imperative that the
Transitional Federal Government be sufficiently
supported to strengthen State institutions, particularly
in the security sector. Strengthening State institutions is
the most effective durable way of combating piracy in
the waters off Somalia.

Lastly, we thank the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Ould Abdallah, and the staff of
United Nations agencies and the humanitarian agencies
for the support extended to the Somali people in
difficult circumstances.
