Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, I wish to thank
you, Mr. Minister, for organizing this debate on such a
vital issue. It is an honour to have you among us today
in the Security Council. Thank you for the very well-
focused concept paper, which by itself highlights the
centrality of this issue. We welcome you. We are
always very pleased to have the Secretary-General
among us. We like to think that he is one of us.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Portugal on behalf of
the European Union (EU). I shall limit myself to some
supplementary remarks.
07-58364

Italy attaches the greatest importance to the role
in the maintenance of international peace and security
assumed by regional and subregional organizations. We
look with favour to the definition of more-incisive
modalities to deepen their cooperation with the United
Nations, and thus we welcome your initiative,
Mr. President. We also welcome the initiatives that the
Secretary-General referred to earlier.

Regional organizations should be involved in
every stage of peacekeeping, from preventive
diplomacy to troop deployment and peacebuilding
activities in a broad sense, from disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration to security sector
reform and consolidation of rule of law. This is because
they are the main stakeholders in their respective
geographic areas. Regional organizations, as
Ambassador Khalilzad has already said, actually know
local realities better and have direct interests in the
solution of crises that risk having negative
repercussions on the region. Here, I would like to
highlight the point I have already made, that regional
organizations should be involved from the beginning of
the process - not just arrive when things have already
been prejudged, in a sense.

While the United Nations continues to bear the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the multiform and
interconnected nature of threats and challenges
requires that the international community take a global,
collective and multilateral approach. The new
missions, which often combine more and more civilian
and military dimensions, involve complex tasks. The
Chad operation is just one example of how these
multidimensional operations now constitute the new
pattern for new needs. Activities range from
peacekeeping to monitoring the implementation of
peace processes, military consultants and assistants,
police work, monitoring the borders, the rule of law
and the defence of human rights. An effective response
thus assumes action in which all the international
subjects, starting with the regional and subregional
organizations, are as united and coordinated as possible
and able to offer added value.

Italy, which promoted the European security
strategy during its 2003 EU presidency, looks with
favour on the strengthening of cooperation between the
EU and the United Nations based on the joint
declaration of June 2007, which follows on and
updates the one adopted under the Italian presidency in
07-58364
September 2003. The operations that the EU conducted
in the Balkans under a Security Council mandate and
its experience with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have been useful testing grounds.

It is time to focus on the implementation of these
strategic decisions. The mission in the Central African
Republic and in Chad is a new example of the way the
EU assumed the responsibility towards the United
Nations and enhances a strong and focused cooperation
with the African Union. We are working along these
lines to strengthen coordination mechanisms between
EU member States on the Security Council to
undertake more effective action by the EU.

The Peacebuilding Commission is a body that
brings together, in country-specific meetings, all the
significant actors in a specific country, including the
regional and subregional organizations. The
Peacebuilding Commission therefore represents a
model for interaction between the United Nations
system and regional and subregional organizations,
whose potential has to be exploited to the maximum
for the promotion of integrated peacebuilding
strategies. There are enormous potentialities in that
regard that we must not miss.

Finally, we attribute particular relevance to
capacity-building in regional and subregional
organizations, especially in the area of homogenous
standards, respect for shared principles and lessons
learned from the most recent peacekeeping
experiences. In that context, ways to assist regional
organizations should be explored that do not
necessarily provide for the use of troops, such as
greater assistance in the areas of logistics, intervention
planning and training.

With regard to training in particular, Italy
contributes, through structures of the Centre of
Excellence for Stability Police Units, to strengthening
the capacities of the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the police component of
peace operations.

What I mean to say is, that if we enhance the role
of regional and subregional organizations, we have to
focus at the same time on building the capacity of
those regional and subregional organizations.
Otherwise, this is just a rhetorical exercise.

