Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to start
by thanking Mr. Lacroix for his briefing and for his
support - and that of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) - for peace in Lebanon.

We are meeting during a holy month that is
supposed to bring peace to all on Earth. Unfortunately,
it seems that my country, Lebanon, is condemned to
be the victim of continuous threats, conflict and pain.
While the Lebanese were busy preparing for Christmas
in order to celebrate the birth of hope and renewal, they
are today worried, concerned and fearful about the
future. When they see this organ convene to discuss
Lebanon, as it is doing today, it triggers memories of
Israeli aggression, invasions and continued occupation
of Lebanese land. They wonder if all of this is a
prelude to another aggression. No one can blame them.
Lebanon has witnessed four Israeli invasions in the last
40 years, which resulted in thousands of civilians killed
or severely injured, the destruction of the country's
infrastructure and years of hardship for the Lebanese
people. We continue to suffer the consequences of
those invasions.

Today we are witnessing another volatile situation
concerning the tunnels. Lebanon has taken this issue
very seriously. It has said - loudly and clearly and at
the highest level - that it is not interested in a new
conflict. Indeed, immediately after the news came
out, President Michel Aoun unequivocally reaffirmed
Lebanon's commitment to the letter and spirit of
resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety. That affirmation
was not mere rhetoric or words - it was a commitment
that is in the interests of my country and my people.
That is also why President Aoun expressed Lebanon's
interest in preserving the security and stability of south
Lebanon, as well as its willingness to work with the
international community to address the issues raised
by the Security Council in its most recent meeting on
Lebanon (see S/PV.8338). He made it clear that Lebanon
has no aggressive intentions.

That same commitment was reiterated by Prime
Minister-designate Saad Hariri in a meeting where
he told UNIFIL's Force Commander, Major General
Del Col, that Lebanon remained committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and respect
for the Blue Line. The Prime Minister-designate has
said that the Lebanese army, the sole power responsible
for defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Lebanon, cooperates with the UNIFIL forces and
will conduct patrols to deal with any flaws in the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) from the
Lebanese side.

Following his statement, the Lebanese army is now
deployed heavily in the area of operations to make sure
that resolution 1701 (2006) is abided by strictly. The
army is continuing its patrols there at this moment.
The Foreign Ministry, on its part, in a statement today
rejected any violations of resolution 1701 (2006) of
any kind. But the President and the Prime Minister-
designate also pointed to Israeli's responsibility in
instigating conflict through its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty. The real issue at hand is indeed
the constant violations of our sovereignty by land, air
and sea, in full contravention of resolution 1701 (2006),
but also in full contravention of a key provision of
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations.

The Lebanese State did not commit any violations,
while the violations on the Israeli side were committed
by the Israeli Government, which amount to 1,800
violations annually, and in the last four months they
have reached 150 a month, on average. Here is a sample
of the violations that we have provided to the United
Nations, every day and every week i I am sure they
are in the United Nations offices already. These are
for the month of December alone, and today is only
the nineteenth. Moreover, Israel breached Lebanese
airspace in the last four months alone by an average of
84 violations daily. All of those are documented with
UNIFIL.

That is in addition to its violation of the Lebanese
telecommunications network, sending threatening
messages to Lebanese citizens and causing fear and
panic among the population. We sent reports of those
violations to the Security Council and the Secretary-
General, in a formal letter on 6 December. Just imagine,
if we were to call for a Security Council meeting every
time Israel had violated Lebanon's sovereignty since
2006, the members of the Council would be here 24/7
to address them.

Lebanese officials accorded the problem of the
tunnels the utmost careful attention fearing, rightly
so, that Israel might use it as a pretext to threaten the
stability of Lebanon. The Prime Minister-designate
told the UNIFIL Force Commander that the United
Nations must shoulder its responsibilities in facing
Israel's daily violations. He said that the escalating tone
towards Lebanon, which those present had a taste of
today outside the Council, does not serve the relative
calm that has prevailed for more than 12 years in the
south.

Prime Minister Hariri called on the international
community and all members to curb this escalation
in the interest of respecting the Blue Line and the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). We repeat
his call here again in the Council, with the hope that
it will defuse the situation for the benefit of peace and
calm on our border.

In the light of all those violations and disregard
for international legality, the Lebanese are asking a
legitimate question: for the international community,
are there aristocrats in committing violations? They are
worried about double standards: the Lebanese reports
of Israeli violations of its sovereignty are buried in the
archives, while Israel's complaints get Security Council
meetings and its actions go unpunished.

"We have the perfect right to pre-emptive self-
defence, survey and collect intelligence."

Those are the words of the Prime Minister of Israel
a few days ago when addressing the Israeli breaches
of Lebanese airspace. What the Prime Minister sees as
self-defence is seen as a threat in Beirut. When Israeli
planes fly low or break the sound barrier over populated
areas, people feel the brunt of the Israeli violations.
We all know too well how the so-called Israeli right
to pre-emptive self-defence, which, by the way, has
no international legal basis, is used to justify illegal
aggressive acts and invasions.

We should not be condemned to repeating the
same situation over and over again. There is a simple
way of keeping the border calm. It is by the adherence
to resolution 1701 (2006) by both sides, not only by
Lebanon. It is by moving from the cessation ofhostilities
to a permanent ceasefire. It is by the Israeli withdrawal
from the remaining occupied Lebanese territory and
territorial waters.

There is also a United Nations mechanism in south
Lebanon, as members have mentioned, the Tripartite
Committee, which can deal with all the issues that arise
from the situation in south Lebanon. That Committee
can be empowered to solve all the violations, especially
the outstanding issues of the border dispute between
Lebanon and Israel, including the maritime border.
Those issues can be resolved away from any domestic
political considerations.

The Israeli press is rife with questions about the
timing and purpose of this Israeli campaign. But,
although Lebanon is not concerned with Israel's
domestic policy, it refuses to be used as a pawn in Israeli
power politics. Lebanon is interested in preserving calm
within its territory and living in peace and security. Is
that too much to ask for?

