Mr. Nesi (Italy): Today's debate represents an
important occasion to discuss a few points that may be
extremely relevant for the future development of
United Nations action in the area of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and for international
law more broadly.

The concept paper prepared by the presidency
(S/2010/322), for which Italy thanks the delegation of
Mexico, is extremely solid and focused and invites us
to concentrate on three main issues. As Italy associates
itself with the statement that will be delivered by the
representative of the European Union, I will limit
myself to a few remarks concerning one of the three
issues raised in the concept paper, namely, the
promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

As far as this issue is concerned, Italy would like
to emphasize the need for a concerted effort by all
relevant actors. We must also acknowledge that not all
situations necessarily require the same treatment, and
attention must be focused on the specificities of each
and every situation.

At the same time, we all agree on the importance
of promoting and strengthening the rule of law in the
area of security, especially in conflict and post-conflict
situations. That is the reason that Italy has been so
committed to assisting States afflicted by armed
conflicts to build up their own rule-of-law capacities.
In doing so, we believe that the international
community should spare no effort in helping them to
re-establish the rule of law in all ofits aspects.
The United Nations and its specialized agencies
have in the past played - and will continue to play in
the future - a crucial role in this area. Their expertise,
neutrality and recognized capacity to have an impact
on rebuilding mutual trust, which is indeed a
prerequisite for the rule of law, are unquestionable.

Italy therefore welcomes the important initiative
of the Secretariat, which was recently approved by the
General Assembly, to strengthen the Standing Police
Capacity and to set up the new justice and corrections
standing capacity at the United Nations Logistics Base
in Brindisi. Those meaningful steps are aimed at
guaranteeing the timely deployment, in the framework
of peacekeeping operations, of qualified personnel
specialized in rule-of-law activities. Through those
means, the United Nations will be able to bridge the
gap, from the initial stages of peacekeeping operations,
between blue helmets and peacebuilders.

However, States and other international
organizations also actively contribute to this end
through the coordinated promotion of capacity building
and initiatives aimed at strengthening the backbone of
States' institutions. In that regard, we commend the
role played by the European Union and the important
work done by other international organizations such as
the International Development Law Organization. Over
the past decade, Italy has actively contributed to
programmes concerning border controls, the
improvement of legislative and judicial capacities, the
drafting of criminal codes in post-conflict areas and the
training of judicial and police personnel.

With regard to the latter, we would like to recall
the activities of the Center of Excellence for Stability
Police Units (COESPU). In four years, over 2,000
peacekeepers of different nationalities, many from
Africa, have been hosted by COESPU for training
through an integrated approach that encompasses the
rule of law as an essential element in peacekeepers'
mandates.

Another aspect of promoting the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations is that of not
underestimating the issue of impunity. Over the past 20
years, the international community has resorted to a
variety of instruments and institutional mechanisms to
address this issue and to re-establish the rule of law in
war-torn countries.
In that respect, Italy believes that the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the Rome

Statute system are powerful instruments at the disposal
of the international community to end impunity for the
most heinous crimes of international concern. The
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council
is extremely important to reaffirming the rule of law
and can help to reinforce the stability of international
peace and security. The Council has already proven
that a positive relationship with the Court can indeed
be established, although some progress must be made
in this area.

The Rome Statute system is much more than the
mere setting up of a court of last resort. It lays down
general principles to be respected by all States and
individuals and must be implemented by the Security
Council as part of its mandate to ensure the
maintenance or restoration of peace and security.
Today, the ICC has a pivotal role to play in this area.

