Mr. Benomar: I am grateful for the opportunity
to present the Secretary-General's report on Burundi
(S/2017/l65). This is the first written report pursuant to
resolution 2303 (2016), and it provides a comprehensive
picture of the situation in the country. The report is
very factual and those facts speak for themselves.

First of all, the human rights situation remains
extremely worrying, and has in fact been worsening.
During the reporting period, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
documented allegations of serious human rights
violations and abuses, including extrajudicial killings,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced disappearances,
cases of torture and ill-treatment, allegations of illegal
places of detention, and restrictions on freedom of
association, expression and movement. OHCHR noted
an increase in allegations of enforced disappearances,
with more than 210 allegations received from October
2016 to January 2017 alone. Many Burundians live in
fear as a result of widespread repression and increasing
intimidation by the Imbonerakure, the ruling party's
youth militia. Members of opposition political parties
and perceived opponents reportedly continue to be
victims of arbitrary arrest, detention, ill-treatment and
enforced disappearance.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate. In 2016, the number of people in
need of humanitarian assistance reached 3 million,
or 26 per cent of the population. There has been a
fourfold increase in the number of people who are food
insecure. According to the World Health Organization,
8.2 million Burundians, or 75 per cent of the country,
were affected by malaria in 2016. Since the beginning
of the crisis, almost 390,000 Burundians have fled the
country. We commend the neighbouring countries for
their generosity in hosting these refugees. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
projects that the number of refugees will reach 500,000
by the end of the year.

The third key message of the report is that the
political impasse in the country continues. Nearly two
years have passed since the beginning of the political
crisis in Burundi, which was sparked by President
Pierre Nkurunziza's decision to run for a third term
in office. Since then, the political impasse has only
deepened. Political space has been narrowed further
through repression.

I commend the mediator, President Museveni,
and the facilitator, former President Mkapa, for their
leadership and stand firmly behind their efforts. It is
disappointing that despite their dedicated engagement,
there has been no significant progress in the dialogue
process led by the East African Community (EAC).
The latest round of talks in Arusha was boycotted by
the Government. Until today, the two sides have not sat
around the same table.

The United Nations will continue to provide its
full support to facilitator Mkapa. In this context, the
establishment of a joint technical working group marks
a positive enhancement of the collaboration among
the EAC, the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations. Yet, no progress will be achieved without all
Burundian stakeholders committing in good faith to
an inclusive dialogue process without preconditions.
The full political weight of the region and international
community is needed to achieve progress.

While the EAC-led dialogue has not advanced
as hoped, the internal dialogue process led by the
Government-established Commission Nationale
de Dialogue Inter-Burundais (CNDI) is close to
completion. The interim report of the CNDI reaches a
number of sweeping conclusions that have the potential
to undermine the Arusha Agreement, including that the
majority of citizens demand an end to presidential term
limits and are in favour of amending the Constitution.
Opposition leaders and civil society groups have raised
concerns that the CNDI process is not inclusive, that it
is controlled by the Government and that its objective is
to produce a predetermined political outcome.

In that context, the report highlights the risks
associated with the prospect of constitutional reform
and the potential abolition of presidential term limits
under the current circumstances. While Burundians
have the sovereign right to amend their Constitution,
in accordance with their own laws, it was President
Nkurunziza's decision to seek a disputed third term of
office that triggered the country's most severe crisis
since it emerged from a bloody civil war more than a
decade ago.

Burundi is still suffering from the electoral crisis
of 2015 and continues to face multifaceted challenges,
including ongoing serious human rights violations and
abuses, mass displacement of people and economic
degradation. Any attempt to seek constitutional
amendments to allow the President to stand for another
term in office would, in the current political climate,
intensify the crisis and undermine collective efforts to
find a sustainable solution to the current situation.

The report also provides an update on the
implementation of resolution 2303 (2016), which the
Council adopted on 29 July 2016. Unfortunately, there
has been no progress in thiat regard. On the contrary,
the period since the adoption has seen a continuous
deterioration in the Government's relations with the
international community.

As detailed in the report, the Government has
categorically refused to allow for the implementation of
all key aspects of resolution 2303 (2016). That includes
the deployment of the United Nations police component,
enhanced human-rights monitoring, the strengthening
of the Office of the Special Adviser and cooperation
with African Union observers. The Government has
also decided to withdraw from the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, suspend cooperation
and collaboration with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and has refused
to cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry mandated
by the Human Rights Council.

Reduced cooperation with the United Nations
system is undermining efforts to find apeaceful solution
to the crisis and to assist a population in growing need.
We have tried our utmost to constructively engage with
the Government and support the people of Burundi
in their search for peace and stability. We engaged
quietly, refrained from public criticism and encouraged
modest, small steps to build confidence between the
parties. Despite that moderate approach, the doors to
engagement and cooperation have been largely shut by
the authorities.

The report of the Secretary-General calls on the
Burundian leadership to fulfil its moral obligation
and political responsibility to return the country to the
path of peace. I am convinced that most Burundians,
including many in the Government and the ruling party,
do not want to continue on the track of international
isolationism, violence and repression.The international
community must do its part to support those who seek
a peaceful resolution of the crisis. The United Nations
will always remain committed to helping the people
of Burundi, and we look to the Council for further
guidance on the way forward.

