Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (Spoke in French): First,
Belgium joins in today's expressions of sympathy to
France and the French people.

Experience and facts reveal an inextricable
link between peace and security, on the one hand,
and inclusive and sustainable development, on the
other. Resolution 2171 (2014) and the presidential
statement of 19 January (S/PRST/2015/3) recognize
this interdependence and the need to develop a global
and integrated approach to addressing the underlying
causes of conflicts and preventing them. This means in
particular strengthening the rule of law and institutions,
promoting sustainable and inclusive development,
combating poverty and exclusion, promoting good
governance and democracy, and encouraging political
and religious tolerance.

The Security Council is not indifferent to the idea
that security, development and human rights must be
treated in an integrated manner. However, the results
in terms of conflict prevention and establishing lasting
peace remain debatable. The marked increase in crises
and their nature oblige us to reconsider the gravity and
attention that we accord to conflict prevention. In Syria,
Libya, the Central African Republic or South Sudan,
the conflicts have become enmired and more complex
with every passing year, entailing serious humanitarian
consequences and threats to those countries' future. We
must attach greater importance to the early warning
signs of conflict, including not only serious human
rights violations and language inciting intolerance,
hatred or radicalization, but also social, economic and
religious marginalization.

The United Nations has excellent prevention tools
at its disposal, such as the good offices ofthe Secretary-
General and his special envoys, the Standby Team of
Senior Mediation Advisers, peace and development
advisers, regional offices, the Office on Genocide
Prevention and Responsibility to Protect and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative. Furthermore, the
United Nations could make better use of its significant
presence in the field, including, for example, peace
missions, country teams, human rights offices and
humanitarian teams. Above all, the system must
operate more consistently in order to prevent conflict,
both in risk analysis and at the operational level. We
therefore welcome the emphasis that has been placed
on that point of view in the report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446).

The Security Council can heighten its understanding
of the link among peace, security, development and
human rights through field visits focused on prevention
or information-gathering, and by paying the required
attention to information emanating from the field
itself, including from outside traditional channels.
Civil society should be heard more often, including
in Arria Formula meetings. The advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission must carry more weight
in the eyes of the Security Council, for example in the
cases of countries in transition or when a situation is
no longer seen as urgent. The current review of the
peacebuilding architecture affords us the opportunity to
make progress to that end. In that regard, I welcome the
presence of the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
at today's meeting.

Without consensus among the permanent Council
members, our early warning and prevention mechanisms
will be for naught. Belgium supports the initiative led
by France, Mexico and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group to promote the voluntary
limitation ofthe use ofthe right of veto in cases ofmass
atrocities.

Finally, the Security Council is regularly called on
to define mandates on the strengthening of institutions
and the rule of law, particularly in the security and
justice sectors. Security sector reform is indeed a
decisive component in stabilizing peace, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention. However, it is a very long-term
process that requires a strong political will and the
commitment of all concerned stakeholders. Belgium
therefore welcomes the adoption of resolution 2151
(2014) and calls on the Security Council to ensure its
follow-up.

As has already been stated in the Council, every
conflict is unique. There is no universal, ready-
made solution, but it is essential to recognize that
making peace and security sustainable requires a firm
commitment to prevention.

