Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is always a pleasure to
see Mr. Martin Griffiths, and today it has also been a
pleasure to listen to him and his upbeat briefing. I do not
need to repeat all of the various positive developments,
I can only echo what he and my colleague from C6te
d'Ivoire said: the momentum that has been built needs
to be sustained in both the south and the north of the
country. It is essentially the obligation of the leadership,
as Mr. Griffiths said, that leaders on all sides continue
to be constructively engaged by talking to each other
and that they pursue the path of de-escalation.

I was a little concerned that by the end of his very
interesting statement, Mr. Griffiths would propose
that the leaders be candidates for the next Nobel Peace
Prize, but then had the cold shower from Ms. Ursula
Mueller. It is always a pleasure to see her, but it was not
a pleasure to hear what she had to say. She reminded
us of the humanitarian situation, which continues to be
the worst we face in the world today. Although we have
heard about positive developments in Al-Hudaydah,
that governorate remains the place with the highest
number of civilian casualties.

With regard to humanitarian access, I had to listen
very carefully, but I heard our Russian colleague say
that we must ensure unconditional compliance with
international humanitarian law, and I can only subscribe
to that - not only in Yemen. It is absolutely vital that
humanitarian access be granted, and we still face a lot
of problems in that regard.

Several colleagues, including the representatives
of France, the Dominican Republic and Poland, all
mentioned the unresolved issue of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, which represents an increasing threat to the
environment. All those who are in contact with the
Houthis should pressure them into at least allowing
for a United Nations assessment team to have access
to the ship.

Germany continues to be committed to supporting
the Special Envoy. We are ready to support the political
process by facilitating meetings at different levels.
With regard to the provision of financial humanitarian
aid, Germany remains committed and will contribute
substantially to the Yemen humanitarian response
plan. We also appeal to other donors to continue to be
engaged and to disburse their contributions in a timely
manner so that the problem we encountered this year
does not repeat itself.

Finally, I want to come back to Mr. Griffiths'
briefing. At the end, he highlighted his contact with
women leaders, and I fully support that. Others
members have also highlighted the inclusion of youth.
It is important not only to hold separate meetings
with them, but to ensure that women have a seat at the
negotiating table and are able to bring their Vision and
point of views to the negotiations process.

