The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned about
the failure of the Bosnian parties to agree to an
extension of the agreements on a cease-fire and a
complete cessation of hostilities in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the recent deterioration
of the situation there. It stresses once again the
unacceptability of all attempts to resolve the conflict
in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina by military
means.

"The Security Council calls upon the Bosnian
parties to agree without further delay to a further
cease-fire and a complete cessation of hostilities and,
in this regard, fully supports the negotiating efforts of
UNPROFOR and other international efforts aimed at
persuading the Bosnian parties to agree to such a
cease-fire and complete cessation of hostilities. The
Council urges the Bosnian parties to abstain from any
steps which may lead to further escalation of the
conflict and reaffirms the need for a political
settlement on the basis of the acceptance of the
Contact Group plan as a starting point."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/24.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have also been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about the obstruction of the normal operation of
Sarajevo airport, including the suspension of the
humanitarian relief airlift, caused by Bosnian Serb
threats against United Nations aircraft and
humanitarian relief flights, and by their attempts to
impose restrictions on the use of Sarajevo airport by
official missions as foreseen in the 5 June 1992
agreement (S/24075). Such obstruction is in breach
of the 5 June 1992 agreement and of the Council's
previous resolutions, in particular resolution 761
(1992), and is unacceptable. Obstruction of the
humanitarian relief also constitutes a violation of
international humanitarian law.

"In that context the Security Council demands
that all parties and others concerned comply fully
with the 5 June 1992 agreement and create
immediately the necessary conditions for unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian supplies to Sarajevo and
other destinations in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It calls upon the Bosnian Serb party to
guarantee the safety of all UNPROFOR supervised
flights to Sarajevo, including humanitarian relief
flights.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to keep it informed of discussions with the
Bosnian Serb party on the restoration of the normal
functioning of Sarajevo airport so that it might take
further action as necessary."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/25.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12:15 pm.

