Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also first express our appreciation for Ambassador Pierce's outstanding contributions to the work of the Security Council. We wish her every success in her new assignment. On the subject of our meeting this morning, I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their comprehensive briefings and we very much agree with their plea to stop the fighting and engage in de-escalation immediately. That is the most important message and the most important step that needs to be taken right now. We are extremely worried that fighting in the north continues and that military gains could lead to a further advance of front lines and fuel a cycle of ever-growing violence and escalation. An attack on Ma'rib would be very alarming news. We urge all relevant actors, in particular on the Houthi side, to refrain from seeking territorial gains by force, which would jeopardize the lives of thousands of civilians and threaten the security of the 2 million internally displaced persons (IDPs), which have found refuge in Ma'rib. There is a significant risk of the fighting and violence in the north impacting the volatile military situation in other parts of Yemen. The recent air strike on Al-Salif, in the north of Al-Hudaydah governorate, is a stark reminder that the fragile stability in Al-Hudaydah and beyond needs to be preserved. We also agree with Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Rajasingham that all parties must adhere strictly to international humanitarian and human rights law and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. Women and children are among those suffering the most from the dire military and humanitarian situation. All actors should alleviate their suffering and put the needs of vulnerable populations first. Mr. Griffiths has spoken about his efforts in past weeks, calling for de-escalation, and we could not agree more with that. We call on all actors to break the cycle of violence and engage constructively and without delay in efforts to de-escalate the situation. We very much welcome and support the efforts of the Special Envoy aimed at the establishment of a de-escalation mechanism. His visit to Ma'rib last weekend, which he mentioned today, sent a clear and important signal in that regard and has our strong support. For sustainable and lasting de-escalation, a minimum degree of confidence is indispensable. We therefore urge all sides to further engage in confidence-building measures and to demonstrate good will. We need to see implementation of the agreed prisoner exchange, the continuation of mercy flights, access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker and unrestricted and full cooperation with the United Nations Mission to support the Hodeidah Agreement. On all these fronts, much more needs to be done. Confidence-building measures, as well as informal meetings and exchanges among representatives of all sides, as facilitated by the Envoy at the end of last month in Amman, are crucial for the resumption of formal political talks. We particularly welcome the high level of women's participation at that meeting, which should set the standard for all subsequent talks. Political leaders and their vision for a future Yemen must be judged on their ability to provide a safe, prosperous and healthy environment for all Yemeni people, taking into account the diverse interests and groups in the country. There is no alternative to an inclusive political process. The slow progress of the direct talks between the Houthis and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as well as the lack of progress in the implementation of the Riyadh agreement, underline the urgency of a swift restart of the political process under United Nations auspices. The Security Council has a responsibility to call on the involved parties to engage. Before I conclude, I wish to say a word on the humanitarian situation. Given the ongoing and escalating fighting in the north, we are witnessing further degradation of the already catastrophic humanitarian situation, as we heard in this morning's very sobering briefing. Against that backdrop, it is even more incomprehensible that the political leadership in Sana'a is treating humanitarian workers and aid organizations in a way that calls into question the whole humanitarian operation in the north. We have tolerated such increasing restrictions for far too long. As a result, 8 million people in need are not being reached. That is absolutely unacceptable. We must not wait any longer to send clear and hard messages to the authorities in Sana'a. In that regard, we appreciate the lead taken by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Without respect for the humanitarian principles and the safety of humanitarian staff, life-saving assistance cannot and will not get in. Therefore, we once more reiterate that it is the responsibility of all parties, especially the Houthis, to cease any harassment of humanitarian staff; facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered access; lift bureaucratic restrictions; and enable project agreements without further delay.
