Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (Spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the convening of today's briefing and thanks Mr. Taye-
Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General, for the
very important information he has provided. We also
thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira for his significant and
strenuous efforts to carry out the duties entrusted to
him last year. We welcome the appointment of Mr. Jose
Viegas Filho as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS). We would also like to again congratulate
former Special Representative Mr. Modibo Toure on his
initiatives and constant cooperation with the Security
Council during his two-year tenure.

After nearly three years of a political and
institutional crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the Security
Council and the international community have a
reason to be optimistic. Recent positive developments
in the country provide a logical explanation for the
encouraging environment. On 16 April, President Jose
Mario Vaz conveyed hope to his people, the friends
of Guinea-Bissau and the international community by
appointing Mr. Aristide Gomes as consensus Prime
Minister. The appointment of Mr. Gomes to that
important State post was the result of long negotiations
supported primarily by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union,
which enabled the main political parties to reach a firm
consensus. A few days later, UNIOGBIS endorsed
the overwhelming approval of civil society and of the
people in general with regard to the appointment of
such an experienced politician.

With regard to the recently formed inclusive
Government, although it is indeed true that the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
and the Party for Social Renewal control the majority
of Government portfolios, the real surprise in the
Government's composition is the fact that the leaders
of three other parties - the President of the Union for
Change, the President of the Democratic Convergence
Party and the President of the New Democracy
Party 4 were allocated seats in Parliament, which
demonstrates the Government's inclusive nature. The
main goal of the new Government team, which should
achieve tangible results in a relatively short time, is to
guarantee smooth, transparent and inclusive legislative
elections on 18 November. To that end, it is vital that
the necessary $7.7 million be made available to the
electoral fund as soon as possible. The Government and
the United Nations Development Programme agreed to
that fund to be able to proceed with the electoral census
update and to establish a new mapping division so that
the Government and the new management team of the
National Electoral Commission can have the technical
means to hold successful elections in a peaceful and
calm environment.

Peacebuilding and the consolidation of political
and institutional progress require much more than
organizing elections. The Conakry Agreement also
demands other kinds of conclusive reforms, such as a
review of the Constitution, the signing of a stability
pact, electoral law reform, political party law reform,
including public financing, and defence, security
and justice sector reform and the drafting of the
fresh start development plan according to the Terra
Ranca vision. Prospects for development are vital to
enable the country to return to the path of economic
development. We acknowledge and are grateful for the
donations already being made, and we congratulate the
Government of Guinea-Bissau for making an initial
contribution of $1.8 million. We call upon donors, the
main international financial institutions and Guinea-
Bissau's traditional and non-traditional donors to make
their contributions in order to move the process forward.

It is important that such development occurs within
the context of regional development. As expressed by
the African Union Commission in its communique' of
2 May, we would like to encourage the new authorities
and all interested parties in Guinea-Bissau to work
closely within the framework of the country's democratic
institutions and take urgent and sustainable steps to
address current challenges as soon as possible in order
to ensure lasting stability in the country. The examples
of Liberia and Sierra Leone clearly demonstrate that,
with effort, political will, solidarity, coordination and
international assistance, a peaceful and lasting solution
can be found to the situation in Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, we congratulate and pay tribute
to regional institutions - the ECOWAS and the
African Union - on the tremendous efforts and
considerable progress they have made to resolve
the political and institutional impasse. It is also
important to acknowledge the involvement and efforts
of the European Union, the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. It is
essential that group of international actors remain
committed to providing assistance to Guinea-Bissau
in the post-election period and helping it to develop
a budget to achieve its economic goals. I would like
especially to thank and congratulate Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, for his support to the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to curb drug trafficking.

In our capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, we are considering a trip to
the country at the end of June to begin to take stock
of the progress made and of the status of the current
sanctions imposed on military leaders who carried out
the coup d'etat on 12 April 2012.

