Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes this opportunity to address the situation
in Afghanistan. There are continuing military and political
developments taking place almost hourly. The kaleidoscope
of alliances has shifted markedly in the past few weeks.
While events are moving so fast, it would be a mistake to
rush to judgment.

In this maelstrom of political and military activity, we
should not lose sight of some fundamental objectives. The
aims of the international community must be an agreement
to an immediate ceasefire, negotiations between all the
parties, and the establishment of a peace process leading to
the formation of a broad-based representative government
which respects human rights. The United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan has a critical role in achieving these
aims.

 

While I listened with great interest to the statement
made by the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and noted in particular his call for the
dispatch of a United Nations fact-finding mission, I was
a little surprised - if he will allow me to say so - to
find no word of recognition in his speech that there is, in
fact, already a United Nations Special Mission there on
the ground.

The United Kingdom strongly supports the efforts of
Mr. Norbert H011 and his team. We call on all parties to
cooperate with them. In the present fluid circumstances,
the Special Mission has an opportunity now to make a
real impact. The strongest possible political support must
be given to those efforts. The international community
stands ready to help, but the responsibility to achieve a
settlement lies with the parties themselves.

For too long, Afghanistan has been subjected to
interference from outside, which has only served to
prolong the conflict. We call, like others, for an end to
such interference, and an end to the continuing supply of
arms and ammunition to the factions. We remain
concerned about the use of the territory of Afghanistan
for the production of drugs and for the training of
terrorists. The continuation of such activities will only
hinder the acceptance of Afghanistan back into the
community of nations.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan continues
to cause grave concern. We too call on all factions to
cooperate in the delivery of humanitarian aid to all people
of Afghanistan, irrespective of ethnic group, race or
gender. The United Kingdom will continue to support the
United Nations coordinating role in assistance
programmes in that country. And again, when the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan said that
the only United Nations actions in Afghanistan were
resolutions and statements, I am sure he did not mean to
imply that he did not recognize the very considerable role
being played by the United Nations in coordinating
humanitarian assistance. We, the United Kingdom, remain
one of the major aid donors to Afghanistan, contributing
around $10 million annually through the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
other United Nations agencies, as well as through the
International Committee of the Red Cross and major
British non-governmental organizations. This collective
effort by the international community deserves to be
recognized on an occasion like this.

 

We have made clear our strong objections to violations
of fundamental human rights. In particular, we are gravely
concerned about measures implemented to restrict girls'
rights to education and women's rights to employment. We
have major concerns in this regard about the prospects for
many households where women in that country are the only
providers. They face destitution as a result of these
measures. We call on all the factions to respect
international human rights norms and to act in accordance
with those international instruments which Afghanistan has
signed and ratified, for example the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights.

The Security Council and the international community
as a whole must keep a close watch on the rapidly changing
situation in Afghanistan. Coordination of all our efforts,
through support for the activities of Mr. Holl and the
United Nations Special Mission, must remain our priority.
We look forward to hearing the considered views of the
Special Mission on the best way for the Security Council to
support its efforts, but there is a risk that precipitate action
by the Security Council might even jeopardize those.

We hope that recent events have impressed on all the
parties that a military solution is not possible and that there
is no alternative to negotiation and compromise. If there is
an opportunity, however small, in the coming days or
weeks to begin that process of negotiation, the parties must
seize that opportunity. The United Kingdom will continue
to work towards the goal we all share: the peaceful
settlement of the conflict, and an end to the suffering of all
Afghan people.

