Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Bolivia expresses its appreciation for the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, African Integration and
International Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.

We also join our colleagues in offering our
condolences to the Government and the people of
France and the family of the the French army soldier
who lost his life in the line of duty.

We also express our appreciation for the presentation
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/27l) by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and take this opportunity to wish
him success in his work.

Bolivia commends the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the efforts made in stabilizing
the Republic of Mali through fulfilling its mandate.
We regret that its mandate has been undermined by the
incursion of extremist and terrorist elements affiliated
with Al-Qaida and what is known as the Islamic State,
in particular in the north and centre of the country. We
are concerned about the persistent situation of violence
caused by those groups, which continues today, thereby
undermining the goals of the legitimate Government
of Mali, the United Nations, partner countries and
regional and international organizations that have
reaffirmed their commitment to the peace process
and constructive dialogue so as to definitively achieve
stabilization in Mali.

We condemn the attacks carried out by irregular
and terrorist groups against the Malian defence
and security forces as well as MINUSMA through
increasingly sophisticated, complex and lethal means
that collaterally affect civilians, thereby resulting in
deaths and leading to the displacement and movement
of people to neighbouring countries. We also strongly
condemn the use of anti-personnel mines and similar
types of weapons, which continue to jeopardize the
entire civilian population and the defence and security
forces of the Malian Government.

For its part, Bolivia expresses its concern about
violence directed against civilians. According to the
latest report of the Secretary-General, irregular groups
have committed crimes, including sexual abuse directed
against women, girls and boys, and there have been
reports of summary executions, forced disappearances,
the recruitment of children and attacks against
personnel of the United Nations peacekeeping mission.

We demand that the armed groups lay down
their weapons and demobilize. We also urge them to
put aside whatever sectarian differences they might
have that stand in the way of constructive dialogue,
and to solidify previous agreements so as to end the
conflict. Moreover, we value and stress the importance
of the Government of Mali's tireless search for a
process leading to reconciliation, pacification and
understanding through inclusive dialogue that will lay
the foundations for stability. We call on MINUSMA
to continue to work with the Government of Mali to
achieve those goals and in greater coordination with
it in the framework of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Mali.

Finally, Bolivia is aware ofthe difficult process that
the brotherly country of Mali is going through, which
has not led to the stability and peace that it needs. We
therefore urge donor countries, regional organizations
and the international community, in general, to continue
to actively contribute to finding the appropriate means
necessary to achieve the disarmament, demobilization
and definitive reintegration of armed groups through
political initiatives, pacification and support for a final
reconciliation process for the Malian people.

