Mr. Sylla (Senegal) (spoke in French): Let me
express at the start of my statement my great pleasure
at seeing the United States of America assume the
presidency of the Security Council and to affirm on this
occasion all the support of my delegation.

Through me, my delegation wishes to reiterate
its sincere thanks to the members of the Security
Council for their initiative in drafting resolution 2177
(2014), whose adoption will certainly allow for better
mobilization of the international community's efforts
and means towards countries affected by the epidemic.

At the most recent United States-Africa Summit,
Mr. Macky Sall, President of the Republic of Senegal,
alerted the international community that the Ebola
epidemic was not just an African matter but a global
one, as the virus knows nothing of borders. Fortunately,
that call received a positive response, which we
welcome. I also warmly welcome the health protection
efforts and mechanisms already implemented by
States of the West African subregion affected by this
terrible epidemic. I would also like to include in that
appreciation the international partners, in particular
other States and civil society organizations, that have
brought their valuable assistance to countries affected
by the epidemic. In that regard, I reaffirm Senegal's full
support for brotherly and friendly countries affected by
the Ebola epidemic and reiterate our readiness to work
to strengthen the global partnership in the area of health
emergencies and the establishment of humanitarian
corridors.

It mustbe said that, right from the start, on 21 March,
as this epidemic was taking hold in the West African
subregion, Senegal immediately implemented a strategy
of prevention and epidemiological monitoring, as well
as a communication and outreach plan. That strategy
has been particularly effective because, to date, there
has not been a single case of Ebola virus infection in
the country. The only case in Senegal, brought in from
outside, was quickly taken up by Senegalese doctors and
our health system, and that patient is now completely
cured of the virus, his life saved. All persons who were
in contact with the foreign patient were placed under
observation for 21 days and their tests thankfully came
back negative.

We reaffirm the need, given the strong links
uniting all the countries of our subregion, to strengthen
our unity of action, naturally with the support
international community, and work together to defeat
the epidemic. I can assure you, Mr. President, of the
full readiness of Government of Senegal to cooperate
with the international community in order to curb
this extraordinary crisis, which requires a response
commensurate with its gravity.

