Let me start by thanking the Dominican Republic for organizing this timely debate. Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the European Union, and wishes to add some remarks in its national capacity. This year, when we are marking many important milestones, including the fifth anniversary of the youth, peace and security agenda, we need to reaffirm the important role that young people have in shaping a better world for everyone, but especially for themselves, as they are humankind's future generation. It is imperative that they have a place in shaping it. Young people have already demonstrated that they can be drivers of positive change and key actors in the search for sustainable solutions to the many challenges that the world is facing today. They must have a voice, and we need to listen and empower it. Their participation in post-conflict peacebuilding processes and sustaining international peace and security is an important part of that. One of our contributions is to provide a unique platform for young leaders, entrepreneurs, influencers, thinkers and social activists to share their visions, exchange ideas and connect with peers from different parts of the world. Since 2011, the Young Bled Strategic Forum has been bringing together young leaders aged between 18 and 35 years from all over the world to engage in lively discussion and to develop innovative solutions to some of the most pressing global issues. The platform is part of the Bled Strategic Forum, an annual international foreign policy conference. This year, we look forward to also welcoming the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake. We are happy to see young women stepping up and taking the lead in addressing not only many global challenges, such as environmental degradation and climate change, but also particular challenges at their local level. Their important role needs to be recognized and supported. The gender perspective must be an integral part of the youth, peace and security agenda. For many years now, the Slovenian Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been supporting the engagement of the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme in the work of the United Nations. Slovenian youth delegates regularly participate in the sessions of the Third Committee and the Economic and Social Council Youth Forum. Last year, our youth delegate actively participated in the Youth Climate Summit and was a member of the official delegation, led by our Prime Minister, at the Climate Action Summit. The Prime Minister and the youth delegate signed the Kwon-Gesh Youth Pledge within the framework of the youth engagement and public mobilization coalition for the meaningful involvement of young people in climate policy planning. Young people can be full participants in shaping our world only with the full protection and assurance of the full enjoyment of their human rights, including the freedom of expression and movement, the freedom of peaceful assembly and economic and social rights, and the right to quality education, which are essential for empowering young people. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is the most important document that the international community has as a signpost for the future. The young are an essential key player in its implementation. Let us not forget that one of its goals - education - is most pertinent to precisely the young generation. 112/123 When it comes to issues of peace and security and the peaceful settlement of disputes, mediation is an effective tool for saving lives and sparing human suffering. It is a cost-effective tool for prevention and for post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction. However, only an inclusive mediation process can be efficient and effective, and we believe that the active participation of young people in that regard is essential. In 2017, Slovenia launched a pilot project of school and peer mediation against peer violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. By building up mediation capacities among teachers and students, schools become promoters of reconciliation, tolerance, human rights and diversity. The project, which has been well received within the local communities, has thus had a positive impact on raising tolerance and peaceful conflict resolution. In fact, mediation techniques could, or should, be part of a comprehensive education. Today, as we deal with this unprecedented coronavirus disease crisis, the need to engage all our human potential that the different generations can bring to the table is more evident than ever. Only by working together in an inclusive manner will we overcome this global threat and come out stronger and with better prospects for the future. As I mentioned at the beginning, this future belongs to the young.
