Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson and Mr. Antonio Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for their thorough
briefings. I would also like to welcome Mr. Heraldo
Munoz, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, and to
thank him for presiding over this important meeting on
post-conflict peacebuilding.

This is a particularly important year for the role
of the United Nations in peacebuilding. There will
be full reviews of peacekeeping operations and
the peacebuilding architecture, which leads us to
emphasize that these two complementary processes are
indeed inseparable when it comes to ending violence
and enabling countries emerging from conflict to
find a path to lasting peace. Peacebuilding requires
comprehensive efforts that include both international
and regional support, as well as the cooperation of the
Governments and institutions of the countries emerging
from conflict. That cooperation is necessary not only
to enable the work to get done, but above all because
the countries themselves are essential partners in
peacebuilding. Those countries must therefore provide
the necessary tools and contributions, to the degree
they are able, to help the United Nations entities comply
with their mandates and implement their programmes.

Peace consolidation, which can also be described
as a period of reconstruction and rebuilding, is by
its nature a civilian-oriented operation employing a
relatively small staff, which enables such missions to
be more easily accepted by societies emerging from
conflict. They therefore assume the different role of
understanding the specific features and nature of those
societies and tackling many different areas, which
distinguishes them from peacekeeping operations. In
practice, they help to strengthen political processes
and economic activity, improve infrastructure and
human rights situations, and develop plans for
services designed to improve living conditions. It is
therefore essential to take into account the concerns
and aspirations of countries in conflict situations, as
well the regional environment, particularly since some
countries are dealing with issues that are a threat to
their neighbours, too.

The review ofthe peacebuilding architecture should
take into consideration the principles of flexibility and
adaptability, in view of countries" different needs,
the challenges facing them and their policies, and the
speed with which they can be implemented in different
countries, particularly when it comes to transferring
power to the local authorities. We support the United
Nations peacebuilding mandate and the strengthening
of its three principal entities, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office. We greatly appreciate
their efforts to strengthen the role of the United Nations
in countries emerging from conflict.

The review of the peacebuilding architecture will
provide a comprehensive analysis and evaluation of
actions already undertaken and should help to address
the gaps that in the past have had a negative effect on
the work of the United Nations in this field. We should
also review the factors that may influence the United
Nations peacebuilding work and the obstacles it may
encounter, including limited funding and a lack of
political will and genuine cooperation on the part of the
countries concerned. The latter shows how important it
is to maintain a positive partnership between countries
and the relevant entities of the United Nations.

It should also be borne in mind that States
emerging from conflict can be affected by instability
in neighbouring countries as well. We therefore hope
that the review will result in the creation of a road map
that will promote the conditions necessary for effective
intervention on the part ofUnitedNations peacebuilding,
so as to respond to the needs and demands of the
countries dealing with such situations. Sustainable
mechanisms to promote sustainable development are
crucial in this area. We urge donor countries to pursue
their efforts in financing peacebuilding and to find an
effective and optimal way to manage these funds.

Women's participation is critical and constructive,
and we attach great importance to it. Women
can contribute in many ways to strengthening
peacebuilding, and we therefore support initiatives
aimed at strengthening the role of women and providing
them with appropriate training.

Jordan believes that the United Nations vision and
work on post-conflict situations should involve experts
in various areas, acting in accordance with their United
Nations mandates, in order to ensure cooperation and
partnerships with national authorities and regional

bodies, help restore the stability of the countries
concerned and prevent their relapse into conflict.

