Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The impressive anti-war demonstrations that
took place all around the world on Saturday, 15
February; the opinion polls; the productive and
substantial ministerial debate held on 14 February in
the Council; the prudence and objectivity of the
presentations given by the Executive Chairman of the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA); and
the almost unanimous support for the courageous,
measured and constructive statement of the French
Foreign Minister, all of these express a powerful
consensus: peace must be preserved as the ideal and the
very reason for the existence of the United Nations and
in order to ensure that it can exercise its inalienable
and exclusive rights and duties under the Charter.

A blue canvas over Picasso's "Guernica" cannot
disguise the fact that it is a warning to the Security
Council - a warning that cannot be ignored -
concerning the exceptional nature of the prerogative of
the use of force, exercised on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations and for which history
will demand accountability. Nor does it diminish our
memory of the horrors that gave rise to the United
Nations.

Only 72 hours ago, President Fidel Castro stated:

"These are not days of hope and glory for
peace in the world. A war is on the verge of
breaking out. This would not be a confrontation
between comparable forces. On the one side
would be a hegemonistic super-Power, with all of
its overwhelming military might and technology,
backed by a main ally, another country with
nuclear capability and a member of the United
Nations Security Council. On the other side
would be a country whose people have suffered
more than 10 years of daily bombings and the
loss of hundreds of thousands of lives, mainly
those of children, through hunger and disease,
following an unequal war provoked by Iraq's
illegal occupation of Kuwait, which was an
independent State recognized by the international
community. The vast majority of world public
opinion is unanimously opposed to a new war.
Above all, it does not accept the adoption of a
unilateral decision by the United States
Government, in complete disregard for
international rules and for the power and
authority of the United Nations, limited as they
already are. This is an unnecessary war, on
pretexts that are neither credible nor proven.

"Completely debilitated by the last war
against the United States in 1991, Iraq utterly
lacks the capacity to counteract the offensive and
defensive weaponry at the disposal of the United
States, which is fully capable of annihilating any
threat."

We have the absolute conviction that there is not the
slightest risk for that country or for its friends in the
region, and that it would be an unnecessary war.

The consequences of an unnecessary and
unjustified military action in Iraq would be extremely
grave. As has been foreseen, the humanitarian
catastrophe could be massive and terrible. The deaths
and destruction would be unpredictable. No one could
calculate its duration. The economic and political
effects on a world in recession would be enormous,
especially in developing countries, which are already
paying unsustainable increases in oil prices that are
disastrous for their economies and that, with the
launching of the first missile, would rise to even more
exorbitant levels.

Unquestionably, Iraq has cooperated with the
inspectors and has confirmed its resolve to complete its
compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions, in order to eliminate any doubt with
respect to the possibility that it still possesses weapons
of mass destruction. Recently, it accepted additional
inspection components and adopted new legislative and
executive measures; this has been favourably received
by the international community, with the sole exception
of those who appear to have made up their minds in
advance to carry out military action at any cost and
with economic objectives based on control of energy
resources and on domestic policy concerns.

The resolutions must be implemented in good
faith by all parties in order to move forward towards a
comprehensive solution to the question of Iraq that
guarantees peace and stability in the region and
includes the lifting of the sanctions regime, which is
causing so much suffering for the Iraqi people. The
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Iraq, of Kuwait and of all the other
countries in the region must be respected. The Non-
Aligned Movement Summit Countries will surely make
a decisive contribution to peace.

Cuba defends international law, because we
consider it to be the only viable guarantee of
international peace and security. We believe that the
world should be regulated by a system of collective
security, based on cooperation, that provides
guarantees for all. Such a system cannot be replaced by
"the law of the jungle" for the benefit of the powerful
and, ultimately, of the only super-Power. The unipolar,
unsustainable, unjust and profoundly inequitable
international order cannot be succeeded by an even
more primitive, unstable, unpredictable and dangerous
one.

The new doctrine of pre-emptive attack that some
seek to impose advocates the right to use or threaten to
use force in international relations and the right to take
unilateral military action against other States, in
advance and in the face of indeterminate and vague
threats. That is a flagrant violation of the spirit and the
letter of the Charter of the United Nations and seeks to
turn the inherent right of legitimate self-defence into a
blank check.

It is very dangerous to attempt to resolve national
security concerns through unilateral action or
unfounded accusations rather than through cooperation
among States parties to treaties and through the use of
the procedures defined in them for that purpose.

Cuba, which for four decades has been a victim
of the nuclear super-Power's aggression and hostility
and which has never developed, and has the firm
resolve never to develop, weapons of mass
destruction - whether nuclear or of any other kind -
reaffirms that general and complete disarmament,
particularly nuclear disarmament, is the only possible
path to peace. We reaffirm that the use of such weapons
under any circumstances, the further development of
such arsenals, their proliferation or the attempt to
secure such capabilities would be madness, with
unpredictable consequences.

Apparently, the United States is now promoting a
draft resolution in the Security Council designed to
make a war against Iraq inevitable. It would follow up
on elements of resolution 1441 (2002) related to the
supposed ceasefire of 1991 - the concepts of
"material breach" and "serious consequences" -
which, as we warned at the time, were intended to
support the interpretation of the hawks that the
resolution authorizes the use of force in the event of
alleged Iraqi non-compliance. The facts have
increasingly confirmed the rightness of our warnings.

Despite the building of opposition to war around
the world and within the United States and the United
Kingdom, the risk of unilateral attack is growing. Cuba
strongly hopes that, among the members of the
Security Council, adherence to their countries'
legitimate national interests and to fundamentally
democratic respect for the will of their peoples will
prevail.

The Security Council, so often held hostage to the
anti-democratic and arbitrary exercise of the veto, now
has an opportunity to restore, to a degree, its
diminished credibility by building a solid and
insurmountable majority in defence of peace. In that
event, it would act with broad international backing
and with the support of public opinion. Moreover, the
United Nations could rely on the enormous political,
moral and legal force of the General Assembly.

