Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting to mark the tenth anniversary of resolution
1540 (2004). This open debate provides an excellent
opportunity to review the ground covered over the
past decade since the adoption of this landmark
resolution, to assess achievements and remaining
gaps in implementation and to reiterate our collective
commitment to the promotion of the goals of the
resolution.

We welcome the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/7) as an outcome of today's meeting.

In many parts of the world, including the South
Caucasus, the direct relevance ofresolution 1540 (2004)
is obvious. Any region affected by armed conflict,
aggression, foreign military occupation, violent
extremism, terrorism and transnational organized
crime can easily become a proliferation-prone area,
where non-State actors may seek to exploit State
vulnerabilities in order to benefit from the prevailing
impunity for apparent violations of international law.
The accumulation of large quantities of armaments
and munitions in areas beyond international control
and the risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and related materials falling into
the hands of non-State actors pose a serious threat to
international peace and security. We are also concerned
by the existence of an outdated nuclear facility in our
neighborhood and erroneous State policies in the sphere
of nuclear safety and security, which pose a potential
threat for the whole region and beyond.

Therefore, the national security concept and the
maritime security strategy of Azerbaijan define the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction as one of
the key challenges to national security. Countering that
menace is also among the priority areas of Azerbaijan's
bilateral relations and international cooperation.

Azerbaijan has always been a staunch supporter
of a world free from weapons of mass destruction,
including through the universalization of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
establishment of WMD-free zones throughout the
world. Aside from being a party to relevant international
legal instruments, including the Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Materials, my country also participates in various
multilateral initiatives, such as the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

At the national level, Azerbaijan makes all
necessary efforts to maintain an effective export-
control system in order to prevent illegal activities
relating to arms, military and dual-use goods, including
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related materials. Azerbaijan's
export-control system takes full account of our
international legal obligations, including those under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Moreover,
the relevant State agencies in Azerbaijan constantly
enhance their counter-proliferation capacities and
physical protection measures and improve inter-agency
cooperation to strengthen control over related materials.
My country has hosted a number of national and
international events on the effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) in cooperation with various
intergovernmental organizations, including training
sessions and workshops for law-enforcement agencies.

At a time when challenges to international
peace and security remain unabated, more concerted
action and greater synergy are required at all levels.
By striving to implement their national obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004), Member States would
contribute significantly to global non-proliferation
efforts. Likewise, there is still an acute need for
increased international assistance, including from the
United Nations, to help individual member States fulfil
the requirements of the resolution.

I would therefore like to stress the particular
importance of the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We take note of
the Committee's review of the implementation of the
resolution in 2013. We welcome its recommendations to
facilitate Member States fulfilment of their obligations
and we encourage the Committee to continue its
valuable assistance to them.

