Mr. Wimmer (Austria): I should like to begin by
associating my delegation fully with the statement made by
the Ambassador of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.

Austria is deeply shocked and horrified at the events
in East Timor which followed the expression of the
democratic will of the people on 30 August 1999. We are
outraged at the systematic and calculated campaign of
intimidation and violence which, as the Secretary-General
has pointed out, might have resulted in the commission of
crimes against humanity. We strongly support the notion
that those responsible for these crimes must be held
accountable.

In what is happening in East Timor right now, we see
uncanny parallels to the killings, attacks on and forced
relocations of civilians, the destruction of homes and
property, and the total lack of respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights in the conflicts we have
witnessed in recent years and months in the former
Yugoslavia and in Kosovo. The international community
and the United Nations must not accept the human rights of
an entire population being blatantly ignored. Human rights
are universal, in East Timor as in Kosovo.

Austria has appealed to the Government of Indonesia
to fulfil its commitment and responsibilities under the
Agreement of 5 May 1999 and to guarantee the security of
the people of East Timor and the United Nations Mission
in East Timor (UNAMET). As of now, the Indonesian
authorities have failed to live up to their obligations. We
call on the Government of Indonesia to accept the offer,
conveyed to it by the mission of the Security Council, of
an international armed assistance to restore peace and
security in East Timor in order to allow the peaceful and
swift implementation of the result of the ballot of 30
August. The will of the people of East Timor must be
respected.

The major humanitarian crisis which has been
triggered by the campaign of terror in East Timor can be
addressed effectively only if the necessary security
conditions are restored. We call for full access of
humanitarian assistance to those in need, including in
West Timor.

Austria, which has actively supported the United
Nations efforts regarding East Timor for quite some time,
hopes that Indonesia will accept the help on offer. A
refusal to do so would have serious consequences with
respect to its relations with those who have so far shown
understanding for the challenges and problems facing
Indonesia.

