Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I join others
in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for his
briefing to the Security Council on these important
issues. It was also very good to have the opportunity to
hear from the representative of Chad. I would also like
to begin by echoing what was just said by the
representative of Burkina Faso and thank the members
of United Nations humanitarian missions around the
world who risk their lives to do this important work.

As other speakers have noted today, the
humanitarian situation in the region we are discussing
remains of grave concern. I should like to turn to the
Sudan first.

My Government remains deeply committed to
helping the Sudanese people. We are the second largest
bilateral donor. We have given over $700 million in
humanitarian aid to the Sudan, over $250 million of
which has been allocated to Darfur. As we have seen,
many members of the Council have today shared the
Under-Secretary-General's concern with regard to the
situation there, in particular as regards problems of
security and access to humanitarian aid. Despite all the
Council's efforts, those problems continue to worsen.
This past year alone, 11 relief workers have been killed
and 261 humanitarian vehicles have been hijacked. I
think we would all agree that that is unacceptable. It is
the duty of all parties to facilitate humanitarian access
and to commit to an unconditional ceasefire. It is also
worrying, as we heard from the Secretary-General
recently, that it appears that the Government has
already broken the recently announced ceasefire.

The moratorium on restrictions to humanitarian
assistance in Darfur has been renewed until 31 January
2010. That is welcome. The announcement was made
by the Government of National Unity on 18 November,
but it is still the case that there continue to be
bureaucratic impediments to the work of humanitarian
agencies operating in Darfur. That is very
disappointing. A number of Council colleagues have
drawn attention to that issue today. I would like to
invite them to join me in calling on the Government of
the Sudan to abide by the terms and spirit of the joint
communique on humanitarian access. There is a need
to ensure tangible improvements in humanitarian
access, not just in Darfur but also across the entire
country.
We also look to the Sudan to make a firm
commitment that humanitarian operations and the
safety of humanitarian workers will not impacted by
any pending announcement by the International
Criminal Court (ICC). That was a theme to which I
drew attention in the United Kingdom's statement
during the Council's meeting in the Chamber this
morning on the ICC and the Sudan.

Turning to South Sudan, it is important that we
have the full commitment of the Government of South
Sudan to the recovery process. My Government has
committed approximately $500 million to projects in
South Sudan since the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement was signed in January 2005. We welcome
the launch of the Sudan Recovery Fund for Southern
Sudan. We plan to provide another $70 million to cover
it over the next three years.

Turning to Chad, if I may, the humanitarian
situation remains precarious for refugees, internally
displaced persons and the host population. It demands
continued, consistent and sustained humanitarian
engagement. As we have heard today, it is also true that
the delivery of aid continues to be disrupted by
insecurity. Clearly, we need to give priority to ensuring
that that comes to an end.

