Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): The
United States will vote against this draft resolution
because, in our view, it is silent about the terrorist
atrocities committed by Hamas; because it does not
reflect the realities of the conflict in the Middle East;
and because it will not further the goals of peace and
security in the region.

The United States is deeply troubled by the
killing of Sheikh Yassin. Israel's action has escalated
tensions in Gaza and in the region and could set back
our effort to resume progress towards peace. But, as I
said in Tuesday's open meeting, events must be
considered in their context, and the Security Council
does nothing to contribute to a peaceful settlement
when it condemns one party's actions and turns a blind
eye to everything else occurring in the region.

This draft resolution condemns the killing of
Sheikh Yassin, the leader of Hamas, a terrorist
organization dedicated to the destruction of Israel. Last
week Hamas proudly proclaimed its responsibility for a
suicide bombing in the Israeli port of Ashdod that
killed 10 Israelis and injured 10 more. This draft
resolution does not condemn that attack, nor does it
condemn those responsible. In fact, it does not even
mention them, despite the fact that a number of
Council members specifically requested the inclusion
of such references.

This draft resolution also, as indicated in the
preambular language, refers only to the situation in the
occupied territories, ignoring the tragic events which
are occurring in Israel. The Council should focus on
ways to advance the goal of the two States - Israel
and Palestine - living side by side in peace and
security. The one-sided draft resolution before the
Council does not advance that goal.

The United States is committed to achieving the
vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security. We will support any action here in the Council
and, more importantly, on the ground in the region that
will further that goal, and will oppose any action that
would impede it. One-sided, unbalanced draft
resolutions by the Security Council such as the one
before the Council today would only detract from the
efforts of the Quartet and the international community
to resume progress on the path towards peace.

