Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank you, Sir, for choosing the topic of
United Nations peacekeeping operations as the subject
of our discussion today. I should also like to thank
Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra for their briefings.

The maintenance of peace is one of the principal
responsibilities of the United Nations. If it is to
accomplish that important mission, it is natural that the
Organization should have a strategy for making its
peacekeeping operations as effective as possible. In
that regard and as many have pointed out, the Brahimi
report (8/2000/809) is a fundamental reference
document that has enabled us to undertake useful
reforms in the United Nations in order to adapt our
action to increasingly complex new situations.

As time passes, however, we must give new
consideration to how to meet the many challenges
facing peacekeeping operations in terms of the political
commitment of the actors, the participation of States,
the financing and conception of missions, the equipping
of troops and organization. We therefore encourage the
involvement of the greatest possible number of Member
States, particularly troop-contributing countries, in the
current thinking on this issue. We pay tribute to the
Japanese delegation for engaging an ever-growing
number of Member States in the Working Group of the
Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations,
which it chairs. We hope that, following an
intergovernmental process, the Organization will be
able to make us of the innovative ideas that will
emerge from the process as a whole, with the principal
objective of improving the conduct of peacekeeping
operations.

It is of paramount importance that the United
Nations be able to mobilize as many troops as are
needed to address crisis situations in a timely manner.
To that end, all Member States should be able to
contribute to peace missions because, after all,
peacekeeping is a collective responsibility. It is
essential in particular to broaden the involvement of
troop-contributing countries, which should not be
confined to just a few individual countries, but should
encompass all States. Moreover, efforts must be made
to support those States that genuinely wish to contribute
troops but do not have the resources to do so.

The quest for effectiveness also requires us to
give sustained focus to the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Indeed, as many have stressed, the drafting
of mandates remains the subject of debate that is
justified in part by the gap between realities on the
ground and the missions assigned to troops. We must
continue to seek to endow United Nations forces with
realistic mandates and clear rules of engagement that
guarantee protection for innocent civilians, especially
women and children. However, they must also be
endowed with sufficient deterrent capacity in order to
ensure an operation's success.

None of this can be accomplished without the
support of Member States, the Secretariat, troop-
contributing countries and host countries, which must
all offer sustained political support and open
cooperation to peacekeeping missions. The provisions
of resolution 1353 (2001) remain relevant and should
be exploited in order to strengthen such cooperation.

With better-equipped and better-trained troops
and adequate mandates, the United Nations can attain
short-term goals. But sometimes that can be in vain
over the long term if the United Nations confines itself
to addressing physical security. It should support
political processes and help implement peace
agreements. It should also work with the country
concerned in the development sphere, because a lasting
peace process cannot be guaranteed unless the
underlying causes of the crisis are resolved; these
include poverty, exclusion and poor governance.

We cannot ignore the substantial peacekeeping
experience of the United Nations. While there have
been tragic examples in the course of the Organization's
history, it is important also to highlight the successes,
which are far more numerous.

In recent years, regional organizations too have
demonstrated their commitment and their capacity to
manage major crises. It would be desirable to further
strengthen their central role in peacekeeping. The
United Nations should be able to support them in that
respect. We encourage in particular the strengthening
of the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in the peacekeeping sphere, as called for
by all delegations that participated in the Council's
open debate on 18 March (see S/PV.6092). We are
certain that efforts will be made to strengthen the
peacekeeping capacity of the African Union, as
recommended by the African Union-United Nations
panel to consider the modalities of how to support
African Union peacekeeping operations established
under a United Nations mandate.

The available resources are limited, so we believe
that we must further rationalize United Nations action.
At the same time, we are concerned about options that
would impose sometimes subjective deadlines and
criteria regarding the termination of operations. We
remain convinced that early withdrawal can be tragic,
and more costly for the Organization. Hence, we must
better assess the threat of instability and the re-eruption
of crisis before terminating an operation or moving to
the peacebuilding stage. Specifically, during the special
phase of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR), the United Nations - while ensuring the
availability of funding for DDR programmes - should
ensure that the operation is successfully carried out.

We pay tribute to the men and women who,
through peacekeeping operations, provide security and
stability in conflict zones, many of whom have lost
their lives. War is a tragedy, and in our view more must
be done to prevent the outbreak of conflict. We must
also place a sharper focus on prevention, including by
promoting mediation and creating early warning
mechanisms to prevent latent crises from erupting into
open conflict. Such approaches are more desirable and
far less costly than peacekeeping, peace-restoration or
peacebuilding operations.

Troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat,
financial partners and regional organizations all have
their respective shares of responsibility in carrying out
peacekeeping operations. We must try to reduce the
communication gap among those players; we must
involve them in the various stages of the establishment
of peacekeeping operations. We believe that, if we all
work together, our current deliberations will help build
trust among all the key players and will enhance the
effectiveness of action by the United Nations.

Let me say in conclusion that we support the
recommendation offered by the Permanent Representative
of France regarding greater attention to the question of
languages in peacekeeping operations.

