Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and your successful
organization of its work, including today's meeting. I
also thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing this
morning.

Israel, the occupying Power, has continued its policy
of non-compliance with all resolutions of international
legitimacy and of imposing a fait accompli. One of
the worst aspects of that policy has been manifested
through measures taken by the Israeli authorities to
Judaize Jerusalem and to obliterate the Arab and Islamic
character of that holy city. In that context, we reiterate
that those Israeli actions are null and void and without
any legal basis. Jerusalem remains an Arab, Islamic and
Christian city with mosques and churches, and there
could be no Palestinian State without Jerusalem and no
Jerusalem without the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

Those policies of imposing a fait accompli carried
out by the Israeli authorities are also manifested in
the building of settlements on Palestinian territories.
We were alarmed to learn of Israel's recent attempts
to legitimize the outposts through the establishment
of the so-called Levy Committee, which has made
recommendations that run counter to international law
and international legitimacy.

Two decades after the Oslo accords, Israel has
continued to speak about its search for peace and to call
on Palestinian leaders to resume negotiations. However,
it also continues to carry out policies that run counter
to all of that. How could negotiations be successful in
the light of Israel's continuing settlement policies and
the Security Council's ongoing inability to assume its
responsibilities with regard to peace in the Middle East,
or in the absence of a strong basis for the negotiations?
How could they be resumed? How could they bear fruit
while Israel continues to detain thousands of people
and to subject them to unjust and cruel conditions?
How can we speak of trust between the Palestinian and
Israeli parties when Israel has maintained its strangling
blockade against the Gaza Strip for the past five years?

We renew our call on the members of the Security
Council, the members of the Quartet and those influential
countries to pressure Israel to end its settlement policies
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem, and put an end to the blockade against the
Gaza Strip. Unless those demands are met, there will
be no basis for the resumption of negotiations between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. If the international
community is unanimous with respect to the ultimate
solution, namely, the two-State solution, then rejecting
recognition of the State of Palestine is contrary to that
call.

Qatar takes this opportunity to urge all Member
States to assist the Palestinian State in gaining
membership to the Organization in recognition of the
positive contribution that this would make towards
establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
in the Middle East. My delegation also reiterates that
the solution to the crisis in the Middle East depends
upon Israel's withdrawal from all of the occupied
Palestinian and Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan and the remaining occupied Lebanese
territories. Israel must end all of its violations of
Lebanese sovereignty, international law and resolution
1701 (2006).

The Syrian people continue to be subjected to their
Government's systematic cruelty in violation of their
rights. Regrettably, instead of assuming responsibility
for its people, the Government has adopted a
scorch-and-burn policy by using heavy artillery,
attack helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, which has
led some Syrians to take up arms in self-defence. The
Syrian regime therefore bears full responsibility for the
situation in Syria today.

The regime has not halted its terribly brutal
and indiscriminate shelling of the capital and cities
throughout the country, including schools, hospitals,
mosques and churches. To add insult to injury, it has
threatened - through a spokesperson ofthe Ministry for
Foreign Affairs - to use chemical and bacteriological
weapons. It has gone so far as to highlight its threat to
use internationally prohibited weapons against Syrian
villages. Those threats reflect an extremely dangerous
escalation and indicate that the regime has crossed all
red lines and abnegated all responsibility. I cannot fail
to mention several announcements that threaten to set
fire to the entire region. The situation has become a
threat to the security of the region and to the entire
international community. The international community
must take urgent steps to adequately confront those
regional and international threats.

We recall that the International Committee of the
Red Cross has announced that its criteria and definition
of civil war are now applicable to the crisis in Syria.
Given those extremely serious considerations, my
delegation further regrets the Council's inability to
effectively deal with the Syrian crisis in a manner that
promotes the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Consequently, Member States have been obliged to
adopt various measures in order to actively address the
crisis in accordance with international laws and codes
of conduct. Along those lines, the Group of Arab States
will request the General Assembly in New York to deal
with the serious threat of the Syrian crisis. We also note
that the Joint Special Envoy and his initiative will be
effective only if Syria acts to ensure a transitional period
that will guarantee the establishment of a democratic,
pluralistic Syrian State in which all citizens are equal
before the law and all rights and freedoms are respected.

History is fraught with examples of the international
community's failure to bear its moral responsibility in
the face of catastrophe. Today, we are all reminded of
our responsibility to put an end to the bloodshed of
thousands of innocent Syrians and to play a positive and
constructive role in finding a solution to the crisis while
maintaining the unity of the Syrian people and Syria's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
in full respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

