Mr. De Rivero (Peru)(spoke in Spanish): My
delegation could not have imagined that, after the last
few days of last week, we would be discussing the
Middle East and that we could accept such an open
discussion in the Security Council. We could not have
expected that we would be confronting an act of
terrorism, and yet that is the case.

This surely demonstrates that those who are
fighting Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories
have neither consensus on nor control over how to
wage their struggle. Some condemn; some
congratulate; and some remain silent. This is a problem
when trying to arrive at negotiations; it is the crux of
the problem. Therefore my delegation would like to
express its most energetic condemnation of the terrorist
attack carried out this morning in Tel Aviv. This act,
just like any terrorist act, deserves condemnation and is
unacceptable, whatever its objectives might be. We
convey our condolences to the Israeli Government and
the families of the victims.

What is happening right now is that the entire
negotiation is in jeopardy - peace in the Middle East
and the road map set by the Quartet. It is important that
both sides take measures to avoid any escalation of the
conflict. The new Administration of the Palestinian
Authority - Hamas - must take urgent measures to
prevent suicide terrorist acts, or it will not enjoy the
support of the international community. It will not have
it. It must also end rocket attacks against Israel. Israel
must also refrain from using excessive force, especially
artillery, against Gaza.

Peru supports the conditions that the Quartet
presented on 30 January to the newly elected
Administration of the Palestinian Authority, headed by
Hamas. It was told it had to renounce terrorism and
violence, to recognize Israel and to shoulder the
commitments accepted by the Palestinians. That is
what democracy is - to accept the commitments that
one's people accepted, including the road map accepted
by the Palestinian people. The new Administration of
the Palestinian Authority so far has not responded to
these vital requirements of the Quartet, which,
furthermore, were reflected in a presidential statement
of the Security Council.

This situation of uncertainty is what prevents
negotiations between the parties, since the State of
Israel is not recognized and thus there is no Palestinian
counterpart for direct negotiations. This is clear;
negotiations are requested by the Quartet and the road
map. As a result, the possibility of a peaceful and
negotiated solution is blocked - a solution that would
achieve the coexistence of the two States, Israel and
Palestine, living in peace, side by side, within secure
and internationally recognized borders.

That lack of recognition, failure to renounce
violence and unwillingness to assume the commitments
undertaken by the Palestinian people constitute the
main obstacle we face now. There is no use going
around the matter: that is the problem. For there to be
agreement between the parties, we must forestall any
chance for unilateral acts of violence.

We believe that the new Palestinian Authority
Government was without doubt elected democratically
by the Palestinian people, who gave it a clear mandate
to improve their living conditions, which were bad, as
well as to put an end to the occupation. However, that
mandate given to Hamas by the Palestinian people does
not mean rejection of the international obligations of
the former Palestinian Authority Government. For
those reasons, the new Government should not ignore
the Quartet - thereby isolating itself from the
international community - because, in the final
analysis, the same Palestinian people who elected them
will ultimately be the ones to pay for that isolation.

The presidential statement we adopted on
3 February 2006 (S/PRST/2006/5) supported the
request made by the Quartet in London that the new
Palestinian Authority Government renounce violence,
recognize Israel and comply with the international
obligations assumed by the former Palestinian
Administration. That request by the Quartet is now
supported also by the main partners that provide
assistance to the Palestinian people, many of which are
beginning to restrict aid to them because of the lack of
a clear response from the new Palestinian Authority
Government.

Against that backdrop, my delegation believes
that it is nevertheless necessary to continue
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people, as
well as to consider the best way to channel and
optimize that assistance, in particular humanitarian aid,
including that provided by the United Nations. This is
a question of avoiding abandoning Palestinians living
in territory occupied by Israel. We call on the parties to
end acts of Violence and escalation and somehow
muster the good sense to achieve at least some level of
communication between the new Palestinian Authority
Government and Israel.
