Ms. Adamson: On International Women's Day,
and on any other day, I am delighted to see you in the
President's chair, Madam.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its Member States.

The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2018/ 165) and strategic review.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing.

I express deep sorrow following the terrorist attacks
in January, in particular the three in Kabul that inflicted
hundreds of casualties, as well as the attack against Save
the Children in Jalalabad. I express sincere condolences
to the Afghan people and the Government for the
horrific attacks against Afghan civilians and security
personnel. I reiterate the EU's unwavering engagement
to stand by Afghanistan in the fight against terrorism,
which is a global threat. The EU calls for an in-depth
investigation of those crimes and identification of the
perpetrators, who must be brought to justice.

The EU strongly acknowledges the crucial role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United Nations
agencies in supporting the Afghan people. The EU
wishes to have the closest and strongest relationship
with UNAMA, both on the ground and in international
forums, for the ultimate benefit of Afghanistan.

The EU fully supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process that will bring all Afghans together
and pave the way to a better future for Afghanistan and
the whole region. The EU welcomes the second meeting
ofthe Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation
on 28 February as an important step towards peace
and reconciliation. The European Union commends all
those that made the conference possible: the Afghan
Government and people, participants, regional actors
and international partners. At the meeting, the Afghan
Government put forward an important and welcome
offer of peace to the Taliban. We encourage the Taliban
to seize that offer and anticipate that it will lead towards
the establishment ofa genuine peace process.

On 8 February, the EU held its first meeting of the
EU-Afghanistan Joint Committee under the Cooperation
Agreement for Partnership and Development. The
Cooperation Agreement came into force provisionally
as of 1 December 2017 and establishes a formal
bilateral relationship. Ahead of the Joint Committee,
High Representative of the European Union Federica
Mogherini and Afghan Minister of Finance Eklil
Hakimi met and emphasized their strong commitment
to bringing about peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Respect for human rights, the full and equal
participation of women and democratic elections
continue to be a focus of the EU's dialogue with the
Afghan authorities and of the EU's actions in the country.
In fact, human rights now form an integral part of the
structured dialogue between the EU and Afghanistan
under the framework that I just mentioned. In 2017, the
human rights situation remained fragile and worrying
in Afghanistan. There were positive achievements with
the adoption of human rights legislation, such as the
revised Penal Code and the Child Rights Protection Law.

Progress has also been noted on the implementation
of the national action plan pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000) and on the elimination ofviolence against women,
for which Afghanistan has prepared an implementation
strategy. However, more needs to be done. The EU is
particularly pleased that the Kabul Process conference
underlined the need to safeguard the achievements
made in the area of women's rights in recent years.
Moreover, the elections scheduled for 2018 and 2019
must ensure the participation of women as candidates,
voters or staff members, thereby safeguarding their
rights as equal citizens.

The death penalty remains a topic of discussion,
and the EU repeats its call for a moratorium. On the
positive side, we note that, in the new Penal Code, the
number of crimes to which capital punishment applies
has been considerably reduced.

The EU calls for more concrete and accelerated
actions to implement the anti-corruption strategy
that was adopted, including an independent
monitoring mechanism.

With regard to the elections, some progress has
been made on the appointment of the leadership of
the Independent Election Commission and on voter
registration. Electoral preparations for the parliamentary
and district elections must be accelerated. The EU and
its member States remain committed to supporting
the Afghan electoral process. The EU has committed
€15.5 million to that end.

The EU and Afghanistan continue to engage
in a comprehensive dialogue on migration. The
implementation of the Joint Way Forward on migration
issues between Afghanistan and the European Union is
part of that discussion, with several planned common
actions related to cooperation on addressing and
preventing irregular migration and on the return of
irregular migrants, the fight against smuggling and
trafficking in human beings and awareness-raising
activities on illegal migration.

The European Commission continues to support
Afghanistan through programmes for Afghan
refugees in neighbouring countries to the amount of
approximately €200 million. Our aim is to support a
safe, manageable, predictable, voluntary and dignified
return process for Afghan migrants.

In 2017, UNAMA documented 10,453 civilian
casualties, which is a decrease of 9 per cent as
compared to 2016. However, the persistently high levels
of violence and the corresponding impact on civilians
remain a deep concern to the EU.

We need to continue to protect the vital role of
humanitarian agencies and to respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs ofthe most vulnerable. In view ofthe threat posed
by the many mines and improvised explosive devices,
the EU also encourages Afghanistan to maintain the
current pace of demining. We support the efforts of the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission to provide further
training, advice and assistance for the Afghan security
forces and institutions.

The EU is alarmed about the sharp increase in
opium production in Afghanistan by 83 per cent in 2017
as compared to 2016, according to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. The illegal narcotics
production and trade remain major critical challenges
to the long-term stability and sustainability of the State,
while providing significant funds to anti-Government
forces and criminal networks.

To conclude, the recent meeting of the Kabul
Process on peace and security was a clear offer ofpeace
to the Taliban, and we anticipate that that offer will now
lead to the establishment ofa genuine peace process that
is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. The EU continues
to consider UNAMA a key partner in that. UNAMA
has an invaluable role in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for that Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned process. The EU will continue to support those
efforts with all the means at its disposal.

