Mr. Emvula: As we meet again for a periodic
debate on the Palestinian question, and while there are
rays of hope for the victims of other conflicts in the
region, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict shows no such
sign. Indeed, were it not for the date stamp on the news
reports, they would read like those from months and
years ago.

Data published by the Israel Central Bureau of
Statistics reveal that, in 2015, settlement construction
increased vis-a-vis the preceding year. In early 2016,
the demolition of Palestinian homes, the confiscation
of Palestinian land and its being redesignated as so-
called Israeli State land, as well as the displacement
of Palestinians, have already exceeded those of all
of 2015. So have the mass arrests of Palestinians and
their long-term incarceration without a charge or trial,
under the label of administrative detention, a practice
that is illegal under international law. Those unilateral
measures, taken at the expense of Palestinian rights and
freedoms, mark a new and fairly disturbing phase in
terms of the clash between international humanitarian
law and the Israeli occupation of the West Bank.

Furthermore, despite repeated assertions that the
situation could not remain the same following the 2014
war, Gaza is still under Israeli blockade and the pace
of reconstruction remains inadequate for the needs of
the Strip, while disbursement by donors of the funds
pledged for the Strip's reconstruction continues to be
painfully slow. Unfortunately, the few voices in Israel
objecting to these policies and calling for constructive
negotiations with the goal of reaching a just peace
are facing increasing measures to silence them
completely, for example through proposed legislation
on non-governmental groups and on the suspension
of members from the Israeli Parliament, which targets
Arab members of the Knesset.

In 2015, the Security Council held 13 meetings to

consider the Palestinian question, but failed to initiate
any action. It is hoped that the Council will act and
support the draft resolution currently being circulated
by the Arab Group reiterating the Council's demand that
Israel immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
non-permanent members of the Council, including the
five members that also serve on the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, have actively engaged the Council on this
issue, most recently through exploring options for a
mechanism to protect the civilian population in the
occupied Palestinian territory, on the basis of existing
Council resolutions. We hope that such efforts will
soon bear fruit. The Committee welcomes the recent
efforts, most notably by the Government of France and
the Middle East Quartet, to explore ways to overcome
the obstacles that stalled the bilateral negotiations, and
continues to offer its full support to those endeavours.

Without the combined efforts of the international
community and the parties on the ground, the current
situation, bleak as it already appears, will only get
worse. In order to stop and reverse the spiral of
violence, the Palestinian people have to regain the hope
for a better future and for a free and sovereign State of
their own that offers prospects for a dignified future,
so that they and their children can feel that theirs is
a movement forward, not a slide backwards into the
abyss. We also hope that Palestinian reconciliation
efforts will succeed.

For all of this to happen, the generic vilification of
Palestinians, which at the moment is all too common
in Israel, has to end. Such demagoguery leads to a
dehumanization of Palestinians in the eyes of the Israeli
public and, ultimately, to such incidents as the apparent
extrajudicial execution of an injured and incapacitated
Palestinian in Hebron by an Israeli soldier just a few
weeks ago. The Committee welcomes the subsequent
statements by Israeli officials that such actions are
unlawful and illegitimate and that their perpetrators
will be prosecuted, and hopes that actions will follow
those words. The Committee also welcomes the clear
and repeated rejection of violence by the Government of
the State of Palestine, most recently again by President
Abbas, including on Israeli television just over two
weeks ago. I would like to reiterate here in the Council
that the Committee condemns all forms of terrorism
and regrets all losses of civilian life.

More needs to be done. In order for a peace to be
agreed upon and then sustained, a modicum of trust
has to be re-established. The Committee will do its
utmost to contribute to this endeavour, for instance by
providing a forum for exchanges between Palestinians
and Israelis at its international meetings and continuing
to encourage dialogue and synergies between civil-
society organizations on both sides. One such example
was a panel discussion on "Women's role in the search
for Israeli-Palestinian peace", organized by the Working
Group of the Committee during the sixtieth meeting of
the Commission on the Status of Women.

Additionally, in March the Committee organized
a round table on the legal aspects of the question of
Palestine in Amman to enhance the capacity ofthe State
of Palestine to fulfil its obligations in the light of its
recent accession to a host of international treaties and
conventions. In two weeks, the Committee will hold the
International Conference on the Question of Jerusalem
in Dakar, organized jointly with the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. In line with the mandate of the
Committee, in the coming months a United Nations
seminar on assistance to the Palestinian people will be
held in Stockholm, focusing on how Palestine can work
towards the Sustainable Development Goals under
the occupation, and the United Nations International
Meeting in Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace, to
be held in Paris, will examine how the international
community can reinvigorate the peace process. The
Committee welcomes active participation by all Member
States and civil society organizations in these events.

I am fully conscious of the fact that warnings of
impending doom have been given so often and for
so long in the case of Israel and Palestine that many
have become inured to them. The situation in the
region should serve as a stark reminder of how quickly
a catastrophe can break out. It is because the price
of failure is too terrifying to contemplate that the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People will continue its strong efforts
towards a peaceful and just solution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which can be achieved only by
ending the occupation, through the two-State solution
on the basis of pre-1967 borders and the just resolution
of all final-status issues.

Our efforts do not support the rights of one group at
the expense of the other. Finding and sustaining a just
peace is the only way in which Palestinian and Israeli
societies can endure and prosper. Failure to achieve a
peaceful solution would ultimately destroy both.

The Committee will continue to advocate and
work towards the goal, enshrined in the United
Nations Charter, that the Palestinian people, like all
other peoples of the world, realize their right to self-
determination. For this we will cooperate with our
partners and all those who share our common values,
those of the United Nations.

