Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
begin by thanking Assistant Secretary-General Zouev
for his excellent briefing and leadership on the issue
at hand. We commend you, Mr. President, on Russia's
able presidency of the Security Council in June. Let me
also thank Ambassador Llorentty Soliz of Bolivia for
requesting today's meeting.

I will address three points: first, the threat of
landmines; secondly, the United Nations and mine
action; and thirdly, the role of the Security Council.

First, landmines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices pose a significant threat
to the safety of civilians, parents and children alike,
peacekeepers and humanitarian aid workers during
conflict and long after it ends. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/623) highlights that it is
truly a global concern. Afghanistan, Libya, Ukraine,
Iraq and Yemen are among the most affected countries.
It demonstrates the relevance of mine action for the
Council's agenda. In places like Mosul, Iraq, urgent
humanitarian action is hindered, which means that
civilians cannot return to their homes. Indeed, the
increased use of those types of explosives in urban
and residential areas is alarming. Let us not forget that
children are the leading victims of explosive remnants
of war. That confers upon us a huge responsibilty.

That brings me to my second point - the United
Nations and mine action. We commend the role of
the United Nations Mine Action Service under the
able leadership of Agnes Marcaillou. We see a clear
connection between mine action and peacekeeping.
We actively support the United Nations in modernizing
peace operations through the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping process, which, as we all
know, the Secretary-General launched here in the
Council in March (see S/PV.8218). In that context, we
highly favour the further integration of mine action
into United Nations peacekeeping, and we look forward
to working closely with cote d'Ivoire in the coming
months in that process.

At the same time, humanitarian space must
be protected, and my country tries to help in that
regard. We are sixth on the list of worldwide donors
in humanitarian mine action. We are contributing
€3 million of unearmarked funding to the United
Nations Voluntary Trust Fund and an additional
€45 million to humanitarian demining projects for the
current four-year period. We cooperate in particular
with non-governmental organizations. We commend
them for their work in sometimes very dangerous
circumstances. Let me mention them: the Mines
Advisory Group, the HALO Trust and DanChurchAid.
That is part of our multi-annual funding and
multi-stakeholder collaboration approach, and we hope
that other countries will approach mine action in a
similar way.

We welcome recent accessions to the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction - also
known as the Ottawa Convention - the Convention on
Cluster Munitions and other instruments, but frankly
speaking we continue to have a long way to go before
all of them are universal. We therefore hope to see
additional accessions to all the relevant instruments by
this time next year.

That brings me to my third point - the role of the
Security Council. We believe that it is important that
the Council continue to consider mine action, which
can be done both in country-specific debates and
through mainstreaming mine action in peacekeeping
mandates. Therefore, we support the Secretary-
General's recommendations contained in his report.
That includes urging troop-contributing countries to
better prepare peacekeepers for the threats that they
will face and including mine action in peace agreements
and ceasefires. We are in favour of holding an annual
debate on that subject in the Council. One year after the
adoption of resolution 2365 (2017), the Council cannot
become complacent.

In conclusion, mine action really is at the nexus of
security, conflict resolution and development. Its ripple
effects can carry a long way if we go about it in the
right way. There is a clear humanitarian imperative.
Mine action enables farmers to grow crops, parents
to buy food for their children and their children to go
to school.

