Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to commend the leadership of
Spain for both organizing this timely open debate and
delivering the 2016 comprehensive review report. With
the target year of 2021 fast approaching for achieving
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), this
retrospective yet simultaneously forward-looking
review is critical to assessing how far we have come
over the past five years. In this regard, my delegation is
honoured to co-sponsor resolution 2325 (2016).

Since its adoption in 2004, resolution 1540
(2004) has successfully mobilized the international
community to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) by non-State actors, with
nearly 10,000 measures in place in the 1540 matrices
this year. This means that more than 500 measures
have been adopted by each Member State, which is a
significant achievement indeed.

However, challenges from non-State actors,
including terrorist groups and violent extremists who
seek to obtain WMD materials and their means of
delivery for malicious purposes, continue to arise at
breakneck speed. Recent advancements in science,
technology and international commerce have lowered
the threshold for these actors. Increasing reports of
the potential detonation of dirty bombs and other
attempts to acquire nuclear materials by dangerous
actors alarm us every day. Recently, the use of mustard
gas by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Syria was identified by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism.

Against this backdrop, I would like to make the
following three points for further consideration in
our joint efforts in combating WMD proliferation to
non-State actors.

First, it is essential to raise awareness of resolution
1540 (2004) by enhancing our outreach activities.
Indeed, given the extensive nature of the obligations
imposed by the resolution, ensuring a strong link
between each and every stakeholder, including the
industry, academia and civil society, will certainly
be key to success. In that regard, in recent years the
Republic of Korea has actively supported the outreach
events held by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Phnom Penh, London, Seoul,
Kathmandu, Wiesbaden, Santiago and Addis Ababa
through its contribution to the Trust Fund for Global
and Regional Disarmament Activities. Last September
in Seoul, we successfully hosted the first regional
Wiesbaden Industrial Outreach Conference, which was
attended by public and private sector participants from
Asia, Europe and the United States.

Secondly, the Security Council is not alone in
promoting resolution 1540 (2004), and we should
maximize synergetic effects by enhancing cooperation
with and building upon the achievements of various
international organizations and initiatives. This year,
my Government is privileged to concurrently chair
both the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile
Technology Control Regime. This is unprecedented
in the history of export-control regimes. The
Republic of Korea views this double chairmanship
as a token of trust from the international community
for our commitment and capability to reinforce the
non-proliferation regime, and therefore feels a great
sense of responsibility. In these capacities, we will
continue to work closely with the 1540 Committee to
strengthen the non-proliferation regime.

Thirdly, while ensuring full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), we must also scale up our actions
to enable that prevention mechanism to better respond
to the evolving nature of threats posed by non-State
actors. Expanding our current non-proliferation
architecture to encompass cyberterrorism or
radiological threats, which are of growing interest to
violent extremists, among others, is essential to moving
the ongoing process forward. For example, the Nuclear
Security Summit process has significantly advanced
the concept of nuclear security as a public good and
endowed the United Nations and its specialized agency,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), with
a central role in further strengthening nuclear security.
As the Chair of the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit and
the 2016 IAEA International Conference on Nuclear
Security, Korea remains committed to working
closely with the international community to harness
the political momentum and channel it into concrete
actions that directly strengthen ongoing efforts under
resolution 1540 (2004) to prevent nuclear terrorism.

Faced with the imminent threat posed by the
nuclear and missile programmes of the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea, as well as the consequential
threats of its WMD proliferation, the Republic of Korea
attaches great importance to the global non-proliferation
regime. With two nuclear tests conducted this year
alone and technical advancement in its delivery means
having been accelerated through 24 test launches of
various types of missiles, North Korea is now nearing
the final stage of nuclear weaponization. As such,
North Korea's nuclear programme is the single gravest
threat to the international non-proliferation regime.
Given Pyongyang's track record in the illicit arms trade
and blackmarket smuggling, a cash-stripped country
like North Korea could certainly be a willing supplier
of WMD materials or technology to non-State actors.
I would like to underscore the fact that only through
the denuclearization of North Korea can we dismiss
this proliferation concern, and that will be critical to
achieving the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

In closing, I would like to assure the Security
Council that the Republic of Korea remains committed
to the full and universal implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We will continue to work closely with the
1540 Committee in the future.

