The President: Following consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and recalls that
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in matters relating to the
maintenance of peace and security is an important
pillar of the system of collective security
established by the Charter of the United Nations,
as provided for in its Chapter VIII.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
statement of 20 July 2004 (S/PRST/2004/27)
which underscores the importance of a stronger
relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations consistent with the
principles laid down in Articles 52 and 53 of the
United Nations Charter.

"The Security Council at its meeting on 19
November 2004 in Nairobi addressed the
institutional relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union, including their
collective efforts to resolve African conflicts and
to promote sustainable peace, development and
stability.

"The Security Council, referring to the
Constitutive Act of the African Union, welcomes
the establishment of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and expresses its support for
early ratification of the Peace and Security
Protocol by all African States and the
establishment of an African Standby Force and an
early warning system in Africa. The completion
of these efforts will allow for better coordination
of regional mechanisms to foster peace and
security, sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty in Africa, as set forth in
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD).

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of strengthening cooperation with the
African Union in order to help build its capacity
to deal with collective security challenges,
including through the African Union's
undertaking of rapid and appropriate responses to
emerging crisis situations, and the development
of effective strategies for conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building.

"The Security Council welcomes in this
regard the provision by the United Nations and
donors of technical, logistical as well as military
planning support to the African Union in the
establishment of African Union peace and
security mechanisms and operations.

"The Security Council particularly
welcomes the leading role of the African Union
in efforts to settle crises in the African continent
and expresses its full support for the peace
initiatives conducted by the African Union, and
through subregional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), the Economic and
Monetary Community of Central Africa
(CEMAC), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and other regional
agreements committed to the peaceful settlement
of disputes in Africa. The Security Council
underlines the importance of being kept fully
informed, consistent with Article 54 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
strengthening of practical cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, as
demonstrated in the case of the African Mission
in Sudan (AMIS II) and the African Mission in
Burundi (AMIB), to support and enhance the
management and operational capacities of the
African Union in the field of peacekeeping and
peace-building.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community to support the African
Union's efforts to strengthen its capacities for
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-
conflict reconstruction, through the provision of
information, training, expertise and resources, as
well as to support the activities of the United
Nations and its agencies in this regard.

"The Security Council further invites the
Secretary-General to explore, in close
consultation with the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, new means of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African
Union, especially taking into consideration the
expanded mandate and the new organs of the
African Union."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/44.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Before adjourning our final meeting in Nairobi, I
would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
members of the Security Council, to express warm
thanks to the Director-General of the United Nations
Office at Nairobi (UNON), Mr. Klaus Toepfer, and the
entire staff of the Office, for having hosted these four
meetings of the Security Council.

I would like in particular to pay tribute to the
Division of Conference Services at UNON and its
Chief, Mr. Rudy van Dijck, who has facilitated the
very smooth conduct of our work.

Our meetings in Nairobi during these two days -
32 years after meeting in Addis Ababa - mark the
first occasion since 1972 that the members of the
Security Council have gathered on African soil. Our
meeting at the largest United Nations outpost in Africa
once more underlines the importance that the United
Nations and, in particular, the Security Council, attach
to the need to resolve the conflicts ravaging the
African continent.

I would also like take this opportunity to wish the
Permanent Representative of France, Ambassador De
La Sabliere, success in leading the mission of the
Security Council to Central Africa after leaving
Nairobi. I wish all the members of the mission a safe
and successful trip.

