Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I take the floor on behalf of the six countries that,
during the final phase of the negotiating process that
led to the unanimous adoption of this resolution,
moved the text forward and urged its consensus
adoption.

Bulgaria, Germany, France, the Russian
Federation, the Syrian Arab Republic and Mexico
participated in this effort, first, in the conviction that
the Security Council had clearly and unequivocally to
demonstrate its responsibility for the protection of
humanitarian workers. Secondly, its sponsors, in the
conviction that the resolution had to be adopted
unanimously, made it their task to send an unequivocal
message, as the Secretary-General pointed out, to those
who believe in impunity for acts against humanitarian
workers in conflict situations. The message to the
international community had to be equally clear and
unequivocal to the effect that the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole are committed to
undertaking concrete actions leading to the creation of

a better framework of protection for humanitarian
workers in conflict situations.

We regret the fact that the resolution does not
explicitly mention the International Criminal Court and
the Rome Statute. However. given its purpose and the
vital importance of its unanimous adoption. the
sponsors feltjustified in reaching the difficult decisions
made during the negotiating process, culminating in the
adoption of this instrument.

I wish finally to indicate that. thanks to the
dedication of humanitarian workers of the United
Nations and of civil society organizations around the
world, thousands upon thousands of people are
protected in extreme conflict situations. We owe it to
them to support and to create better security conditions.

In particular, since the events of 19 August in Baghdad,
the Council owes it to them to shoulder the clear and
resolute responsibility to demonstrate its appreciation
of their Work and its solidarity with them.

