Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We too join in
welcoming the Facilitator for the Burundi Peace
Process, His Excellency Mr. Charles Nqakula, and we
thank him for his briefing to the Council.

South Africa notes with appreciation the
important role the countries of the region, through the
Regional Peace Initiative under the leadership of
Uganda, and the African Union have always played in
steering the peace process in Burundi towards a lasting
and sustainable political settlement.

We commend them for the concerted effort they
have made to help the people of Burundi realize their
goals of peace, security and socio-economic
development. South Africa has always been honoured
to be called upon to contribute to this process, in order
to help steer the peace process towards a sustainable
political solution inclusive of all the Burundian people.
South Africa has always believed that only political
dialogue and reconciliation can guarantee a sustainable
and lasting political solution in Burundi. We will
continue to do whatever is necessary to support the
efforts of the Facilitator and his team as they undertake
their responsibilities.

The signing of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement between the Government of Burundi and
the PALIPEHUTU-FNL marked a significant milestone
in the peace process and has contributed significantly
to the overall improvement in the security and political
situation in that country. Rightly, the Agreement
brought hope to the people of Burundi, as there was a
general expectation of peace dividends.

We were encouraged by the major breakthrough
of bringing the Government of Burundi and the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL to sign the Agreement. We
therefore join the call for the return of the FNL to the
Joint Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, without
delay or preconditions, and for all parties to fully
implement the Agreement. South Africa is encouraged
by the efforts of the Government of Burundi to
promote dialogue and national reconciliation, and we
call on them to continue on that path.

We call on the Security Council and the
international community to act in unison in support of
the Regional Peace Initiative and its programmes, in
particular by supporting the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of former
combatants who have come forward in the DDR
process, now estimated at 2,700 combatants. We also
call on the international community to exert pressure
on the FNL to rejoin the peace process. South Africa
will continue to contribute to the African Union special
task force currently deployed in Burundi and do
whatever else is necessary to finalize the facilitation
process and bring an end to the conflict.

We are aware of the impending deadline of
31 December 2007 for the completion of the
facilitation process, after which we are confident that
the Regional Initiative and the African Union will
reconsider the situation and take appropriate decisions
on the way forward.

Finally, we commend the work done by the
Facilitator, who we know has equally challenging tasks
and responsibilities back home. We encourage him and
his team to continue on that path, as determined by the
Regional Initiative and the African Union. It is
important that the process continue to receive the full
support of the Security Council, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

We also join in the support expressed for the draft
statement drafted by the delegation of France.

