Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate the Mission of
South Africa on its assumption of the presidency for the
month of October. You can count on our support, Sir.

We welcome the progress made in putting an end
to armed conflict on the continent, including the peace
agreements reached in the Central African Republic
and in South Sudan, as well as the democratic processes
that have been conducted in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Madagascar. We also recognize the
efforts made by the African Union in working with
the United Nations and the international community
to achieve those goals. Yet despite that significant
progress, we are still a long way from ridding the
continent of armed conflict.

The African continent has the youngest population
in the world. Properly harnessed, it could represent a
key demographic dividend for promoting peace and
security in the region. The reality is that the majority
of young people in Africa reject violence and seek
spaces to contribute to the construction of peace and
development in their countries. As is articulated in the
Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns
in Africa by the Year 2020, if we want to achieve a
sustainable transition from war to peace and prevent
relapses into conflict in Africa, it is essential that
young people identify with the decisions made and the
results achieved. Their meaningful participation in the
processes of prevention, conflict resolution and the
maintenance of peace and security, as well as in political
processes and positions of power, is crucial. We must
therefore provide young people, youth organizations
and young peacebuilders and human rights defenders
with adequate support, both financially and politically,
and protect their lives and human rights.

The Dominican Republic worked closely with
Equatorial Guinea, as facilitator of resolution 2457
(2019), to ensure that the text recognized young people's
key positive contribution to conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa. We therefore hope - in line with
resolutions 2457 (2019), 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) on
youth, peace and security - that young people in the
region will actively participate in the implementation
of all the Roadmap's objectives, as well as in the
conference on silencing the guns in Africa to be held
next month.

Regional and international institutions must bolster
collective efforts to ensure that the processes aimed at
achieving peace are inclusive. In that regard, we propose
creating a network of young Africans for conflict
prevention and mediation, with a view to enhancing
their role in the efforts to advance the African Peace
and Security Architecture and African Governance
Architecture. We would like to take this opportunity to
urge African Union member States to fully comply with
their domestic and international legal commitments,
including the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the International Tracing Instrument. We note that
the effectiveness of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes depends on the ability of
State institutions to foster an inclusive environment,
among other things.

We hope that the Secretary-General's reports to
the Security Council and the mandate renewals for
peacekeeping operations and political missions will
include specific references to the implementation of
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). We also hope
that more young people will be able to participate
in Council meetings to share their perspectives and
visions. Since it became a member of the Security
Council, the Dominican Republic has made a point of
inviting young people to speak in meetings and debates.

Finally, I would like to highlight a few other
recommendations that emerged from regional
consultations with young people in Africa in relation
to the preparation for publication of The Missing
Peace: Independent Progress Study on Youth, Peace
and Security. The first is that we must increase the
transparency and accountability of Governments.
Next, we should develop strategic alliances between
Governments, youth organizations, young people
and communities, with a view to building peace;
thirdly, build trust between security forces and young
people; and lastly, implement mechanisms that ensure
young people's participation in the preparation,
implementation, evaluation and monitoring of social,
economic, environmental and political policies and
initiatives, and continue working to consolidate peace
in Africa.

