Ms. Sellassie: It is my honour to brief the Security
Council for the second time on the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and the
situation in the Sahel. This is an important opportunity
to highlight the predicament of a region that desperately
needs the continued focus of the Security Council.
I take the floor at a time when terrorist attacks have
taken place around the world - in Bamako, northern
Cameroon, Nigeria, Paris and Lebanon, and the
targeting of a Russian aircraft over the Sinai - attacks
in which too many innocent lives were lost and which
I strongly condemn. The attacks attest to the global
reach of terrorism and the interconnectedness of all
communities, rich or poor, and are a reminder to all of
us that no one is immune to this threat.

The fight against terrorism requires international
solidarity. Global partnerships in the fight against
terrorism are no longer an option; they are an imperative
for survival.

Security threats continue to be the main
preoccupation in the Sahel region. Increasingly, the
countries of the region, which are among the poorest
and least developed in the world, are forced to dedicate
significant percentages of their budgets to address
security threats, in a region where only 56 per cent of
children have access to primary education and only
36 per cent of the population can read or write. This
unsustainable vicious cycle can only worsen without
strong international assistance.

It is very alarming that young people and women
in the Sahel, who constitute a vast majority of the
population, are the targets of recruitment into radical
movements. Up to 41 million young people under 25
years of age in Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania
and the Niger alone face hopelessness and are at risk
of radicalization or migration. If nothing is done to
improve access to education and increase employment,
integration and opportunities for young people, the
Sahel, I am afraid, will become a hub of mass migration
and recruitment and training of terrorist groups and
individuals, which, as Council members know, will
ultimately have grave consequences for global peace
and security.

Drug traffickers are increasingly colluding with
armed groups and terrorism movements that grant
them safe passage in exchange for financial benefits.
If conflicts are to be prevented in the Sahel, illicit
trafficking, including in drugs, weapons and human
beings, should be stopped.

Governance challenges are persistent, with
major segments of populations continuing to be
denied meaningful political participation. Building
communities' resilience continues to be a real
challenge in the Sahel due to the persistence of extreme
environmental degradation, repeated climate shocks
and demographic trends that, together, are pushing
millions ofpeople to the brink of humanitarian disaster.

The persistence of those challenges notwithstanding,
there are reasons to be optimistic about the Sahel. First
of all, the Sahel has continued to receive the sustained
attention of the international community, as evidenced
by the numerous Sahel strategies. Improvements in the
coordination of our efforts and strategies will enhance
the benefits of those activities for Sahel communities.

Secondly, the countries of the region have taken
greater leadership in, and ownership of, initiatives
designed to address regional challenges in the Sahel.
There is evidence of enhanced partnership and
coordination between the countries of the region
and international partners using various platforms
established by the Group of Five for the Sahel, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.

Thirdly, the United Nations entities working in
the region have greatly improved coordination and
coherence in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. My office has made
ownership of projects by the countries of the region the
hallmark of its regional programming by ensuring full
consultations and effective operational partnerships
with regional organizations, Governments, civil society
and beneficiary communities.

We have worked closely and in an innovative
manner with several United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes that are now jointly developing
and implementing projects aimed at addressing
multidimensional issues in the areas of governance,
security and resilience. In that regard, significant
progress has been made in the development of regional
projects by United Nations entities and the International
Organization for Migration, in collaboration with
regional organizations and countries of the region.

I recognize the central responsibility of the Sahel
countries to take the lead in finding solutions to the
challenges they face. However, I am also obliged to
admit that the Sahel is a victim of the effects of such
global phenomena as climate change, drug trafficking,
violent extremism and the global economic decline,
which surpass the nations' capacity to address them
and that require diverse tools to mitigate and prevent
these trends.

As I conclude, I would like to make two
recommendations. First, I would urge the Security
Council to remain engaged in support of the Sahel
region. Secondly, I would urge the Security Council to
fully use existing mechanisms and expand their mandate
to better monitor, report on and prevent the trafficking
of drugs in the Sahel region. This trade finances terror
and instability, and must be choked if our efforts are
to be successful. I would also like to highlight the
importance oflisting all those who indirectly finance or
support terrorist activities in the Sahel. In that regard,
I commend the efforts of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
has so far listed seven entities and six individuals who
have their origins in the Sahel region.

Finally, I encourage the international community
to enhance its support to the United Nations and
regional organizations in addressing cross-cutting and
transboundary issues. Together, and only together, we
can prevent further deterioration of the situation in the
Sahel.

