At the outset, I would like to thank the German Foreign Minister, Mr. Heiko Maas, and, through him, the Federal Republic of Germany for the initiative to hold this meeting at the ministerial level, which, we hope, conveys a message of reassurance to the Libyan people about the firm commitment of the Security Council and the international community to encourage all the parties to overcome the actual crisis, put an end to the military conflict and achieve a comprehensive political settlement. I also extend my sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Antenio Guterres, and, through him, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, headed by Ms. Stephanie Williams, for their valuable and continuous efforts in support of the political solution of the crisis in Libya. I take this opportunity to reiterate Tunisia's continued commitment to facilitating the conduct of the Mission's operations. The continuing military escalation and the blocking of the political process in Libya represent a direct and serious threat to peace and security in the region and the world. It poses a major challenge that requires concerted and combined efforts and feasible and viable initiatives in order to achieve a lasting and comprehensive solution to the crisis in this brotherly country under the auspices of the United Nations and in accordance with the agreed regional and international frameworks. Tunisia has been proactive in warning against the unfolding of the crisis, the deterioration of the security situation and, in particular, the fuelling and prolonging of the conflict due to the external interference. We have always been cautious to reiterate Tunisia's principled position, which focuses on the necessity to adopt a Libyan political solution in accordance with international legality and on the basis of the dialogue mechanisms, as mentioned in the political agreement, and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Recalling Tunisia's positive and impartial role from neighbouring relations and common history, we reiterate our openness to, and support of, any comprehensive inter-Libyan dialogue within the terms of reference of international legality and under United Nations auspices. In that context, Tunisia welcomes the progress in the implementation of the Berlin Conference outcomes and the stages reached in the negotiations within the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. We hope that the political path will soon be relaunched with the participation of all the Libyan parties. Tunisia commends the important role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and renews its plea to expedite the nomination of a new United Nations representative in Libya. Such a nomination will give a new incentive to international parties and the Libyan brothers to rebuild trust in order to achieve reconciliation and a comprehensive settlement of the crisis. Realizing the grave fallouts of the crisis for the humanitarian and social situation of the Libyan people, Tunisia joins the working group for humanitarian action of the Berlin Conference and stresses the necessity of respecting international humanitarian law and human rights law in Libya. In that regard, we call on all the parties to ensure the safety of civilians, especially women and children. The situation of migrants and refugees should also be given due attention. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has brought new challenges and exacerbated the suffering of the Libyan people, especially under the continuing and widespread military escalation, putting the security and stability of Libya and the whole region at serious risk. The President of the Republic, Mr. Kais Saied, was among the first leaders who early on called for an immediate humanitarian truce, as well as the elaboration of a new vision based on the values of solidarity and cooperation, to enable a rapid and efficient response to crises, unprecedented pandemics and emerging threats to peace and security in the world. The current situation following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has proved that such challenges cannot be faced and contained through individual efforts. In that connection, Tunisia renews its deep thanks and appreciation to all Member States for their valuable and constructive cooperation, which led to the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020) on | July, initiated by Tunisia and France. Tunisia calls upon all parties to the Libyan crisis to firmly commit to the important contents of that resolution, to immediately engage in a humanitarian truce and to resume constructive dialogue and political negotiations. We underline that effectively tackling the internal disorder and achieving reconciliation will enable the Libyans to take their fate into their own hands through a political settlement supported by the United Nations, based on the Berlin Conference conclusions and in accordance with the relevant international resolutions. We also note that international and regional efforts and initiatives can never succeed in helping Libyans to move forward if differences, disputes and mistrust prevail and continue to divide them. Tunisia remains confident in the ability of the Libyan people to overcome the crisis. To that end, a peaceful and inclusive national dialogue is essential. Such a dialogue must occur within the framework of the Berlin tracks and be based on the Libyan Political Agreement and relevant international resolutions, the most recent of which is resolution 2510 (2020). In conclusion, Tunisia reaffirms its full readiness to continue its efforts - with the same commitment and determination - to contribute actively and constructively to alleviating the human suffering of the brotherly Libyan people and supporting all international efforts aimed at the resumption of dialogue among all parties to the Libyan crisis.
