We would like to thank Special Representative Shearer and Mr. Edmund Yakani for their briefings. We begin by reiterating the support of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and its ongoing efforts to support the peace process. Yesterday marked exactly five months since the leaders of South Sudan committed to forming the revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. That laudable decision remains essential for the restoration of peace, stability and the sustainable development of South Sudan. My delegation reaffirms its solidarity with South Sudan and urges all parties to comprehensively implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. There are notable advances in the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/536) on South Sudan. Significant residual challenges, however, need to be addressed, particularly the transitional security arrangements, the resolution of gubernatorial positions, as well as the establishment of the Transitional National Legislative Assembly and a permanent Constitution. My delegation is encouraged by reports that the parties have agreed to nominate regional governors and we stress the importance of fulfilling the 35 per cent quota for women in Government, as anticipated in the revitalized agreement. The maintenance of the ceasefire is a positive step and remains critical to creating a climate of security. However, the reported uptick in intercommunal conflict, as well as violations against vulnerable groups, including conflict-related sexual violence, threats posed to internally displaced persons and the forced recruitment of children for armed conflict are disconcerting. My delegation is firm in its conviction that intercommunal conflicts will not be resolved unless their root causes are effectively addressed. We also reiterate the importance of establishing strong and enduring institutions to ensure the safety of civilians and good governance. In that context, we align ourselves with the African Union Peace and Security Council's call for the finalization of all necessary instruments to operationalize the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. In addition, we are worried about the humanitarian situation, which has been further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its concomitant socioeconomic challenges. We reiterate our call for the lifting or easing of unilateral coercive measures in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, including those imposed on South Sudan. Let us do all we can to propel South Sudan towards sustainable peace and development. Unilateral sanctions should be lifted in order to enable the Government to meet the people's needs. Similarly, we look forward to the review of Council sanctions measures, in keeping with resolution 2521 (2020), towards the end of this year. We hope that progress on key benchmarks will facilitate a progressive easing of these sanctions. As countries across the globe consolidate efforts to combat the pandemic, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines calls on the international community to continue supporting South Sudan. We welcome the financial support thus far for the 2020 humanitarian response plan, but note that it is only 30 per cent funded. Greater technical and financial resources to regional and subregional organizations instrumental to the peace process in South Sudan, such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, are necessary. We also urge greater financial support to South Sudan's national development strategy, in accordance with the aims of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the South Sudan Vision 2040. We welcome the formation of the high-level task force to respond to the pandemic and encourage enhanced collaboration with the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization and UNMISS. We further underscore the importance of facilitating humanitarian access to help mitigate the impact of the pandemic. In conclusion, my delegation remains ready to work with the international community and South Sudan to ensure that peace and stability prevail.
