Mr. Braun (Germany): Let me join others in
thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his comprehensive
briefing today. Germany appreciates the outstanding
work of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in leading and coordinating
international civilian efforts, including in the promotion
of human rights, humanitarian access, counter-narcotics
and donor cooperation. We also commend his Mission
for its excellent outreach and the good offices provided
in support of the Afghan Government.

With the support of the international community,
Afghanistan has made great strides over the past 14
years. Life expectancy has increased considerably,
the number of maternal deaths has decreased and
millions of boys and girls now have access to primary
and secondary education. Despite these significant
achievements, great challenges remain.

Following the first peaceful and democratic
transition of power in Afghanistan's history, the
National Unity Government has committed itself
to implementing an ambitious and cross-cutting set
of reforms to tackle these challenges. We strongly
encourage the National Unity Government to
make further progress on this reform agenda. The
implementation of difficult economic and political
reforms is at the core of the mutual accountability
principle that Afghanistan and the international
community reaffirmed in Kabul in September. The
ministerial conference in Brussels in October 2016 will
be a highly relevant milestone in measuring the progress
achieved. Afghan ownership and leadership are key
prerequisites in the preparation of the conference and
will be instrumental in reconfirming the exceptional
international commitment to Afghanistan.

The unsatisfactory economic and security situation
are the main drivers behind the rising numbers of
Afghans leaving their country - young, educated
citizens who should be the backbone of their country's
reconstruction and development. Halting and reversing
this brain drain is first and foremost in the interest of
Afghanistan. To this end, it is necessary to provide the
Afghan population, especially young people, with the
prospect of a future in their own country.

We remain highly concerned over the high number
of civilian lives lost due to incessant fighting and the
outrageous, cowardly acts of violence and terrorism.
We strongly condemn today's attack near Bagram
and express our deepest condolences to the families
of the victims. I would also like to express our
abhorrence at the recent attacks on Kandahar airport
and the compound of the Spanish Embassy in Kabul
earlier this month. In the face of this difficult security
situation, the Afghan National Security Forces have
shown remarkable resilience during this first year
in which they have carried the full responsibility for
their country's security. We deeply deplore the many
casualties that they have sustained in their fight for law
and order in their country.

The NATO Summit in Warsaw in July 2016 will be an
important opportunity for the international community
to reaffirm its support for the Afghan National Security
Forces. Germany will continue its financial assistance
and support in the years ahead. Last Thursday, our
Parliament voted to extend our military engagement.
in Afghanistan as part of the NATO Resolute Support
Mission for another year, with a raised troop ceiling
of 980 soldiers. In so doing, Germany joins all of
Afghanistan's friends and partners in sending a clear
message. We will not abandon Afghanistan at this
critical time.

The only path to lasting peace and security in
Afghanistan is a process of peace and reconciliation
among all Afghans. We commend the courageous
leadership shown by the National Unity Government
and President Ghani Ahmadzai personally during his
recent visit to Islamabad. We are encouraged by the
commitment of the Governments of Afghanistan and
Pakistan to promoting an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned political process. We call on all regional actors
to lend their active and unreserved support to this
effort.

Let me assure you, Madam President, that Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan during
the current transformation decade, in close cooperation
with the Afghan Government and our international
partners.

