Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me welcome His Excellency President
Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan; Mr. Menkerios,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General;
Mr. Gambari, Joint Special Representative; and
Mr. Bassole, Joint African Union-United Nations Chief
Mediator for Darfur, and thank them for their insightful
briefings.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA),
which is fundamental and indispensable to peace and
stability in the Sudan, is reaching a critical stage. In
just more than six months, referendums that will
determine the future shape of the Sudan will take
place. I would like to reiterate Bosnia and
Herzegovina's support for the full implementation of
the CPA.

Bosnia and Herzegovina takes positive note of
the progress made by the CPA parties on a number of
issues, including adoption of related legislation. It is of
the utmost importance that the CPA parties engage
constructively in order to address outstanding issues
with regard to the implementation of the CPA. Border
demarcation, the establishment of the conditions for
peaceful referendums, and post-referendum
arrangements must be prioritized.

The level of cooperation between the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of
Southern Sudan in the pre- and post-referendum
periods will determine the destiny not only of the
Sudan but of the entire region. We hope that the CPA
parties will resolve all outstanding issues in a friendly
and peaceful manner for the benefit of their peoples.

It must be made clear that no option can leave
any side a loser. If unity prevails, a just power-sharing
system must be established. Moreover, the diversity
and equality of all regions, including Darfur, have to be
respected. On the other hand, if independence is
chosen, both sides must unite around the values and
principles of friendly relations and good cooperation.

The Sudan is a good example of close
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The symbiosis of a universal and

regional organization and their collaboration in Darfur
through their hybrid mission, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), have
not only contributed to an improved situation on the
ground, but strengthened hope and paved the way for
peace, as well. Experiences from this joint endeavour
will help in anticipating solutions for other conflicts
and crises in Africa.

A just solution has to be found for the people of
Darfur, who have suffered for too long. A lasting
solution for Darfur must include the equal participation
by the people of Darfur in the decision-making process
and the creation of conditions that will prevent any
marginalization of Darfur or its people. Substantial
numbers of the population in affected areas and
internally displaced persons did not participate in the
elections held in April. To address this issue, the
Government of the Sudan must find a way to ensure
that their voices are integrated into the political
process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the political
process and mediation efforts in Doha. It is vital that
the Doha peace process take place within the timeline
of the CPA. As the parties missed an opportunity to
conclude peace talks before the elections, it has now
become essential to achieve a comprehensive peace
agreement for Darfur as soon as possible in order to
ensure that its provisions are implemented before the
referendum. We call upon all parties to engage
constructively to reach a final peace agreement and put
an end to the conflict in Darfur.

We commend the African Union High-level Panel
and its efforts to reveal the root causes of the conflict
in Darfur and marvelous articulation of
recommendations for its settlement. The findings of the
Panel have also significantly contributed to a better
understanding of the situation in the Sudan in its
entirety.

It is essential that at this crucial time, regardless
of the future status of Southern Sudan, priority be
given to capacity-building of its authorities in order to
provide security and deliver services to the population.
Only a viable Southern Sudan with a strong local
structure will contribute to peace and stability within
the region.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
improvement in Chad-Sudan relations and their
positive influence on the Doha peace process. Their
cooperation along the border has had a positive impact
on the security situation on the ground. There will
always be an interconnection between the situation in
the Sudan and the peace and stability of the region. The
people of the Sudan will resolve their own problems,
but an enabling environment in the region will also
facilitate positive developments in the Sudan.

The African Union Panel wisely contemplated the
interconnection among peace, justice and
reconciliation in the Sudan. The Sudanese by
themselves, with the assistance of the international
community, must find a golden equilibrium among
peace, justice and reconciliation in order to enter the
new phase of a democratic and prosperous Sudan.

At this stage, it is vital that the Governments of
the Sudan and Southern Sudan, as well as the
international stakeholders, draw lessons from the
elections held in April and utilize all resources to better
prepare for conducting the referendums in Abyei and
Southern Sudan. It is encouraging that the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan has already completed its
team for the preparation of the referendums.

In conclusion, at this critical time all peace
processes in the Sudan - resolution of the conflict in
Darfur, the CPA, and North-South relations - deserve
the full attention of the international community. We
must all assist the peoples of the Sudan to find their
way towards a better future for their country and the
entire region.

