Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report. The final
report that the Panel transmitted to the Council paints
an alarming picture of Iran's violations of its
obligations. These violations are systematic and
deliberate and cover all the categories of measures
adopted by the Security Council - in the nuclear,
ballistic, arms embargo, transport, financial and trade
areas. They involve increasingly complex methods, the
use of shell companies and aliases, multiple
intermediaries, physical concealment, false
declarations and forged documents. The Panel has
highlighted the recurrent involvement in these
violations of the members of the Revolutionary Guard
and the maritime company IRISL.

I would like to emphasize one aspect of the report
in particular: Iran's violation of the arms embargo,
which is at the core of the violations brought to the
Committee's attention. Indeed, three new cases have
been brought to our attention since our last meeting, in
March. These arms transfers are a threat to the security
of us all.

We are particularly concerned in this regard by
the active role of Syria in these illicit arms transfers. It
is involved in the majority of the cases of embargo
violations brought to the attention of the Committee.
Moreover, Syria refuses to cooperate with the Panel
and the Committee, which is a serious Violation by that
country of its obligations to the Security Council.
Furthermore, I would recall that the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in accordance with the Agency's statute, has brought to

the attention of the Security Council Syria's Violations
of its nuclear non-proliferation obligations.

We are also greatly concerned by recent
announcements by Iran. It has stated its desire to
produce 20 per cent enriched uranium at its Fordow
site and to triple its production capacity. I would
remind the Council that Iran had hidden the existence
of this site, which was revealed by the international
community in September 2009. I would also recall that
the background and original purpose of that site are
still not well known, because Iran has refused to
provide the Agency all the clarifications it has
requested. Moreover, on 15 June Iran announced that it
had launched a satellite into space. Satellite launchers
and ballistic missiles use similar technology, and
resolution 1929 (2010) prohibits Iran from using
technology related to ballistic missiles. We would like
the Panel to investigate that launch and the space and
ballistic programme Iran has developed.

The independent Panel of Experts created
pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) last year plays a key
role in ensuring that the measures adopted by the
Council are implemented and remain effective, even as
Iran increases its efforts to violate them. In a very short
time the Panel has done an excellent job, and I would
like to express our appreciation for its professionalism.
We fully endorse the recommendations of its final
report. The Panel's task, however, is far from over, and
we welcome the renewal of its mandate for another
year. This sends an extra signal to Iran from the
international community that it must fully abide by its
obligations under the Council's resolutions.

For its part, the Committee must also shoulder its
share of the responsibilities. We hope that the Panel's
recommendations will be followed up and that the
Committee will adopt the necessary measures,
particularly with respect to updating the lists of assets,
individuals and entities, pursuant to its mandate from
the Council. This particularly applies to individuals
and entities involved in cases of violation. It would be
unthinkable for the Committee not to proceed with
their designation. We also trust that the Panel's final
report will soon be published as an official Security
Council document, in accordance with the standing
practice of the sanctions Committee, because
transparency is essential in order to keep all United
Nations Member States informed and improve
implementation of the sanctions.

11-3854]

The most recent report of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to the
Security Council, on 24 May, increases our concerns. It
shows that Iran continues to refuse to respect its
international obligations. The report is especially
detailed on serious issues linked to the possible
military dimension of the Iranian programme,
involving in particular the development of a nuclear
payload for a ballistic missile. The Agency is more
concerned than ever about the possibility of secret
activities being or having been conducted in this area
in Iran. The Director General emphasizes seven issues
in particular where the Agency is still awaiting
explanations from Iran - for example, design work
involving replacing the conventional payload in the
warhead of the Shahab-3 missile with a spherical one.
This, on top of the Iranian ballistic and space
programme, is extremely worrying, and we trust that
the Director General of the IAEA will continue
investigations in this area and that Iran will respond to
all the questions.

Iran has stated that its nuclear programme is
civilian, though for nine years it has not given the
IAEA any guarantees that its nuclear activities have
only peaceful purposes. In this regard, we regret, along
with our partners in the group of six States, that Iran
has not seriously considered our offers of cooperation
or our specific proposals aimed at building confidence
and facilitating the start of dialogue; on the contrary, it
has laid out conditions that run counter to Security
Council resolutions and are unacceptable, as the six
States recalled recently in Vienna. The Iranians are
heading down a dead-end street involving violation of
international obligations, isolation and repression, at a
time when the youth of the Middle East aspire to
freedom.

The door to negotiations remains open, but it is
up to Iran to show us, by its actions, that it wishes to
negotiate in good faith and that it can be considered a
serious actor in the international community. As the
Heads of State and Government of the G-8 indicated in
Deauville at the end of May, we shall determine, on the
basis of Iran's conduct, whether or not we need to take
additional measures pursuant to the dual-track
approach.
