Let me first congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Council for the month of September and wish you and your outstanding team every success in this responsibility. I would like also to express our appreciation and deep consideration to Indonesia for its successful presidency during the past month. We reiterate Tunisia's support for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), headed by Ms. Stephanie Williams, and we reaffirm Tunisia's commitment to facilitating the conduct of UNSMIL operations. We also thank Germany for its engagement at the head of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. As the President of the Republic of Tunisia, Mr. Kais Saied, reiterated today when he received Ms. Stephanie Williams, there is no military solution to the crisis in Libya, and the only sustainable solution would be through an inclusive, Libyan- led and -owned political settlement that puts an end to violence and escalation, addresses the root causes of the conflict and alleviates the suffering of the Libyan people. The current situation, which continues to deteriorate and threaten peace and security, is unacceptable and unsustainable. We call upon all Libyan parties to maintain unity and resolve their differences through constructive dialogue that leads to national reconciliation and to create conditions conducive to the resumption and success of the political process, in accordance with the political agreement, the Berlin Conference conclusions and the relevant Security Council resolutions. In that regard, de-escalation remains the top priority. Accordingly, we appeal to all parties in Libya to commit immediately to a permanent ceasefire and to fully engage in the 5+5 Joint Military Commission talks in order to reach consensus on the ceasefire agreement and its implementation, in accordance with resolutions 2510 (2020) and 2532 (2020). Despite the current deadlock in the Libyan political process, we firmly believe in the ability of the Libyan parties to overcome their differences and promote the supreme national interests so as to bring an end to the crisis and ensure the fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people for security, democracy, development and reform. In that connection, Tunisia welcomes the recent announcements aimed at ending hostilities, breaking the political stalemate and restoring peace, security and stability. We consider the conduct of municipal elections in Ghat to be yet another promising signal. In the same vein, we believe that agreeing on the top representation of the United Nations in Libya would significantly bolster international and regional efforts to advance the solution and help the Libyan parties re-engage in the political process. Tunisia renews its call on all parties to fully commit to implementing the arms embargo imposed on Libya. We also stress the necessity of putting an end to all forms of external interference in Libya's internal affairs and preventing the country from becoming an arena for settling regional and international scores. We also express our deep concern about the continued influx of foreign fighters into Libya, as specified in the recent updates of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and we strongly call for an end to those trends and violations, which can only exacerbate the conflict and expose the region to a serious terrorist threat. We note the responsibility of the Security Council in that regard. Since the situation remains tense in Libya, we remind all parties of the necessity of respecting international humanitarian and human rights law, particularly with regard to ensuring the safety of civilians and the protection of groups in vulnerable situations, such as migrants and refugees. We highly value the efforts of the humanitarian country team in Libya, especially those in support of the Libyan national and local health authorities' response to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We stress, however, that the full implementation of the 2020 Libya humanitarian response plan will require enhanced support from the international community. It is also high time to resume oil production and exportation so as to alleviate the dire socioeconomic situation in Libya for the benefit of all Libyans. In closing, Tunisia reaffirms its strong commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya. We express once more our determination to support all international efforts aimed at resolving the Libyan crisis and recall the important role of neighbouring countries in efforts to restore security, stability and peace to Libya.
