The Secretary-General: As the Council meets to
address the grave crisis in Gaza, I welcome the leader
of the Palestinian people, President Mahmoud Abbas,
who is recognized by the members of this body as the
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. His
presence, and that of high-level representatives of
members of the Security Council, as well as of Arab
and other Member States, is a reminder that we must
move from debate to action, and must do so
immediately.

The situation on the ground demands nothing
less. The Israeli military operation, with the stated
purpose of bringing an end to rocket attacks by Hamas
militants and a change in the security conditions in
southern Israel, is in its eleventh day. Israel has
intensified its air bombardment and sea attacks into
Gaza. These attacks have caused damage and
destruction both to Hamas militants' facilities and to
public infrastructure, mosques, schools and homes.

Hamas militants have continued to fire rockets at
Israel, most recently reaching 30 kilometres from Tel
AViV. Three days ago, in a further escalation, Israeli
troops entered the Gaza Strip. There have been fierce
clashes in heavily populated areas, including in and
around Gaza City and in refugee camps.
09-20097

According to the Palestinian Ministry of Health
and media sources, over 570 Palestinians have already
been killed and over 2,700 injured. United Nations
teams are unable to confirm figures due to the
dangerous situation on the ground, but objective
assessments, including those based on Visits to
hospitals, suggest that the numbers are credible.

Israeli sources have confirmed the deaths of five
soldiers and another 50 are injured, in addition to four
civilians killed and dozens injured by the more than
500 rockets launched in the last 11 days, some of
which have struck homes and schools.

As this conflict has escalated, I have repeatedly
condemned indiscriminate rocket attacks by Hamas and
the excessive use of force by Israel. I have called for an
immediate end to the violence, and I have warned that
if these appeals went unheeded, civilians were
inevitably going to continue to be killed in large
numbers. Today, at United Nations facilities in Gaza,
that is exactly what has happened. Three United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) schools, set up by
the United Nations as places of refuge for civilians
fleeing the fighting, have been hit in adjacent Israeli
strikes. The third strike, at a school in the Jabaliya
refugee camp, has killed dozens of civilians.

These attacks by Israeli military forces, which
endanger United Nations facilities serving as places of
refuge, are totally unacceptable and should not be
repeated. Equally unacceptable are any actions by
Hamas militants that endanger the Palestinian civilian
population. Today's events underscore the dangers
inherent in the continuation and escalation of this
conflict. I call once again for an immediate ceasefire.

In the midst of this fighting, the civilian
population of Gaza faces a humanitarian crisis. Entire
families, including women and children, have perished
in the Violence, as have United Nations staff and
medical workers. There are no shelters for the vast
majority of the civilian population. Food and fuel
supplies are insufficient. A million people have no
electricity. A quarter of a million have no running
water. The only answer is an end to the Violence.
Whatever the rationale of the combatants, only an end
to violence and a political way forward can deliver
long-term security and peace.

I have been actively engaged with regional and
world leaders to bring the violence to a speedy end. I
3
stressed to President Bush today the importance of
acting immediately, and I had valuable consultations
with Arab leaders yesterday and today, including
President Abbas. My envoys and I have been working
to facilitate the emergence of a consensus, and I will
continue my efforts with regional and world leaders,
including many already gathered here in New York.

I am gratified by the most recent initiative by
President Mubarak and President Sarkozy for a way
out of the current impasse.

I also intend to travel next week to Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory and to regional capitals.
But I do not believe we can wait until then to end the
Violence. We must achieve that now.

To do so, there must be an immediate ceasefire,
that is durable and respected fully by all sides.
Immediate humanitarian measures, including open
crossings for humanitarian assistance, should be
ensured.

In addition, Viable international mechanisms will
be required to ensure that borders are properly
functioning. This must include a plan to ensure that the
crossings operate as envisaged in the 2005 Agreement
on Movement and Access and that smuggling from any
direction is addressed. Third parties will need to
provide assistance, both on the ground and in terms of
diplomatic support, to supervise and safeguard all the
various elements of a ceasefire.

Gaza's enormous social relief and reconstruction
needs will have to be addressed. A consolidated
account of the current humanitarian needs, including
the urgent appeal by UNRWA, has been issued by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. I
urge all Member States to respond promptly and
generously to this appeal.

We urgently need to achieve Palestinian unity and
the reunification of Gaza with the West Bank within
the framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.
We must also see the urgent continuation of
negotiations for a political solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which we worked so hard for in
2008 but did not achieve.

This Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
hope that the Council will act swiftly and decisively to
put an end to this crisis.
