Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Despite
everything that has just been said by the representative of
Sudan, to which I listened carefully, my delegation is
unfortunately not persuaded that Sudan has yet complied
with the Council's demands in resolutions 1044 (1996) and
1054 (1996). Sudan has not extradited the three suspects
wanted in connection with the assassination attempt on
President Mubarak, and many of Sudan's neighbours
remain concerned about its support for terrorist activities
within their territories.

That is why the Council has to take further action. It
has nothing to do with the orientation of the current
Government in Sudan: it is purely and simply a necessary
response to Sudan's failure to respond adequately to the
demands of this Council and of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU).

We therefore welcome the initiative of Egypt in
bringing forward the draft resolution on which we are about
to vote. We fully support the measures it contains, and we
hope that they will contribute to an early change of heart in
Khartoum.

The solution to the problem is simple: the Government
of Sudan must recognize international concern about its
behaviour and comply with the demands of the Security
Council and the OAU.

One of the principal demands of this draft resolution
and the previous resolutions is the requirement for Sudan to
ensure that the three suspects wanted in connection with the
assassination attempt on President Mubarak are brought to
justice in Ethiopia. We remain convinced that the
Government of Sudan knows where they are. If they are
still in Sudan, the answer is straightforward: the
Government must extradite them to Ethiopia under the
terms of the bilateral extradition treaty. If, as may be the
case, Sudan has helped at least one of the three to leave the
country, this draft resolution clearly requires that the
Government of Sudan must take immediate action,
including, for example, by providing the necessary
evidence, to bring about extradition to Ethiopia. We will
not be satisfied until Sudan has secured this objective, and
has also ceased to support international terrorism.

We have noted with interest the moves Sudan has
made to distance itself from some of the terrorist groups it
has supported, and we have noted the claims made by the
Government of Sudan that it has demonstrated its readiness
to cooperate with all parties concerned in seeking and
apprehending the suspects. But we consider that it still
needs to do more to comply with the demands of Security
Council resolution 1044 (1996).

By adopting this draft resolution the Security
Council will show the Government of Sudan that it
remains engaged in this matter, and that it will not
hesitate to implement air sanctions after a period of 90
days if Sudanese compliance is not forthcoming.

Finally, we urge those States that have not yet
reported to the Secretary-General on the steps they have
taken to implement resolution 1054 (1996) to do so.
Rigorous enforcement of sanctions is an important factor
in ensuring Sudanese compliance.

