Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we congratulate the United Kingdom on
its assumption of the presidency of the Council and
thank it for having organized this meeting. We also
reiterate our gratitude to the delegation of Togo for its
outstanding management of the presidency in February.
We would like to thank Mr. Henry Bellingham,
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State of the United
Kingdom, for presiding over this meeting and to
congratulate him for the successful conference held in
London a few days ago. We also extend a warm
welcome to Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Augustine Mahiga, an ex-colleague and
esteemed friend, who joins us through cyberspace.

The London conference undoubtedly raised
Somalia's profile in the international community, and
generated good prospects for meeting the schedule
established for the transition period. We believe that
Somalia is facing a challenge akin to that of a
marathon runner, since the drafting of the constitution
must end by 20 April and its adoption completed on
22 May. Following that, on 15 June we expect the new
Somali Federal Parliament to be formed and, as if that
were not enough, the general elections are planned to
be held on 20 August. Therefore, we understand that
the next six months will be critical to the political
trajectory of Somalia, and a rigid discipline on the part
of the authorities and civil society of the country, as
well as the strong support of the international
community, will be required if this highly ambitious
timetable is to be met.

Both the London conference and the recently
adopted resolution 2036 (2012) - which strengthens
the operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) - demonstrate the commitment of the
international community to supporting the national
process in Somalia. This is adequately reflected in the
documents that came out of the first and second Somali
National Consultative Constitutional Conferences held
in Garowe. The Security Council must remain vigilant
to the compliance with these deadlines, since
postponing the end of transition would represent a step
backwards.

We hope that the new Government of Somalia
that will assume power after 20 August will be more
representative and inclusive of the Somali people. We
appreciate that 30 per cent of the representatives in the
new Somali Federal Parliament will be women. We are
concerned about the tactics of one group of
parliamentarians in not recognizing the Principles and
road map that emerged from the second Garowe
Conference, as noted by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mahiga in his briefing. We
appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Mahiga and by the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia to help
these tasks be completed.

Allow me now to highlight some points about the
security strategy. We are encouraged by events on the
ground and by the areas recently recovered. We are
grateful to all partners for their sustained support to
Somalia, in particular those whose personnel have
made the supreme sacrifice in helping to stabilize the
country. We reiterate that financial support to
AMISOM. must be predictable. At the same time, we
believe that the capacity-building of Somalia's security
forces is essential, and that these continue to work side
by side with AMISOM.

We are encouraged by the fact that Mogadishu is
experiencing an environment of stability that is
increasing day by day. The presence of Mr. Mahiga and
his team there attest to that fact. We fully support
expanding and implementing the stabilization plans to
the recovered sectors. The establishment of local
administrations capable of providing basic services to
their local population will be essential.

Finally, we know that Somalia is endowed with
an adequate base of natural resources, including one of
the longest shorelines in Africa. The sustainable
management of these resources must benefit the local
population. We know that piracy and armed robbery on
the coasts of Somalia are largely a consequence of the
lack of economic opportunities for its population. That
is why we are pleased that the economic development
of Somalia is a key item on the agenda of the
forthcoming Istanbul conference.

