Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We wish to welcome Mrs.
Ogata to the Council and thank her for the informative
briefing. It is disheartening to know that hundreds of
civilians in Africa are forced to flee their homes and
become refugees or internally displaced persons, living
under the most degrading and unbearable conditions.

Refugees and internally displaced persons, in
particular women and girls, are subjected to sexual
violence as they flee the safety of their homes for
unknown destinations. It is even worse when they are
now in danger of being infected with the most dangerous
diseases, including HIV/AIDS.

Can we just express our concern and fold our hands?
In our view, there are a number of concrete actions that
the Council can take to minimize and bring an end to
those situations which give rise to refugees and internally
displaced persons. There are also measures that the
international community can undertake to relieve their
suffering and agony.

There is an urgent need for the international
community, and in particular the Security Council, to
exercise the necessary political will to bring an end to the

 

conflicts on the African continent. It is also imperative that,
in those countries where the political climate is stable and
refugees have returned, support be provided for
development efforts to facilitate the reintegration of
refugees and avoid the recurrence of conflict.

Time and again, the Council has expressed its concern
over the plight of refugees and internally displaced persons
on the continent. It is our view that the time has now come
for words to be matched by concrete action. We cannot
overemphasize the need for the provision of adequate
resources to cater to the requirements of African refugees
and internally displaced persons.

Over the past year, we have seen how differently the
international community treats refugees from various parts
of the world. We in Africa are not asking for special
treatment. All we are asking for is that all refugees be
treated in the same manner. Only in Africa do we see
hungry refugees, refugees without medicine and refugees
without clothing. Why is it that we do not see this in other
parts of the world? We will therefore continue to refer to
the discrepancies or imbalances that we perceive in the
international community's dealings with refugees and
internally displaced persons until such time that the
situation is addressed.
Some have argued that African countries should cater
to their own refugees. We have no quarrel with that. Africa
has its own responsibilities to address the conflicts on the
continent by inculcating a culture of peace and democracy.
But African conflicts, which are producing millions of
refugees, have an external dimension and these external
forces should begin to help make peace in Africa, rather
than make wars.

In fact, African countries are already paying a very
high price. Most of the African countries hosting refugees
are either least developed or, in the case of my own
country, Namibia, have just emerged from conflict
themselves. In accordance with international principles, they
cannot turn those in need away. Thus, in both cases, their
social and economic infrastructure cannot cater to these
refugees. For example, in Tanzania, a least developed
country, there are about 300,000 Burundian refugees, yet
the assistance from the international community is minimal
at best. There is an urgent need to assist African host
countries. Failure to do so may impact on their political
stability.

We cannot reiterate this point enough: It is important
that arms producers halt the irresponsible flow of arms to
disgruntled elements and rebel movements that are
destabilizing and causing havoc in many African
countries. Similarly, those countries and others that
continue to sustain rebel movements by buying diamonds
and other natural resources from rebels and their
supporters are responsible for the soaring number of
refugees and internally displaced persons and should
cease forthwith. This is an area where the Security
Council should do something.

I also wish to refer to the selectivity of the media in
dealing with refugees and internally displaced persons.
Some cases seem to be completely forgotten and
non-existent, while others receive both media coverage
and the necessary resources.

Despite the fact that there are legal instruments in
place to protect refugees, combatants tend to ignore them
completely. Internally displaced persons are in an even
more precarious situation; there is no international legal
framework guiding their protection. It is for this reason
that Namibia takes account of the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement. We acknowledge that it is the
responsibility of national Governments to look after their
citizens, including internally displaced persons, but in
situations of conflict, as we can all appreciate, the
Governments' ability is eroded. These are abnormal
circumstances and it is therefore important for the
international community to assist them.
Every refugee or internally displaced person desires
to return to his or her home and resume normal life. It is
therefore important to create conditions that will allow
them to return home in safety. This is where the entire
United Nations system comes in.

I wish once again to thank you, Sir, for organizing
this meeting and to express the hope that the international
community will heed our call and provide the necessary
resources to assist African refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Finally, I wish once again to thank Mrs. Ogata for
the briefing and her colleagues in the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as in
other humanitarian agencies, who are carrying out the
enormous task of assisting thousands of refugees and
internally displaced persons under difficult conditions.

