Mr. Zuain (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, let me begin by thanking you and your
delegation for organizing today's meeting. I would
also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Jamal Benomar
and Mr. Abdul Latif Bin Rashid Al Zayani for their
statements and recognize the important contribution of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen, Mr. Abubaker
A. Al-Qirbi.

On 6 August, during our presidency of the Council,
Argentina organized an open debate to highlight
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security (S/PV.7015). We
have no doubts that the critical role played by the
Gulf Cooperation Council in achieving an agreement
establishing the basis for a negotiated political
transition in Yemen offers one of the best examples of
the responsible and timely involvement of a subregional
organization in the prevention of a regional conflict. It
was model for the peaceful transfer of power, unique
in the Arab Spring developments. At a time when there
was a real possibility of a return to violence, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, with the decisive support of the Security
Council, defined a comprehensive road map with
specific deadlines to move towards democratic
transition by holding a National Dialogue Conference,
the preparation of a new constitutional framework
and the holding of elections at the beginning of the
following year.

Today's meeting of the Security Council is taking
place at a critical juncture on that path. Over the
next few days, the National Dialogue should adopt
the recommendations of the working groups and the
outcome document that will both reflect the discussions
of the past six months and feed into the drafting of the
new constitution. All parties must demonstrate the
greatest flexibility to achieve that result. The goals
were ambitious for Yemen and would be for any country
in the world. Over the course ofjust a few months, the
political and social leaders in Yemen had to reopen
discussion on the very foundation of the new State with
great inclusiveness. We are therefore not surprised that
throughout the process there have been difficulties and
challenges commensurate with what is at stake. Success
is not assured but there is certainly an effort to find a
consensus that we hope will be maintained in the final
phase of the National Dialogue.

The Government of President Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour has taken important steps forward for
the purposes of creating a favourable environment
for advancing the transition. Although a lot remains
to be done in terms of the transitional democracy, the
specific measures designed to respond to the historic
demands of the south have been as courageous as they
are necessary to bring about trust and maintain the
commitments of the various players in the process.

Just as relevant have been the measures relating to
the reorganization and restructuring of the army with
a view to creating a security force that is professional
under a unified civilian command. Those reforms,
which have not yet been concluded, are not only
important for a successful transition from a political
point of view, they are also central to effectively
dealing with the precarious security situation that the
country is experiencing, including with the persistent
daily threat of Al-Qaida on the Arabian Peninsula.

The political progress has been important, and
we must recognize it. But we must not forget that the
men, women and young children who went out onto the
streets in Sana'a at the beginning of 2011 were not only
calling for greater participation in the decision-making
process, but they were also asking for full participation
in the economic and social life of their country. We
therefore believe that the viability of the transition will
depend on the capacity and the swiftness with which
the political consensus can be translated into a tangible
improvement in the lives of Yemenis. We feel that the
degree of political support for the political system in
the next few months will depend to a large extent on
how much the aspirations for social inclusiveness have
been met.

Like many economies in the Arab world, Yemen is
clearly suffering from the uncertainty and instability
that has been experienced by the country over the last
13 years. When it comes to Yemen, the new difficulties
are coming about in the light of a prior serious
humanitarian situation that is affecting over half of the
Yemeni population, with the potential to undermine
the transition process. Therefore, Yemen's sustainable
economic development is not only a humanitarian
imperative, it is also a moral obligation. Above all, it is
a matter of political urgency.

We therefore salute the support of the international
community for the Government of Yemen in its efforts
to deal with its economy in the long term. The meeting
of the Friends of Yemen that was held two days ago
shows that it continues to be a relevant forum for the
coordination of international aid for achieving the
economic potential ofthe country. Once again, we hope
that the promises of contributions that had been made
at the Group of Friends' successive meetings will soon
be fulfilled and translated into projects that make a
tangible difference to the lives of Yemenis.

Under the leadership of the Government of
President Hadi Mansour, the people of Yemen have
made significant progress towards realizing the
vision of a new State that can fulfil its aspirations for
inclusion, participation and dignity. The next months
will be critical for producing a stable, prosperous
Yemen, and the international community, including the
Security Council and United Nations agencies working
in the country, should be prepared to support the efforts
aimed at meeting those goals in the framework of the
priorities defined by the Yemenis themselves and with
due respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Yemen.

