Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): First, let me
extend a warm welcome to Deputy Prime Minister
Covie and convey our thanks to Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for - as always - a very helpful,
useful and informative briefing. My delegation
associates itself with the statement that will be made by
Spain on behalf of the European Union later in the
debate, so I can be relatively brief.

Like others, we welcome the very positive
developments that have taken place since our last
briefing on Kosovo. We welcome in particular the
election of the President and the Government by the
Kosovo Assembly. That was a key step forward both
for Kosovo and for regional security. And also like
others, I would like to congratulate the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Steiner, on having secured that agreement and on
his attempts to complete the process by ensuring
Serbian participation in the Government. It is, very
clearly, strongly in the interests of the Serbian
community to play its full part in this endeavour. The
provisional self-government administration needs to
work in the best interests of all communities, and the
best way to ensure that is for the Serbian community to
take part. We urge the earliest possible agreement to
such participation. I would also say that this is going to
be an important benchmark. I very much welcome what
Hedi Annabi had to say about the Special
Representative's intention to set benchmarks, which is
something for which the United Kingdom has argued
for quite a long time in successive discussions in the
Council.

We also welcome the second important
development, to which others have referred: the
transfer of Kosovo Albanian prisoners from Serbian
prisons to the custody of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). That is
an important step in building trust and confidence
between the ethnic communities. Here and now, I
should like to congratulate Deputy Prime Minister
Covic' and UNMIK on their roles in delivering this
successful outcome. We look forward to the completion
ofthe process ofthe review of sentences.

The dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina,
which as soon as possible should include
representatives of the new provisional Government, is
essential to regional stability. Both sides need to
continue to engage positively in order to represent
effectively the interests of all communities. Those
interests include making the most rapid progress
possible on the commitments in the November 2001
Common Document. There is a clear need in particular
for close cooperation on the return of internally
displaced persons from minority communities. IfI may
say so in his presence, Deputy Prime Minister Covie
has a central role to play in that process, and we look
forward to continued and further intensified
cooperation between his Coordination Centre and both
UNMIK and the new provisional Government.

I make no apology for returning now to the issues
of extremism, terrorism and organized crime, which
have been a persistent theme in United Kingdom
statements to the Council. These are regional problems,
and they need regional solutions. We welcome the
existing cooperation between law and order ministers
and police forces and other actors. But it needs to be
intensified to ensure that criminals have nowhere to
which to run. We support further investment by
UNMIK in its law and order capability, and in
particular in those measures designed to combat
organized crime. We are eager for the number of
Kosovo Police Service officers to be further increased,
with the number of international officers being reduced
only in parallel with such an increase. We further
welcome steps to increase the specialization of
UNMIK police officers in areas such as organized
crime.

I would agree with Deputy Prime Minister Covie
that the two key areas on which we should be focusing
are the building of institutions and a multi-ethnic
society. I am not sure that I find Ambassador Lavrov's
image of "the cancer of Europe" (supra) particularly
encouraging, but it is self-evidently something which
we must all strive desperately to avoid. It goes without
saying that if we are to do so we must, as a Council,
both recognize the importance of a functioning and
effective dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and
send a resounding message of support for the efforts of
the Special Representative, who has made such a good
start in his new job. I am very pleased to say that I
think that the sense of the debate today very strongly
reflects both those points.

