Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to join my
colleagues in welcoming Foreign Minister Ramos-
Horta and Special Representative Hasegawa to the
Council. I thank both of them for their statements.

In terms of peacebuilding, Timor-Leste has been
one of the United Nations success stories, and we all
hope it will remain so. In that regard, I would in
particular like to thank the Foreign Minister for his
honest account of the recent unrest and difficulties in
Timor-Leste. It shows that, while the overall situation
in Timor-Leste has greatly improved in recent years,
we cannot afford to lose sight of the tasks still ahead.
We express the hope that the present difficulties will
only delay, but not alter, the previous steady course
towards a smooth transition from peacebuilding to
sustainable development.

I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union. I shall only add a few points.

A major next step will be the upcoming
parliamentary and presidential elections in 2007, which
will require continued international support to ensure
that democracy in Timor-Leste can be further
consolidated. We therefore support Timor-Leste's
request for a continued United Nations political
presence. However, given that many of the functions of
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
are already being taken over by bilateral and
multilateral development partners, the size of that
presence should be limited, leaving the Timorese in the
driver's seat.

We support the elements for the new mission
proposed in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2006/251). They include in particular the electoral,
political and human rights elements; the size of the
security component and the number of civilian advisers
should be carefully considered in the light of the
already considerable bilateral and multilateral
commitments that have been made to Timor-Leste.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
report on the issue of justice and reconciliation
requested by the Security Council in September 2005.
As stated previously, we had hoped that the report
could be released in time to guide the Council in the
post-UNOTIL period. We hope it will be released as
soon as possible. In that respect, we support the
suggestion contained in the Secretary-General's present
report that, as part of its human rights mandate, the
proposed United Nations mission should assist in
strengthening national capacity and mechanisms for
promoting justice and reconciliation.

The success of the elections in 2007 will be
crucial to secure a democratic future in Timor-Leste.
Continued international assistance will be required.
The Government of Timor-Leste, the United Nations
and other bilateral and multilateral development
partners will have to work hand in hand to ensure that
peace, development and democracy are further
consolidated. I think we all sense the strong
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to take
charge, as well as to form a better, more prosperous
and democratic future for its people. We strongly
welcome and support that.

