Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe and
Mr. Craig Boyd for their briefings and to welcome the
Permanent Representative of Somalia in our midst.

Despite the numerous challenges faced by the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia, in
the past few months it has managed to achieve some
progress towards attaining its political and security
objectives by pursuing dialogue with opposition
groups, building local governance, preparing a draft
constitution and strengthening security institutions. We
welcome the commitment shown by President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and his Government to setting up
an all-inclusive Somali Government.

We urge the opposition groups that have not yet
joined the Djibouti process to participate in the
reconciliation process and to eschew violence. By the
same token, we urge capable States and organizations
to convince all Somali factions outside the peace
process to lay down their arms, stop fighting and
participate in political dialogue and the reconciliation
process.

We invite the TFG to continue its efforts with a
view to achieving national reconciliation. In this
regard, we appeal to the international community to
redouble its support for the Government.

We felt shocked by the attack that targeted the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) on
17 September, and we strongly condemned it. We
renew our condolences to the Governments of Burundi
and Uganda, as well as to the families of the victims
who lost their lives in that attack. We also wish to
voice our sympathy with the wounded.

By the same token, we wish to commend the role
undertaken by AMISOM. in an environment fraught
with risks. We urge the international community to
complete the disbursement of the funds it has pledged
in support of the Mission and rapidly transform it into
a United Nations mission, in accordance with
resolution 1863 (2009).

We welcome the generous contributions made by
States of the region and the international community to
support and strengthen the Somali police and security
forces. We urge donors to fulfil the pledges they made
in Brussels and cooperate closely with the Joint
Security Committee, with a view to coordinating their
contributions and supporting the Committee as a
political forum able to facilitate the preparation of a
national security strategy in accordance with resolution
1872 (2009).
We believe that there is a need for the
simultaneous implementation of a package of capacity-
building programmes in various Government bodies,
such as the judiciary, the parliament and the
Government administration. We urge the TFG to take
decisive steps to extend and entrench its authority,
restore the rule of law and meet the basic needs of the
population.

We express our concern at the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation as a result of Violent acts of
abduction and killing and other threats to humanitarian
workers, as well as the drought that hit the country.
This has increased the number of those in need of
humanitarian assistance from 3.5 million to 3.7 million,
approximately 50 per cent of the total population.

In this regard, we applaud the sacrifices of and
the courage shown by humanitarian workers and
denounce the recent attacks against them, including the
looting of their compounds. We urge all parties to
abide by human rights law and international
humanitarian law and to take steps to protect civilians,
including humanitarian workers.

We also call upon all parties to pave the way for
unfettered delivery of humanitarian aid and
cooperation with humanitarian organizations on that
score. Moreover, we urge all States to support the
consolidated appeal and the United Nations approach
regarding Somalia.

We express our concern over persistent criminal
activity, including the smuggling of drugs and arms
and trafficking in weapons. We call upon the
international community to find appropriate means to
grapple with illegal activities that threaten peace in
Somalia and the region as a whole.

With regard to piracy, once again we emphasize
that the problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia is a
natural result of the unstable situation in Somalia, the
overall deterioration in the security situation and the
absence of State authority. In order to resolve this
problem in a definitive manner, there must be a
complete and comprehensive solution to the question
of Somalia.

Although we support the international efforts
deployed to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia, we
warn against the use of an international maritime
presence in the region to protect illegal fishing
activities in Somalia's territorial waters and exclusive
economic zone. We urge States with a maritime
presence off the Somali coast to try to protect
Somalia's maritime wealth. We are duty-bound not to
turn the international maritime presence into a tool
protecting breaches of the principles of international
maritime law and preventing the Somali people from
enjoying its riches.
In conclusion, we commend the efforts made by
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and his team, and we express
our support for him.

