Mr. van Bohemen (New Zealand): Mr. President,
I would like to welcome you and the other Foreign
Ministers who are taking part in today's debate, and
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing. I would like to commend the thought-
provoking briefings we have had from Mr. Christophe
Deloire and Ms. Mariane Pearl, particularly Ms. Pearl's
reflections on the changing nature of journalism, the
need for reflection on the balance between reportage
and entertainment, and her analysis of the threats
posed - by terrorist organizations, other non-State
actors and, sadly, Governments that are Members of our
Organization - to those who take on the demanding
challenge of reporting the news.

It has been almost nine years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1738 (2006), on the protection
ofjournalists in armed conflict. The intervening years
have been particularly dangerous and bloody, as we
have heard today. More than 60 journalists have been
killed each year since the adoption of resolution 1738
(2006). Most, but not all, of those fatalities have been
conflict-related, and many more deaths go unreported.
Already this year 25 journalists have been killed. New
Zealand therefore welcomes the opportunity this debate
gives us to reflect on the protection ofjournalists in
armed conflict, and we commend Lithuania for taking
that initiative.

Today I wish to focus on four challenges to
protection. The first is tackling impunity. In nine out
of 10 cases, the perpetrators of attacks on journalists
are never prosecuted. That remains first and foremost
a national responsibility. While it may pose particular
challenges for fragile and conflict-affected States,
there are tools available to assist them with it, including
through regional organizations. States should be better
at asking for help. Today's resolution 2222 (2015)
strengthens standards in that area.

Secondly, New Zealand welcomes the increased
monitoring by the United Nations of the protection
of journalists, including in the Secretary-General's
thematic report on the protection of civilians
(S/2013/689) and in country-specific reports. Such
reports should reflect on the work of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and of
the various special rapporteurs and envoys who raise
concerns about attacks on journalists in connection to
their own mandates. That will provide more clarity, at
the national level and across the United Nations system,
for improving the implementation of resolution 1738
(2006) and now resolution 2222 (2015) as well.

Thirdly, we recognize the particular vulnerabilities
faced by local journalists, who represent a majority of
the victims. Local journalists often lack access to the
kind of equipment and resources that can help them to
keep safe. In that regard, we urge media organizations
to take responsibility for all their staff, regardless of
their national status. We also urge United Nations
personnel in the field to remain alert to the protection
challenges facing localjournalists.

Finally, there is the transformative effect of
technology and the rapidly evolving media landscape.
Anyone with a pen and notepad, a smart phone and
a Twitter account can contribute to the discussion
through the Internet and social media. That has led to
the rise of citizen journalists, who are often the only
source of information in areas controlled by terrorists
and other non-State actors. The importance of such
changes cannot be ignored. Citizenjournalists are often
exposed and at risk. That has been grimly demonstrated
in Syria, where credible reports indicate that at least
130 Internet and citizen journalists have been killed
since the start of the conflict.

Journalists remain a vital part of our work here
in the Council. We have been reminded graphically
today of many of the horrible incidents involving the
persecution of journalists in Syria and elsewhere.
We value the close relationship we have with the
representatives of the media who follow the work of the
Council both here and in conflicts abroad. The story of
what is happening on the ground and behind the scenes
must be told. The people of Burundi, Syria, South
Sudan, Ukraine, Yemen and elsewhere need a voice.

