Mr. Thomas (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting. We are particularly pleased to see you here
today and are grateful to you and the Burkina Faso
delegation for all your hard work in promoting an
agenda item to which we attach great importance too. I
would like to thank too the Secretary-General for his
words, and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for his
informative and thought-provoking briefing.

We agree that drug trafficking constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. We see this, as
others have said, in several regions of the world. For
example in Afghanistan, the drugs trade is one of the
most powerful forces undermining legitimate
Government and promoting instability. In that
particular context I was pleased to see a decrease in
poppy cultivation in Afghanistan by some 22 per cent
this year, and an increase in the number of important
drugs traffickers being prosecuted by Afghan
authorities. But these gains are fragile, so we look to
the Government of Afghanistan, with the support of
international partners, to consolidate this progress.

Today we are particularly concerned about the
threat posed by drug trafficking in West Africa and
specifically the fact that West Africa has become a
significant route for cocaine being trafficked from
Latin America into Europe. There are a number of
factors that make West Africa particularly attractive to
drugs traffickers. Recent events in Guinea and
elsewhere have highlighted the fragility of political
institutions across much of West Africa. We strongly
support African Union calls for an end to
unconstitutional changes of government. West Africa is
also the shortest disembarkation point when travelling
from South America to Europe. Organized criminal
gangs, particularly from Latin America, have been
scaling up their operations and their presence in the
region in the past five years. And we know that when
their activities are disrupted in one country, they then
look to exploit another.

These developments have serious implications for
West Africa. Organized crime, drug trafficking, the
misappropriation of assets and corruption disrupt
growth, undermine investment and discourage
entrepreneurship. In West Africa, organized crime and
drug trafficking have the potential to undermine all the
good work that has been done to promote economic
development, reduce corruption and improve poor
people's lives.

The clear role that West African States, and their
leaders in particular, can play is crucial. That is why
we thank the Cape Verdean leaders, for example, for
the excellent work they have done on the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Regional Action Plan against drug trafficking. Now is
the time to convert this plan into action and to
operationalize it on the ground. The United Kingdom
stands ready to help in taking this forward.

We welcome the work that the United Nations is
undertaking in the region through its offices such as the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
United Nations Office for West Africa. This includes
developing programmes such as the West Coast
Initiative, aimed at taking forward the ECOWAS
Regional Action Plan. The United Kingdom
Government is committed to supporting these efforts.
That is why we have set up a cross-governmental
strategy group to mobilize and coordinate United
Kingdom counter-narcotics activity in West Africa. We
have provided £750,000 this year to fund counter-
narcotics projects in Ghana, Sierra Leone and Nigeria.
And we aim to provide more funding next year. Our
Serious Organized Crime Agency has increased its
presence in the region to help local law enforcement
agencies target traffickers and develop better
intelligence. Staff members of our Border Agency have
been deployed to airports in Ghana and Nigeria to
target drug mules. And we are working in partnership
with Governments in West Africa to address
governance and corruption concerns, and to tackle
constraints to economic development.

We have had some successes but more needs to
be done. We must make clear to cocaine users the
impact they are having on the lives of people in
producer and transit countries. We need to continue to
help Colombia to combat its drug cartels. We need to
work with international partners and organizations to
ensure a coordinated and coherent response.

The threat from organized crime is constantly
evolving. Criminals are very resourceful in finding
new trades, new routes and new methods. We need to
make sure our response is equally flexible.
We thank Burkina Faso for their draft presidential
statement. We support the recommendation that the
United Nations should consider mainstreaming drug
trafficking into its wider conflict prevention,
assessment and peacebuilding activities. And we call

on the Secretary-General to provide more information
on drug trafficking where it risks threatening or
exacerbating an existing threat to international peace
and security.

In closing, I should like to thank the outgoing
members of the Security Council - Burkina Faso,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Libya and Viet Nam - for all
their contributions over the last two years. And I would
also like to welcome the incoming members - Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon, Lebanon and Nigeria.
We look forward to working with them.

