Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on successfully presiding over the Security Council
for this month. I wish friendly South Africa all the best.

On 14 September, my country endured awful
attacks against Saudi ARAMCO oil facilities using
Iranian weapons, which led to a decrease in oil
production by almost 50 per cent. That act of aggression
is a flagrant violation of international rules and norms
and against international peace and security. The
international community must take a historic stance.
This is a grave threat to the world oil supply and the
international economy, and not only to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. However, my country was able to contain
the repercussions of those attacks and resume normal
production in record time.

It is clear that those and other attacks against
international energy production, as well as missile
attacks against my country, are in defiance of the strong
and steadfast policies of my country. They are in defiance

of collective international counter-terrorism efforts and
an attempt to intervene in the internal affairs of States
in our region. In that regard, my country appreciates the
condemnation of the international community for those
attacks. We call on the international community to take
stronger and more comprehensive measures to assume
its responsibilities in confronting those subversive
policies that support terrorism and foment sectarianism
in the region. They support armed militias and seek to
destroy the countries of the region by sowing strife and
threatening the world oil production. The international
community must realize that it is time to act decisively
and form a united front to protect the region and the
world's economy from any reckless behaviour that
could lead to further crises in the region and the world.

I reiterate the clear position of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia against any strife and war in the region.
We do not seek war. However, at the same time, we
will not hesitate in protecting our territories from
any aggression. We will not hesitate in protecting our
citizens and the resources ofour country by all legitimate
means. We believe in the principles of dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. However, any dialogue
must be coupled with an effective cessation of threats
and hostilities. All countries that call for dialogue must
abandon their policies of exporting their revolutions
and creating sectarian pockets in other countries as a
means of interfering in their internal affairs.

Over the course of past century and up until
today, the world has not seen a crisis as prolonged
as the Palestinian crisis, suffering as deep as that of
the Palestinian people or policies as repressive as
those of Israel. Although Israel joined the United
Nations as a State Member, it has disregarded all the
resolutions of this international Organization and the
Security Council, which was tasked with maintaining
international peace and security. Israel continues its
heinous violations of human rights in Palestine before
the eyes of the entire world. Israeli policies are based
on a fait accompli - an approach that must change
in order to end the greatest crisis in the world to have
befallen an entire people.

The Palestinian people have suffered one of the
most heinous forms of occupation in modern history.
However, Palestinians have not given up. They have
continued to struggle amid the support of their brothers
and friends in order to reach a just solution. This crisis
cannot be resolved without addressing its root causes,
namely, Israeli occupation and its hostilities. We believe
that the Palestinian question is of the utmost importance
to stabilizing the region. Any solution must be based
on a two-State solution, in line with the international
terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative of
2002, which calls for establishing the Palestinian State
along the borders of4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its
capital. It also calls for the return of refugees and an
end to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Arab Golan
and of Lebanese territories.

Historically, my country has been among the largest
donors and supporters of the Palestinian people. That is
why, in September, we announced the contribution of an
additional $50 million dollars in support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) and its programmes and
in order to provide humanitarian assistance and basic
needs to the Palestinian refugees. Therefore, in total,
we have contributed nearly $800 million to UNRWA
over the past two decades.

My country once again welcomes the agreement to
create the Syrian Constitutional Committee. It gives us
hope for the possibility ofreaching a political agreement
that would put an end to the suffering of the fraternal
Syrian people and ensure the safe and voluntary return
of Syrian refugees in line with international standards.
My country condemns the Turkish military operations
in northern Syria. It is important not to take any
measure that would exacerbate the Syrian crisis and the
suffering of the Syrian people. All parties must refrain
from any measures that would undermine international
efforts against terrorist Da'esh or threaten Syria's unity
and territorial integrity.

The Government of my country reiterates its call
for confronting the armed militias and expelling them
from Syria. Those militias serve foreign agendas and
seek to destroy Syria by fomenting instability in the
region. We call on the international community to unite
against any unilateral measure that would undermine a
political solution in Syria, in line with resolution 2254
(2015).

My country fully supports the Yemeni Government
and the fraternal Yemeni people during the current
crisis in their country and will continue to do so until a
comprehensive political solution is reached and stability
is restored in Yemen. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
recently provided $500 million to Yemen, through the
United Nations, to support the humanitarian response
plan in the country for 2019. This means that the
Kingdom has contributed more than $14 billion in the
form of support and aid to Yemen. We also hosted a
dialogue recently between the Yemeni Government
and the Southern Transitional Council to bridge any
differences regarding the solution in Yemen and
addressing the Houthi coup. The dialogue concluded
with what will be known as the Riyadh agreement,
which will be signed soon. According to this agreement,
a new Government in Yemen will include 24 efficient
ministers and will seek to create a united front, using
State institutions in the service of all the Yemeni people
while providing them with their essential needs.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports United
Nations efforts to solve the crisis in Yemen and welcome
the progress made in creating joint observation posts
in Al-Hudaydah. My country once again calls on the
international community to take all necessary measures
to support the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, which was adopted almost a year ago but is
yet to be implemented due to the stalling of the Houthi
militias. The Stockholm Agreement is necessary to
reach a comprehensive solution in line with the three
terms of reference, in particular Council resolution
2216 (2015).

