The Deputy Secretary-General: I want first
to commend the Republic of Korea for convening
this open debate on resolution 1540 (2004). Let us
recognize that in its first 10 years, this landmark
resolution has accomplished a great deal. Resolution
1540 (2004) has helped us make important inroads
against the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. The resolution has set in motion a
great number of steps by Member States. Over 30,000
measures and actions taken by States to implement
the resolution have been reported to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

This, of course, only tells part of the story. There
have also been setbacks and disappointments, including
the recent use of chemical weapons in Syria. However,
through vigorous diplomatic and administrative
action, and by agreement, over 90 per cent of Syria's
chemical weapons have been removed even as the
conflict has continued and intensified. We note that
some 20 countries have not submitted a report on their
implementation efforts to the 1540 Committee. In most
cases, these are countries facing serious economic or
social difficulties. I encourage all Member States that
have not yet done so to submit a first report in this
anniversary year.

If resolution 1540 (2004) is to work even more
effectively, it must be a global commitment and a global
enterprise. It is critical for every country to implement
the resolution. Terrorists and traffickers tend to target
countries whose customs, borders, trade, ports and
airports are less well or poorly monitored or controlled.
One promising trend is the preparation of voluntary
national implementation action plans. At the recent
Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague, 32 countries
released ajoint statement reaffirming their commitment
to submitting such action plans to the 1540 Committee.
That was an important step forward.

Looking ahead, we hope to see expanded regional
cooperation in implementing the resolution, especially
since States sharing borders often face similar
challenges. Civil society also has a major role to play
in moving the world closer to meeting the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004), and through such joint efforts we
can come closer to an even more ambitious vision - a
world free of all weapons of mass destruction.

Supporting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a high priority for the United Nations and a
key task for the Office for Disarmament Affairs. We
all share an interest and a duty to prevent individuals
and non-State groups from acquiring and using these
abhorrent weapons. The effective implementation
of this resolution requires a wide scope of measures
ranging from legislation to law enforcement. It requires
action on the part not only of Governments but also
of industry and other relevant actors. In this year of
its tenth anniversary, I appeal to all States and other
stakeholders to continue their e fforts to implement this
resolution.

In closing, as the Secretary-General has said several
times, there are no right hands for wrong weapons. Let
us join together in the work against their proliferation
with renewed resolve to ensure a world of greater peace
and security in the years to come.

