Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would first of all like
to congratulate your delegation, Mr. President, on its
very successful presidency of the Security Council and
to express our appreciation to you, Sir, in continuing to
preside over this very important debate, which shows
your strong commitment to the signature event that
your delegation chose during its presidency. I also thank
the presidency of Equatorial Guinea for highlighting
the important strategy of silencing the guns to bring
peace and stability to Africa, as well as the leadership
of the United Nations and the African Union for
their insightful briefings. We are also honoured to
co-sponsor the important resolution adopted earlier
today (resolution 2457 (2019)).

Kazakhstan fully supports the Master Road Map
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020. Despite the immense challenges, we are
confident that the African Union's aspirations for
a conflict-free Africa are achievable. Recently, the
African Union's ability to resolve conflicts has been
internationally acknowledged, especially in conflict-
torn countries such as Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra
Leone, the Gambia, those in the Horn of Africa and
other places. The African Union is now paving the
way for peace in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. My delegation would like to make the
following observations.

First, national and regional ownership is crucial
for success. We therefore need to carefully listen to the
guidance given by the African troika. At the same time,
we must harness the comparative advantages of regional
economic structures, such as the Economic Community
of West African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. That is because of their
in-depth understanding of the dynamics and root causes
of conflicts and capability to mobilize local financial
and human resources. Likewise, parliamentarians,
religious leaders, women, youth and civil society are
also important assets with whom we must engage.

Secondly, strengthened cooperation, unity of
purpose and consolidation among all Member States and
international organizations are essential for a conflict-
free Africa. That calls for a reinforced institutional
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union on peace, security and development. That
requires new modalities for joint analysis, planning,
assessment and reporting for a smoother and more
effective partnership.

Thirdly, conflict prevention and mediation are
priorities that require comprehensive, coordinated
action. That should be aimed at strengthening the
security-development nexus in order to implement
the Secretary-General's reform of the United Nations
development system. That should be accompanied by
strengthening all existing African Union preventive
diplomacy tools, including the guidance of the Panel of
the Wise. For our part, we propose a three-fold strategy
to prevent and address conflicts through an enhanced
security-development nexus, a regional approach and
the United Nations delivering as one.

In order to contribute to the United Nations
reforms, we propose establishing an interregional
United Nations modelling centre for the Sustainable
Development Goals in Almaty, and look forward
to forming partnerships with African countries.
Through investments in education, health, welfare,
employment, climate mitigation and refugee and
migrant rehabilitation, we will be able to prevent illegal
trafficking in small arms and light weapons and human
beings and drugs, and combat transnational crimes,
which fuel conflicts.

Fourthly, enhancing peacekeeping is another
critical priority in preventing conflicts in Africa.
The African Union-led peace support operations have
been recognized as absolutely essential to the Security
Council's responsibility for maintaining peace and
security. The African Union forces and hybrid missions
have also proven to be very effective owing to their
familiarity with their own terrain, local conditions
and the tactics of armed and militia groups. They
have provided invaluable reinforcement for our global
counter-terrorism action. We must therefore continue
capacity-building by way of training and providing
the latest equipment, as well as exploring different
sustainable predictable mechanisms for the financing
of African Union peace operations.

In conclusion, I would like to once again reiterate
that Kazakhstan, as an observer at the African Union,
is strongly committed to helping African countries
fulfil their vision for peace.

