Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. At the outset, we would like to congratulate Belgium on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and pay tribute to His Excellency Mr. Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium. We should also like to welcome Her Excellency Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and other briefers to today's open debate. Promoting and sustaining international peace is a key issue for the Non-Aligned Movement. The Movement and its member States have historically opposed war and supported peace, fought against colonialism and neocolonialism, rejected all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and struggled to suppress slavery and the slave trade. The Movement reaffirms and underscores its principled position and commitment with regard to the promotion of the pacific settlement of disputes, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including those adopted by the Security Council. The strengthening of the role of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and_ resolution, confidence-building, national reconciliation, and post-conflict peacebuilding, rehabilitation, reconstruction and development contributes to the strengthening of international peace and security and to saving future generations from the scourge of war and armed conflict. The States members of the Movement stand ready to take effective measures for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace to defend, promote and encourage the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered. The Movement also stresses that the root causes of conflict should be addressed in a coherent, well- planned, coordinated and comprehensive manner, with other political, social, economic and developmental instruments. During their eighteenth summit, held in Baku in October 2019, the Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement took note of the importance and merit of the concept of sustaining peace, as understood in the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)), and reaffirmed the primary responsibility of national Governments andtheir leadership and ownership in identifying, driving and directing priorities, strategies and activities. The Non-Aligned Movement also emphasizes the need for the involvement of all segments of society in peace processes, including women and youth, who can play an important role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts and in building peaceful and resilient societies. Inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to ensure that the needs of all segments of society are taken into account. The Non-Aligned Movement proceeds from the strict belief that the observance of the principles of international law and the fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed by States, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, are of the greatest importance for the maintenance of international peace and security. Based on that premise, in cases in which violations of international law take place, those responsible must be held accountable in order to prevent their recurrence and seek sustainable peace, justice, truth and reconciliation. Otherwise, impunity would run rampant and perpetrators would be de facto encouraged to continue committing their crimes. In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement underscores that there can be no development without peace, and no peace without development. Therefore, we should redouble our collective efforts to enhance the synergies created by peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, as appropriate, and attain the overall objective of sustaining peace, thereby fulfilling the commitments made when our Heads of State and Government adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
