Mr. Bishnoi (India): I thank the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for the briefings that they have provided.

We welcome this opportunity to share our views
on the subject of conflict prevention, which cannot but
be of the utmost importance to the membership of the
United Nations. We note, however, that decisions are
taken by the Council before the views of non-members
are heard. That has been the case today as well. We
therefore wonder about the purpose served by an open
debate.

We have perused the concept note (S/2014/572, annex) with great interest. To be honest, it would be
difficult for us to say that we are wiser after having
done so. But then, that may have to do with the subject
that we have at hand today.

The concept note refers to the need for the Security
Council to move from a culture of action to one of
prevention. In general terms, it would be difficult to
take exception to that. Equally important, if not more
so, is the need for the Council to establish a culture of
introspection.
It is not that the Council has not had the tools
that are required for it to fulfill its responsibilities.
The fact is that the Council has decided to use those
tools selectively and on the occasion that they suit the
convenience of those who have taken the decision.
These are political issues, and it is not as if they can be
resolved by any technical fixes.

The concept note refers to the need to respect the
prerogative of national authorities to resolve internal
crises. That, we believe, is a cardinal principle. We
are convinced that the interventionist trend of using
humanitarian concerns as a pretext runs the danger of
exacerbating conflict between and within countries.
The Council should be cognizant of the fact that the
developing world consists of nascent sovereignties. Its
actions should not be such as to revive the insecurities
of a bygone era.

The concept note also refers to the Council using
innovative approaches and taking forward the idea of
preventive missions. We would advise abundant caution.
Unless help is requested by sovereign Governments,
imposing solutions from outside can easily be a recipe
for instant disaster.

Reference has been made to the role of the Secretary-
General and of his so-called good offices function.
Once again, only a role that is acceptable to all parties
can be tenable. Anything else would be perceived as
interference and would be counter-productive.

While action by the Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations is binding on all
States Members of the United Nations, the efficacy of
most of the conflict-prevention tools that are available
to it depends on its moral authority. Moral authority,
however, can only be limited if the composition of
the Council is demonstrably out of touch with ground
realities. The fact is that the Security Council is today
seen as neither representative nor reflective of the
aspirations and views of the larger membership. It is
only when the composition of the Council is reformed
and it is seen as being responsive to the needs and
wishes of the general membership that its actions will
have have the moral force that is required for them
to be accepted in good faith and acted upon. That, in
our view, is a matter that would greatly benefit from
introspection.

