Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We too would like
thank today's briefers for their extremely important
contribution to this meeting and to assure them of
Ukraine's full support. I would also like to extend a
warm welcome to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of the
Republic of Croatia.

We would like to commend the steady progress that
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals have made since December
2016 in litigating trials and appeals, reforming and
strengthening efforts to locate and arrest the remaining
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
fugitives, assisting nationaljurisdictions in prosecuting
international crimes committed in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia.

Unfortunately both institutions are experiencing
problems and challenges in performing their mandates.
There is a challenge of staff attrition, along with the
added pressure to meet deadlines in anticipation of the
planned closure of the ICTY and to ensure a smooth
handover of remaining issues to the Mechanism.
Although they are natural and hardly avoidable under
the circumstances, we hope that those difficulties
will not affect the operational capabilities of both
institutions at this important stage of their work.

Yet there are challenges of quite a different nature.
The need for States to cooperate with international
criminal courts and tribunals is constantly stressed,
including in the unanimously adopted resolution 2329
(2016). That is why we are concerned that States'
non-compliance with tribunals' orders remains an
outstanding issue that impedes their efficient work.
We are therefore particularly concerned about Serbia's
defiance of the Tribunal's arrest warrants and orders to
surrender three indictees to the Tribunal's custody. We
call upon that country to comply with its obligations
under article 29 of the ICTY statute and respective
Security Council resolutions to render all necessary
assistance to the Tribunal.

It is of the utmost importance for international
justice and crime prevention that all cases before the
Tribunal are completed by the time its activities are
concluded. It is imperative to send the strong message
that no one can avoid accountability for serious
violations of international humanitarian law. In that
respect, we welcome INTERPOL's issuance in March
of Red Notices in relation to pending warrants.

We urge all States to cooperate with the ICTY
and the Mechanism and to respect their mandates in
line with obligations under relevant Security Council
resolutions. Courts cannot deliver justice by themselves.
The international community must be consolidated
in its support of the Criminal Tribunals' work to
ensure the right to universal justice for all victims of
mass atrocities.

Let me touch upon another technical but critical part
of the current stage of the Tribunal's liquidation-related
activities. We have seen strong commitment to a
timely and efficient accomplishment of that task. We
are satisfied with the downsizing process, the transfer
of assets and contracts to the Mechanism, as well as
records and archives of the Tribunal. With regard to
the Mechanism, my delegation commends its judicial
activities and the issuance of more than 150 decisions
and orders during the reporting period, including
through the remote procedure. We also support
continuing efforts in reducing the costs and streamlining
the internal working methods and processes to ensure
efficient and transparent work by the Mechanism.

In conclusion, we would like to hail successful
events held as part of the ICTY legacy dialogues
series and the launch of an enhanced version of the
Mechanism's website. The knowledge and expertise of
international criminal tribunals should be accessible to
a wider public, thus contributing to efforts to maintain
international peace and deliver justice around the world.

