Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this thematic debate on the working
methods of the Council. This annual gathering is of
particular importance, as it offers the opportunity to
the United Nations membership as a whole not only
to evaluate the Council's efforts to provide greater
transparency, effectiveness and inclusiveness in its work,
but also to make proposals and comments to contribute to
the progress of the Council's work in this area. We would
like to thank the Indian and Portuguese delegations
for the joint concept note (S/2012/853, annex) they
submitted for the present debate, which will facilitate
our consideration of the topic.

The Charter has conferred upon the Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The importance of
that mandate and its impact on a large majority of
Member States explain and justify their following of,
and involvement in, the Council's activities and work,
which are no longer limited to traditional situations of
war and peace but now touch on complex issues such
as terrorism and nuclear non-proliferation. While the
Council has certainly taken important steps over the
years both to improve the effectiveness of its work and to
open itself to non-member States, in particular through
the adoption of presidential note 507 (S/2012/507),
optimizing the effectiveness and transparency of the
Council calls for continued effort. In that regard, my
delegation would like to make the following comments
and observations.

First, I wish to pay tribute to Mr. Jose' Filipe Moraes
Cabral, Ambassador of Portugal, who has undeniably
breathed new life into the work of the Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
He will leave an indelible mark on the work of that
Group. Traditionally, the workload of the Council was
spread unevenly throughout the year, with a heavier
programme of work in June and December. The Council
has managed to make some slight changes to the dates
for the renewal of mandates and the publication of
reports of the Secretary-General and of the various
committees so as to distribute them evenly throughout
the whole year. That has helped to reduce the pressure
on the Secretariat.

The Council has taken a number of steps to make
better use of the resources at its disposal, including
consulting on two topics during the same meeting. That
has allowed for budgetary savings, which have been
redistributed to the subsidiary bodies of the Council.
We support the Council's use of new information
technologies, in particular videoconferencing for ad
hoc briefings. The Council can make use of many
formats for its meetings. We note that the number of
public meetings is on the rise. We remain of the View
that the format chosen for each meeting should take
into account the sensitivity and the nature of the topic
at hand and the context in which its consideration is
planned.

Open debates strengthen the interactions and
relationships between the Security Council and the
Member States and regional organizations. We believe
that such debates should have a specific scope and
focus on specific topics. The Council should take
full advantage in its deliberations of the Views and
proposals expressed by the Member States, which must
be afforded adequate time to prepare for such debates.

The Council should also make optimal use of its
interactions with countries contributing police and
troops to peacekeeping operations when discussing
or renewing their mandates. The same goes for the
Peacebuilding Commission and its various country-
specific configurations, which should be systematically
invited to participate in the work of the Council in
order to take into full account their contributions and
proposals.

Informational meetings for Member States and the
press on the programme of work, which are organized
on a monthly basis by the Council presidency, are an
excellent opportunity to discuss the Council's daily
work and the aims and priorities of each presidency.
Greater participation by Member States in those
meetings would strengthen their relevance.

Stronger cooperation has been established between
the Council and a number of regional organizations.
We cannot but welcome that. We note, for example,
that the Council is interacting to a greater degree
with the League of Arab States and that a presidential
statement was adopted in September, under the
German presidency, calling for the strengthening of
that partnership (S/PRST/2012/20). The Council could
also reaffirm its cooperation with other regional and
subregional organizations. Subregional organizations
have shown that they can play an important role
alongside the Council in solving recent crises affecting
their respective regions.

The annual report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly (A/67/2) has undergone several
improvements in terms of both format and content.
Seeking the opinions of Member States prior to the
drafting of the report is a practice that should be
continued and strengthened.

Subsidiary bodies and working groups now
occupy an important place in the work of the Council,
and their chairs take on a heavy workload. Elected
members of the Council should, before being allocated
chairmanships, have the opportunity to express their
choice and preference regarding their desired role.

Finally, we note with satisfaction the work of
the Security Council Affairs Division, in particular
the setting up the Council website in the six official
languages of the United Nations. The website contains
comprehensive and up-to-date information on the
Council's activities and those of its subsidiary bodies.
We strongly support that effort.

The increased participation in today's debate,
which has been underscored by most of my colleagues,
clearly shows the interest that all Member States have
in the Council's work. Improving the working methods
of the Council should remain a work in progress. We
believe that effort at improvement should be followed
up through a periodic review of presidential note 507
and more effective participation by Council members
in that undertaking.

