Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and the Russian Federation
on assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council this
month. You can count on our support. We would also
like to thank Poland for the way they managed the work
of the Council in August.

I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame for
his briefing on the situation in Libya. I also thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011),
concerning Libya, for his briefing on the work of the
Committee. And I thank Ms. Marwa Mohamed, Head
of Advocacy and Outreach at Lawyers for Justice in
Libya, for sensitizing the Council to the impact of
the Libyan conflict on women and ordinary citizens
throughout Libya.

South Africa commends the Secretary-General and
Special Representative Salame for their tireless efforts
to bring together all the Libyan parties and stakeholders
with the aim of reaching an agreement on a permanent
ceasefire. In that regard, we welcome the Special
Representative's three-step proposal to bring an end to
the conflict, as echoed by Ms. Mohamed.

Eight years since the start of the Libyan conflict,
the country remains deeply divided and on the brink of
a civil war. The failure by the Libyan parties to reach an
agreement to end the conflict has dire consequences for
Libya and the broader region in Africa. Furthermore,
the crisis has exacerbated the ongoing migrant crisis.
South Africa wishes to echo the sentiments of the
African Union Peace and Security Council in stressing

"the need for a peaceful and consensual solution
to the Libyan crisis, which continues to impact
negatively on the security and the stability of
neighbouring countries".

I wish to take the opportunity of today's meeting to
focus my intervention on three key issues.

First, there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Libya. South Africa therefore calls all on
parties to agree to a permanent ceasefire and to return
to political dialogue. South Africa will continue to
support the convening of a Libyan national peace and
reconciliation forum, preceded by a national dialogue
conference with a view to unifying the people of Libya.
In that regard, we commend the role played by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya in supporting
those processes.

Secondly, my delegation remains convinced that the
resolution of the Libyan crisis lies in close consultation
and cooperation among the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union and the League of
Arab States. Equally, we call on neighbouring countries
and those with influence on the political stakeholders
to promote a negotiated settlement.

Thirdly, South Africa emphasizes that there should
be full implementation of the arms embargo. The arms
embargo is important not only to curb the flow of arms
into Libya but also to stem the illicit flow of arms into
the Sahel region and beyond, which fuels conflicts and
causes instability elsewhere on the African continent.

South Africa supports the observation of the
Secretary-General that the rule of law be restored
throughout Libya. That should be accompanied
by the full restoration of State control, including a
holistic security strategy that is built on professional,
accountable and unified security institutions.

South Africa wishes to impress on the Council that
for as long as there is conflict over Libya's resources,
achieving consensus on a resolution will be difficult.
As such, we call for a comprehensive dialogue that
includes agreement on resource sharing by all political
stakeholders for the sake of reaching a lasting,
sustainable peace for all Libyans. De-escalating the
Libyan conflict necessitates resolving that long-
standing financial dispute.

Finally, we wish to urge the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to ensure the inclusion
of women in the processes to resolve the crisis, as
Ms. Mohamed requested. Women form an important
constituency in Libya. As such, their involvement in
the formal and informal political processes remains
critical. That is in line with a number of resolutions
adopted by the Council that advocate for the full and
equitable participation of women in public life in order
to build and sustain a strong and vibrant democracy.

