Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Once again we welcome your presence, Sir,
and thank you for presiding over the Council. We also
wish to welcome Their Excellencies the Ministers and
His Excellency the Secretary-General and to thank him
for his statement. The Council is meeting today to
consider the situation in Somalia and the mounting acts
of piracy off its coast during the last months of the
year

It is important that we benefit from the
momentum created and use the international solidarity
that developed lately in the form of several
initiatives - notably, the International Conference on
Piracy around Somalia, which took place in Nairobi in
December 2008 - and move beyond the limited points
of View and partial reactions and seek a comprehensive
solution to the problem in Somalia.

It is well-known that Somalia has been in a state
of instability for the last two decades, which has led to
the collapse of State institutions and the rule of law.
That situation has exacerbated the suffering of the
Somali people, whose lands and waters have been
appropriated. The piracy incidents have threatened the
assistance programmes that were set up for the Somali
people, in addition to the effects on other countries
overlooking the Red Sea and on the security of
international maritime navigation in the region.

We believe that we must deal with the political
situation in Somalia - as that is the situation that has
led to all of the problems - in a comprehensive
manner that addresses the root causes of the crisis, and
we must not limit our efforts to the symptoms and
repercussions of the problems. Those problems must be
dealt with in a manner that promotes and expands the
political process and ensures the implementation of
what has been and will be agreed upon, in particular
the recent Djibouti Agreement.

During the past few months, the Council has
focused on combating piracy. Considerable efforts have
been expended to reach consensus on several important
resolutions, which represent undoubtedly positive and
commendable efforts. Yet, it must not be forgotten that
Somali piracy as a phenomenon, as it has been
discussed, clearly resulted from the collapse of the
Somali State and the attendant consequences of that
collapse, such as the lack of security and the
deterioration of humanitarian conditions. Thus, the
most effective solution to the problem of piracy
requires a comprehensive approach in which the efforts
of the international community would join regional
efforts and would begin by improving the security
situation by providing effective support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Those actions
would be in preparation for an international force with
a clear mandate to improve the humanitarian condition
of the Somali people and to create an environment
conducive to the promotion of the political process and
the realization of national reconciliation.

Libya voted for the resolution because it supports
all efforts to combat piracy, which is a serious crime
that must be stopped and whose perpetrators must be
pursued and brought to justice. Yet, Libya is of the
view that measures taken by the Council to condemn
and combat piracy off the Somali coast must be based
on, and must take into account, complete respect for
and commitment to the sovereignty of Somalia, its
territorial integrity and its political independence. Such
measures must also be taken in coordination with
AMISOM. in the field and pursuant to the provisions of
international law, in particular the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Needless to say, the measures - including the
resolution adopted today - taken to deal with a
specific situation have no relation whatsoever to any
other situation except the situation in Somalia, and
they have been taken without prejudice to the rights
and obligations of other States, in conformity with
international law and without establishing a new
international norm.

In short, measures to combat piracy must, in our
View, seek to enhance the leading role of the United
Nations and must confirm to the rules and principles of
international law and all of its sources, including the
Charter.

