Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
thank you in particular for bringing together such a
galaxy of talent today-not only our distinguished
briefers, to whom I am most grateful for their useful
and insightful contributions, but also the public gallery.
It is a great pleasure to have the public gallery with us
today.

I would like to join others in expressing my
delegation's condolences to the Governments of India
and Pakistan on the recent earthquake.

In recognition ofthe long list of speakers we have
today, I will shorten my printed statement. I should
also draw attention to the fact that the representative of
Sweden will be speaking later in the debate on behalf
of the European Union, and my delegation associates
itself with that statement.

Many of us in the Council have been closely
associated with East Timor, particularly since the
Agreement of 5 May 1999. The Secretary-General's
report shows that an enormous amount has been
achieved in a relatively short period of time. But,
Mr. President, as you have said, the priority now must
be to look to the future. It is particularly noteworthy
that recent months have seen a real effort to accelerate
the transfer of authority to the East Timorese.

The process of Timorization was not envisaged
when the Security Council adopted resolution 1272
(1999); it was, frankly, an act of great vision and
imagination on the part of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. And it seems to be working
well. In the United Kingdom's View, the establishment
of the National Council not only is important in terms
of accountability and legitimacy, but it is also a crucial
contribution to capacity-building for self-government
in East Timor.

For all this and more, we owe a vote of thanks to
the Special Representative and to his staff for their
remarkable work in such difficult conditions. We
should also remember the enormously valuable work
done by the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET) in re-establishing security in the territory.
This is all the more important, since I gather that today
is Australia Day. I understand that Lt. Gen. Peter
Cosgrove, the former Commander of INTERFET, has
been named Australian of the Year, and frankly,
nobody is more deserving of such an honour.

But congratulations should not lead to
complacency. For there is an enormous amount still to
do, both before the transition to independence in East
Timor and afterwards. East Timorese expectations are
not being realized in a number of areas, including
infrastructural improvements. The statements of the
Special Representative and the President ofthe General
Assembly implicitly recognized that fact. Although
Mr. Rohland from the World Bank told us that the
reconstruction programme in East Timor was the
quickest ever, it was not quick enough. Realistically,
we are unlikely to be able to deliver everything for
which the East Timorese people might hope. But the
international community must do better in improving
the delivery of the resources that are available. It is a
good thing that the World Bank intends to draw out the
main lessons of the Timor experience. I hope we will
all learn them well.

I was also grateful for the information given by
the Special Representative and Mr. Ramos-Horta on the
timetable for elections and independence. The East
Timorese are understandably impatient to strike out on
their own. But we also have to recognize that although
the process of building a new State is not a simple one,
precision will be needed soon. Whatever the exact
timetable proves to be, independence by the end of the
year means that the time to complete the job is short.
So it is vital that the next six months should see a
continued delegation of authority to the East Timorese.
This must be accompanied by a real effort to transfer
skills to them through development and training, so
that they can be fully prepared for the administration of
an independent State.

This will be one part of a wider effort to build
capacity in East Timor, which must become UNTAET's
priority in the next months. On this point, I would be
grateful for Mr. Vieira de Mello's assessment of the
success of Timorization in qualitative rather than
quantitative terms. This is relevant in the context of
Jose Ramos-Horta's statement. Is the process effective
in terms of building skills and competencies, rather
than just filling offices?

Political skills will also be crucial. East Timor
will shortly become the first newly independent
country of the new millennium. It is important that it
become a shining example to the rest of the world. As
we have seen in Jose Ramos-Horta's statement today,
the territory is well endowed with political leaders. But
we also need to get the political and constitutional
structures right. First, the process leading up to
elections must be inclusive and transparent; and
discussions on the terms of the new constitution should
involve a full range of representatives from all sectors
of society.

But if it is to move forward, East Timor must also
deal with its past. When I travelled with the Security
Council mission to East Timor and Indonesia last year,
I was concerned at the rate of progress in building a
judicial system. As Sergio Vieira de Mello has
reported, some useful progress has since been made in
bringing to justice those responsible for crimes against
humanity. It is particularly encouraging that this week
saw the first successful prosecution by an international
court in East Timor for the violence that surrounded the
1999 popular consultation. But more needs to be done
by UNTAET and Indonesia to ensure that the judicial
process remains credible and effective. UNTAET and
the international community as a whole must think
through the timelines for the judicial process, which
cannot be allowed to drag on endlessly. The Special
Representative has appealed for international
assistance to help build the judicial sector. I would be
grateful for any more detailed update he might wish to
give us on the response to that appeal. And, as the
President of the General Assembly has said, to
complement the investigation and trial of serious
crimes there must be a determined process of national
reconciliation within East Timor, behind which the
whole of Timorese society must stand together. Again,
I should be grateful to hear from the Special
Representative, and perhaps Mr. Ramos-Horta, how
that process is maturing.

Another problem faced by East Timor is the
tangible security threat that continues to exist on its
border. As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Mr. Ramos-Horta have said, a stable
border is one of the keys to East Timor's future. That is
why we agree that, despite the improvements reported
to us today, there should be no downsizing of the
UNTAET military component at this stage, and that is
also why we believe that a significant United Nations
military presence is likely to be necessary for some
time into the future.

But it is no good simply saying that security
measures must continue. Real progress has to be made
in reducing the security threat. That the militias are
still active in the camps in West Timor is appalling. No
less worrying is the fact that large numbers of genuine
refugees continue to live in such difficult conditions in
the camps and are subject to serious intimidation, as
the Security Council mission saw for itself.

This problem must now be properly addressed,
not only because it has direct implications for the
security of East Timor and the future structure of the
United Nations presence in the territory, but also on the
obvious grounds of pressing humanitarian need.

The successful "come and see" visit programme
over Christmas was encouraging, and we hope it will
lead to an increase in spontaneous returns. But more
must be done. We urge the Government of Indonesia to
take steps to implement resolution 1319 (2000) in full
and without delay, to complete the planned registration
process and to facilitate the return of those refugees
who want to go home to East Timor. Further delay
would mean that the refugees would remain
disenfranchised, which would have serious
implications for the coming elections.

As you have reminded us, Mr. President, we must
look to the future. It is clear to us that the newly
independent East Timor will continue to need extensive
international support. We welcome the intention to start
planning for a follow-on operation now. The East
Timorese are and should be fully engaged in this
process. We look forward to receiving the detailed
plans promised by the Special Representative as soon
as possible, and to a further report from the Secretary-
General later in the year. We have the time and
opportunity to think carefully about how UNTAET
should evolve from its present state to a new operation
that will assist the East Timorese people to assume
their rightful place in the community of nations in
safety and security. That, as the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme has said, is a
real challenge. And though the funding aspects are not
necessary considerations for this Council, for the sake
of the East Timorese people and for the sake of the
United Nations itself, we must get it right.

