Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My country condemned the Lockerbie incident, a terrorist
act, just as we condemn all forms of terrorism and all
perpetrators and abetters of terrorism as well as those who
give them safe haven. We reiterate our condolences to the
families of the victims, we reaffirm our sympathy with
them, and we hope that the day is near when justice will
prevail. We reiterate also our call for the convening of an
international conference to combat terrorism.

After years of deadlock in the Security Council,
despite the many efforts deployed during that time, and
the imposition of sanctions on the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya because of the suspected involvement of two
of its citizens in the Lockerbie incident, today a positive
development is taking place: the United States-United
Kingdom initiative, one of three initiatives put forth by
the League of Arab States to resolve the Lockerbie issue.
My country also welcomes Libya's positive response to
the initiative, which it had previously accepted when it
was set forth initially.

The draft resolution before the Security Council
today calls for suspending the sanctions imposed on the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya if the two suspects appear to
stand trial. We all hope that this will be the first step

 

towards the lifting of the sanctions and towards the
definitive closing of the Lockerbie file.
The imposition of sanctions cannot be unlimited,
without a clear objective and a set deadline with a
beginning and an end, because that would cause the citizens
of the country on which sanctions are imposed to suffer
increasingly with the passage of time. Thus sanctions, to
have an effect, must have an objective and a set deadline.

The issue of the trial of the two accused, according to
the United States-United Kingdom initiative accepted by
Libya, involves a number of legal procedures, and we hope
that the parties concerned will reach agreement thereon. We
hope also that adequate preparations will be made in order
for the trial to take place in a positive atmosphere, thus
assuring the parties and the international community that
the desired results will be achieved.

In this context, we reaffirm the need for cooperation
by the parties concerned in making the arrangements
necessary for the trial to take place and reach a successful
conclusion. That will make it possible to close the
Lockerbie file and lift the longstanding sanctions so that the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya may resume its national
development and its role in the international community's
efforts towards international peace and security.

