Mr. Shkourko (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation would like to join in
the warm congratulations to the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations, Ambassador Merimee, on
his new appointment in Rome. We wish him every success
in this responsible post.

We note with deep satisfaction that the Liberian
parties have finally heeded the aspirations of the people of
Liberia and the numerous appeals of the international
community, and have begun constructive cooperation in
order to put an end to six years of fratricidal war, which
has brought countless sufferings to the population of that
country.

We welcome the Agreement recently signed in Abuja,
which is a clear victory for common sense and a major
political success for the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Organization of African Unity, and which is of important
significance for stabilizing the situation in Liberia and in
the subregion as a whole. It should be pointed out that the
process, which has taken on a positive dynamic for a
peaceful settlement in Liberia, is a good precedent for
successful joint efforts in Africa for the United Nations
and regional structures.

It is exceedingly important that the peace process in
Liberia enjoy the support of all the key political leaders
of the country and be based on the sympathy of broad
sections of the population and also on the agreed policy
of the member States of ECOWAS. This encourages us
as never before to have great hopes for the
re-establishment of peace in Liberia.

The resolution just adopted unanimously by the
Security Council clearly urges the Liberian parties to
comply with the obligations they have entered into and
gives a strong political impulse to support for efforts at
making progress in the peace process and at national
reconciliation in Liberia.

Of special significance is the task of enhancing the
effectiveness of cooperation between ECOMOG and the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
as one of the linchpins of a new concept of United
Nations operations in Liberia. As we understand it, the
Secretary-General intends to report on the basic
parameters of this concept for consideration by the
Security Council in October this year. We believe that the
formulation of this concept, including aspects of financial,
material and technical support by the international
community for the peace process in Liberia, requires a
realistic, weighted approach based on the provisions of
previous Security Council resolutions.

The Russian delegation is firmly convinced that a
lasting political settlement and national reconciliation
cannot be imposed by methods of force, either in Liberia
or in any other country. The key to the success of the
peace process in Liberia is to be found in the hands of the
Liberians themselves. We venture to hope that the current
leaders of that country will have enough political will and
wisdom to be able, through their joint efforts, to bring
their people out of the vicious circle of Violence and
bloodshed. The task of the international community, in
our view, is to provide appropriate support and
cooperation.

