Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Today's
Council meeting is of exceptional importance given the
delicate and critical situation currently prevailing in the
world. My delegation is confident that you, Sir, will, at
this critical juncture, lead the work of the Council with
your well-known skills and competence.

My delegation, like others, followed attentively
the Council meeting held on 7 March and noted the
degree of progress made in the process of inspections
for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, as stated in the
reports presented by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei. We
are, accordingly, all the more convinced of the
effectiveness of this approach, which all agree is the
best one to put an end to the current crisis. In this
regard, we would like to commend the cooperation that
Iraq has continued to extend, the most recent
manifestation of which was the destruction of the Al
Samoud 2 missiles.

My delegation would like to highlight the results
of the Non-Aligned Movement Summit, held at Kuala
Lumpur; the Arab League Summit, held at Sharm el-
Sheikh; and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
Summit, held at Doha. All of those conferences called
for the implementation of the resolutions of
international legitimacy in all their aspects, including
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq and of Kuwait, and the resolution of the question
of prisoners and missing persons.

It is our belief that Iraq's continued and full
cooperation with the United Nations inspectors must be
the basis for the peaceful settlement of the crisis and
should pave the way for the lifting of the sanctions
imposed on Iraq.

We therefore share the view of all delegations
that have already spoken and affirmed the existence of
alternatives other than war. We believe in the need to
support the use of political means to resolve disputes
under the auspices of the United Nations. We see no
justification whatsoever for the adoption of any
additional draft resolution by the Council. Rather, what
is required is to grant the inspectors sufficient time to
accomplish their mission.

Today more than ever there is a need to be
committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. The clouds of war looming on
the horizon cannot conceal from any insightful person
the fact that a declaration of war is at the same time an
admission of failure. To insist on opting for a unilateral
approach is both an explicit and an implicit rejection of

the tradition of working towards a peaceful settlement
and of refraining from violence, and shows a cynical
disregard for the overwhelming majority of the official
views expressed here in this Chamber- a disregard
that is tantamount to an insult to the millions who have
marched in the major cities of the world declaring their
rejection of war.

The Charter, which is binding on all of us, clearly
identifies the instances in which it is permissible to
resort to force to settle disputes. Scholars of
international law have agreed that the Charter prohibits
war except in the case of self-defence, pursuant to
Article 51 and to Chapter VII on the basis of Security
Council resolutions. We know that these references are
almost self-evident to all. However, it is a duty to
stress them and to emphasize their importance at a time
when some voices are calling for the United Nations to
be bypassed and its role to be sidelined.

My delegation affirms its commitment to the
letter and spirit of the Charter. It appeals to all States to
demonstrate their commitment to the Charter by word
and deed. It calls for precedence to be given to the
rational approach, which favours the peaceful
settlement of crises. We believe that we owe our
children the right to inherit a bright future governed by
the culture of peace in which various cultures,
civilizations and religions coexist.

