Mr. Llorenty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the
very informative briefing that we have heard from the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, on her twenty-seventh report
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

We have taken note of the progress made in
investigations as well as of the difficulties that the
Office of the Prosecutor has faced in the course of
investigations as well as in its judicial activities,
relating to situations that hamper the fulfilment of the
task entrusted to the Office by the Security Council.

The situation in Darfur triggered the first referral
of a case by the Security Council to the International
Criminal Court. Since then, 13 years have elapsed,
and said case still languishes at the investigation
stage - an investigation that, as the report indicates,
faces major obstacles. The Council cannot and must
not be indifferent to the fact that the investigation
has dragged on for more than a decade. The time that
has passed makes it harder to shed light on the crimes
committed and to attribute responsibility.

Bolivia believes that those who have committed war
crimes and crimes against humanity must answer to the
courts. There can be no denying that this is an important
element for consolidating peace in Darfur. In voicing
our support for the work of the International Criminal
Court, we wish to recall that when the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Court in resolution
1593 (2005), it not only activated the jurisdiction
of the Court with respect to trying persons but also
urged it to support the promotion of the rule of law,
the safeguarding of human rights and the fight against
impunity, while underscoring the non-jurisdictional
activities of the ICC such as the promotion of peace,
reconciliation and institution-building.

Against that backdrop, we encourage the Office
of the Prosecutor to include, in its next report to the
Security Council, details on the activities undertaken
by the Court to promote the strengthening of judicial
organs and institutions in the Sudan, now that the
priority is the consolidation of sustainable peace
in Darfur.

We also urge the Court to join in the efforts of
the international community, particularly regional
organizations, to strengthen political processes in the
Sudan, particularly those related to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. We believe that, as indicated in
resolution 1593 (2005), cooperation and coordination
between the Court and the African Union are crucial.
The commitment of that regional organization to
fighting impunity is undeniable, as set out in its
Constitutive Act. In addition, we recall that the African
Union set up a ministerial committee to address issues
related to the case. In that context, we call for the
establishment of constructive dialogue to facilitate
the necessary work and strengthens trust between
both institutions.

Over the past years, we have seen positive
developments in the Sudan, as mentioned in the
recent strategic review (see S/2018/530) of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which affirms a general improvement
in the security situation in Darfur and increased
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations to facilitate UNAMID's work on the
ground. Bolivia believes that it was possible to reach
such a point primarily thanks to the joint work of the
African Union, the United Nations and the Government
of the Sudan. All such efforts should continue, with a
focus on strengthening peace in Darfur.

It is important to highlight that the development
and the future of international criminal justice are
closely linked to the concepts of the cooperation and
complementarity of States. The International Criminal
Court is a complementary court to the primary and
sovereign capacities of each State to administer justice
in its territory. In addition to achieving effective
and timely prosecutions, it is therefore necessary to
re-establish local capacities. That demonstrates that it
is now necessary to carefully review the case of Darfur.
We reaffirm that the International Criminal Court is
a global undertaking of interest to all States and that
its mission is intrinsically linked to the strengthening
of international criminal justice, peace, security and
respect for human rights and to ensuring due process.

In that context, on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute, we
must take this opportunity to reflect on the effectiveness
of the Court and on whether the model developed meets
the expectations of cooperation and universality. The
Security Council and the membership of the United
Nations in general must take stock of the cost of the
International Criminal Court in pursuing investigations
and trials within its competence Moreover, when we see
that various States, including members of the Security
Council, are still not a State party to the Rome Statute.
For that same reason, the debate on the impunity
enjoyed by many of those responsible for crimes
against humanity or war crimes undermines the relative
capacity of the Court and, at the same time, weakens
the effectiveness of its work. We stress the point that we
cannot continue a frank dialogue while such countries
do not meet their own international obligations.

Bolivia fulfils its obligations as a State party to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and supports efforts in the pursuit to justice in fighting
impunity. We therefore urge all States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to ensure its
universal jurisdiction. To that end, we believe that the
value of the principle of universality of the International
Criminal Court is vital.

