Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): Let me begin, Mr.
President, by thanking you for organizing today's open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and for providing yet another opportunity for members
of the Council to exchange views with the wider
membership of the United Nations. We wish to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for introducing the
Secretary-General's report (S/2001/331). We welcome
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and thank her for identifying areas of common
concern to her Office and to the Council. My
delegation thanks her for her offer to brief the Council
on actions by the Commission on Human Rights on
gross violations of human rights during armed conflict.

While several important initiatives have been
undertaken by the Security Council since the Secretary-
General's last report (S/l999/957), we have an
obligation to acknowledge and formulate practical
measures to address those commitments which have yet
to be acted upon. The Council must continue, in the
first instance, to encourage Member States to fulfil our
responsibilities for the protection of civilians, to assess
ways of improving cooperation between the Security
Council and other bodies of the United Nations system,
and to adopt a way forward that can generate the
political will and the resources required.

As a first step, the Council has to follow up on
commitments for the protection of civilians on a more
regular basis. We thank the Permanent Representative
of Tunisia for supporting the suggestion that the
Council establish an informal working group to explore
ways to integrate civilian-protection issues into the
Council's work. In that regard, my delegation believes
that a checklist should be developed for consideration
when the Council is drafting resolutions and
elaborating peacekeeping and peace-building
mandates.

We support the emphasis placed in the Secretary-
General's report on coordination between the Security
Council and other organs of the United Nations,
including the use of the monthly meeting between the
Presidents of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly. The Council's meeting later this week with
the Economic and Social Council will also provide a
useful starting point for collaboration between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.

One issue that has already been mentioned by
previous speakers is the importance of ensuring respect
for the rights of civilians among armed groups and
non-State actors. The Security Council, we believe,
must build on its efforts to engage those groups in
dialogue. It must consistently urge them to commit
themselves to the standards contained in international
humanitarian and human rights law and must put
constant pressure on them to accept and cooperate in
the monitoring of adherence to those standards. They
must understand that there can be no impunity for
actions against civilians that are contrary to
international norms.

In that regard, my delegation emphasizes the need
for support, both financial and political, for the
establishment of a special court for Sierra Leone.

While we recognize the difficulty of applying the
legal regimes at our disposal to non-State actors, this is
an area requiring serious study to explore possible
solutions.
Next, my delegation believes that building strong
partnerships with the private sector, non-governmental
organizations and civil society will enhance levels of
protection. Non-governmental organizations and other
civil-society organizations have an indispensable role
to play in shaping the agenda for the protection of
civilians. Their contribution can be particularly critical
in developing operational programmes on the ground
and in serving as important sources of information. I
would wish to emphasize that this includes not only
international non-governmental organizations but,
more important, non-governmental organizations
operating at the regional and national levels. We would
suggest that greater use be made of Arria formula
meetings in facilitating this dialogue. Strengthening the
work of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee is also
important in identifying ways of building on the
complementarity between the United Nations and other
organizations.

Thirdly, regional organizations should be
encouraged to make the protection of civilians an
important part of their own agendas. The Council
should establish a proper mechanism for regular
exchange to foster greater cooperation with regional
organizations for the protection of civilians. Future
high-level consultations between the United Nations
and regional organizations should be used to develop
cooperative efforts for this. I would also suggest that
we use specific cases when we meet, for example, with
ministers from the Economic Community of West
African States or from the Lusaka peace process.
Another area that requires attention is the controlling
of small arms through collaborative mechanisms with
regional organizations.

Fourthly, the Council must improve its efforts to
investigate, prosecute and sanction individuals and
corporate enterprises involved in the illegal
exploitation and sale of natural resources and other
resources that exacerbate armed conflicts.

The Council must therefore not only continue to
investigate the linkages between illicit trade in natural
resources and the conduct of war, but also begin to
develop approaches, including the use of appropriate
incentives and disincentives, in collaboration of other
organs of the United Nations, to encourage a culture of
corporate social responsibility among the business
community. In this regard, the steps already taken by
the Secretary-General to establish a Global Compact
with the business community could be used.

Fifth, the Security Council should ensure not only
that peacekeeping operations include specific and clear
mandates for the protection of civilians, but also that
these mandates include monitoring and reporting on
their protection. In addition, the Council should
continue to stress, as has been done in earlier
resolutions, that peacekeeping forces must be
appropriately trained in international humanitarian and
human rights law to ensure that the rights of civilians
are fully respected.

Sixth, when imposing sanctions, the Council must
improve its efforts to develop a coordinated and
integrated approach to minimize unintended
consequences for civilian populations, including
practical policy changes to improve design and
implementation. The Council should consider
authorizing assessment missions to targeted States and
neighbouring countries before the imposition of
sanctions. Every effort must be made to establish
effective monitoring measures and to assess the likely
unintended consequences. We would therefore support
the establishment of a permanent technical review
mechanism.

Seventh, the Council must ensure that the
momentum already gained in advancing the special
protection and humanitarian needs of vulnerable groups
is maintained. Special attention must be given to
involving women in determining protection strategies,
as well as in negotiations of peace agreements. In this
regard, we look forward to the reports coming out of
last year's resolutions on children and armed conflict
and on women, peace and security.

The best protection for civilians is the prevention
of armed conflict. The Council should give
consideration to the deployment of preventive
peacekeeping operations or other preventive measures.
Prevention has not been used sufficiently by the
Council, although we all agree on its value in reducing
the possibility of civilian crises. It would be useful for
the Council to have a study of lessons learned in
preventive operations, and we hope that these will be
incorporated in the report of the Secretary-General on
the prevention of armed conflict, expected next month.

In Jamaica's last statement on this issue, in April
2000, we stressed that improving the environment for
the safe and secure provision of humanitarian
assistance to individuals in need is also a major
challenge. Attention to legal and physical protection
for United Nations and other humanitarian workers
should be revisited as a matter of urgency by the
Council in the light of ongoing incidents of abuse and
killings in several conflict areas.
The Council should systematically urge parties to
conflicts to make special arrangements to meet the
protection and assistance requirements of civilians. In
this regard, the protection of children is of major
concern. Recommendations have been made by the
Secretary-General, for example, for the establishment
of "days of immunization", security zones and safe
corridors. These still have to be given the attention
they deserve by the Council.

The problem of hate media is also a matter of
serious concern that was addressed by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The Council should,
where possible, ensure that peacekeeping and peace-
building operations are authorized and equipped to
monitor hate media. Media must be used to increase
awareness in the area of human rights and international
humanitarian law and to influence attitudes of
belligerents and other non-State actors, as well as of
the population affected. We believe that it is important
to develop closer collaboration between the
Departments of Public Information and of
Peacekeeping Operations to ensure that this can be
suitably implemented.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
clear connections between human suffering, systematic
and widespread violations of the rights of civilians and
breakdowns in international peace and security warrant
not only keeping this issue at the forefront of the
Council's agenda, but also taking decisive action. Only
when we have developed a culture of prevention, as
well as a culture of protection, will we be able to fulfil
the requirements of the Security Council's mandate.

