Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me start by thanking
Mr. Laj cak, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his briefing and for his report on the
latest developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina (see S/2008/300). We also wish to welcome the presence of
Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank him
for his statement.
We are pleased to note the incremental progress
that has been made by Bosnia and Herzegovina
towards signing a Stabilization and Association
Agreement. The signing of legislation on police reform
is testament to such progress and is part and parcel of
security sector reform. Further progress in the area of
strengthening the system of the rule of law is crucial to
the stability and development of the country.

We welcome the continued efforts of the High
Representative to forge cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). This makes an important political
statement and helps to bring closure to the affected
parties. Nonetheless, this important measure has to be
coupled with other major efforts to facilitate smoother
inter-ethnic relations.

In this regard, let me stress that dialogue,
reconciliation and negotiations must be the preferred
option for the resolution of any issue. The voting
procedures agreed in the parliament and Council of
Ministers showed the desirability of relying on
negotiation, no matter how difficult and intense it may
be.

Moreover, we have also duly taken note of the
recommendations regarding the planned closure of the
Office of the High Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This recommendation is important and
merits thorough consideration by the Council. Closure
of the Office would certainly be an important step
towards the country's self-governance. However, such
a plan has to meet the five critical objectives and,
above all, must be in line with the views of the
Council.

Indonesia profoundly believes that the Council
and the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
have to support the country in empowering itself to
chart its own course of action. While various reform
plans are still under way, we believe that they, as such,
should not be used as preconditions. Although outside
pressure might sometimes be helpful, it will not
meaningfully assist the country in the long run, if it is
to have to rely solely on its own strengths and address
its weaknesses.

We note with concern the slow return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. In this regard, we
welcome the efforts of the Offices of the High
Representative and of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other stakeholders to
draft a new strategy to tackle this delicate humanitarian
issue. We view such a strategy as being not only about
providing the rudiments of modern life, as important as
that is, but, more important, about building a higher
level of trust between the returnees and the local
population. This trust has to be nurtured carefully. The
returnees need to be convinced that they will be able to
interact and live peacefully with the others. It must
also be recognized that the longer it takes for them to
return, the less incentive there is for them to do so.

With reference to the broad constitutional
reforms, we deem it necessary that such reforms be
undertaken in a careful manner and in line with the
Peace Agreement. There are various constitutional
reform processes and models around the world that the
country can benefit from. However, efforts to implant
one particular experience of constitutional reform
would not serve the country's interests. The
constitution should reflect the wishes of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's people and embody local norms, values
and wisdom. The role of the international community
in this regard is to support the country in implementing
its constitution.

Finally, let me reaffirm Indonesia's continued
support for the political process being conducted by the
High Representative in line with the Peace Agreement.

