Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation expresses its gratitude to Ambassador
Ibrahim Gambari for his presence at this meeting and
for the information he has given us. We are pleased that
his visit was positive and has yielded good results.

Our interest in the briefing relates mainly to the
expectations generated by the previous meeting, of 15
November, on the role the United Nations could play,
particularly with respect to his next visit to the region,
so that the peace process could move forward in
accordance with the Lusaka Protocol and the
pronouncements of the Council. What is really
important to the Council is that the Angola peace
process move beyond the deadlock in political and
military terms, as the Secretary-General defined it in
the last report on the activities of the United Nations
Office in Angola (UNOA) in Luanda. It is clear that
UNOA can contribute to much broader work only if the
political conditions exist in the country to make that
possible. We are also pleased that the consultations
with the Government of Angola are considering a
series of activities, including a disarmament and
weapons collection programme, which can be
expanded by the United Nations presence in the future.

We have previously expressed the view that it is a
good idea to include civil society more in the peace
process for at least two reasons: first, to reduce the
impact of bellicose rhetoric and the solutions by force
that at certain stages dominate the peace process; and
secondly, because most of the victims in the
confrontation between Government forces and the
rebels have been from the civilian population, judging
from the numbers of people killed in attacks, internally
displaced persons, refugees in neighbouring countries
and indirect victims of hunger, disease and exposure.

The information we have received today confirms
the sad humanitarian situation that afflicts the Angolan
people. The figure of 4 million internally displaced
persons living in precarious situations - in camps or
in poverty-stricken areas of towns and cities - is a
cause for concern.

For that reason, along the same lines as
Ambassador Eldon, I wish to ask if Ambassador
Gambari could suggest to us ways of involving civil
society. On past occasions, holding an Arria-formula
meeting was mentioned, as also proposed by the
delegation of the United Kingdom.

After having heard the briefing today, we are
convinced that the Council must continue with
formulas for the positive inclusion of the United
Nations in the Angolan peace process. The Council
should encourage the international community,
particularly countries with a strong presence in Angola
and solid political and economic ties with that country,
to contribute to the cause of peace.

Finally, we must continue to apply the sanctions
against UNITA, with the certainty that the effectiveness
of the sanctions regime will substantially improve the
possibility of dialogue between the parties.

