The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Papua New Guinea in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1998/287, which contains the text of a letter dated 31
March 1998 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Papua New Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 30 March 1998 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Papua New Guinea addressed to the
President of the Security Council, conveying copies of the
Lincoln Agreement on Peace, Security and Development on
Bougainville and the Burnham Truce.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, taking note of the
development of the Bougainville conflict, strongly
supports the Agreement on Peace, Security and
Development on Bougainville, signed at Lincoln
University, New Zealand, on 23 January 1998 (the Lincoln Agreement) contained in document
S/ 1998/287, achieved by the Government of Papua
New Guinea, the Bougainville Transitional
Government, the Bougainville Resistance Force, the
Bougainville Interim Government, the Bougainville
Revolutionary Army and the Bougainville leaders,
with regard to a ceasefire among conflicting parties.

"The Security Council welcomes the extension
of the period of truce, and welcomes further a
permanent and irrevocable ceasefire which will take
effect on 30 April 1998 as stipulated in the Lincoln
Agreement.

"The Security Council encourages all parties to
cooperate in promoting reconciliation, so that the
objectives of the Lincoln Agreement can be met, and
urges all parties to continue to cooperate, in
accordance with the Lincoln Agreement, namely, to
achieve and maintain peace, to renounce the use of
armed force and violence, to resolve any differences
by consultation, both now and in the future, and to
confirm their respect for human rights and the rule
of law.

"The Security Council commends the efforts of
countries in the region for the resolution of the
conflict, and welcomes the establishment, as outlined
in the Lincoln Agreement, of the peace monitoring
group composed of civilian and military personnel
from Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu, the
mandate of which is to monitor the implementation
of the said Agreement.

"The Security Council notes that the Lincoln
Agreement calls for the United Nations to play a
role in Bougainville, and requests the Secretary-
General to consider the composition and financial
modalities of such involvement by the United
Nations.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/ 10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

