Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
have previously expressed in detail Egypt's views on
the protection of civilians, in the statement made
before the Council on 17 September 1999, when I
talked about the different competencies of the
Organization and the legal concepts on which we must
base ourselves in dealing with the subject. I also dealt
with the role that we feel the Council can play in some
cases in which it can intervene. Therefore, I will not
repeat my views on these questions.

We have taken note of the report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We have also taken note of the paper distributed by the
President of the Council in order to guide the debate in
a practical direction. We have no real disagreement
with most, if any, of the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report. Those
recommendations are aimed at according due
importance to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. In this regard, allow me to reiterate the
importance of respecting the principle of a State's
sovereignty over its territory and the need for the
relevant actors in the international community to act in
concert to tighten the noose around forces and elements
that target civilians, whether those forces are regular or
irregular.

Allow me now, in addition to everything I have
just mentioned, to move from the theoretical to the
practical. In this context, I would like to refer to the
situation of the Palestinian people. The report of the
Secretary-General contains not even a single reference
to the situation of the Palestinian people. Our sole
consolation in the absence of such a reference may be
the legal view that the situation of the Palestinian
people has to do with an occupation in which
international conventions and agreements apply, the
Fourth Geneva Convention being foremost among such
agreements. Given that perspective, it follows that the
situation of the Palestinian people differs from others
in which a Power is engaged in armed conflict and in
which there is some sort of balance between that Power
and another Power.

The reality is that, in both its civilian and military
aspects, occupation is the imposition by force of the
will of one party on another. It is therefore only logical
that such an occupation would represent the beginning
of a cycle of violence in which the civilians under
occupation are the second party. The violence resulting
from such an occupation would of course be the
responsibility of the occupying Power.
Given that scenario, I find it very difficult to see
any real difference between what Palestinian civilians
are suffering and what other civilians suffer in
situations to which the Council gives special attention
in an effort to render protection. As a matter of fact, the
situation in the Palestinian territories is much worse
than many other situations. The balance of power in the
territories is completely uneven. Not only does the
occupying Power utilize military weapons against
Palestinian civilians, it also employs an economic
blockade that deprives civilians of income and
undertakes political assassinations, trials without
evidence, the demolition of homes and razing of farms,
and restrictions on civilian movement. It even uses
military operations against purely peaceful civilian
demonstrations. I do not think there is a single place in
the entire world where civilians experience what
Palestinians are now experiencing. The situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories is, in fact, the sole case
in which members and non-members of the Council
have made repeated requests for the Council to take
action to assume what we believe is its primary
responsibility under the Charter, namely, to adopt
measures to provide protection for Palestinian civilians
under occupation.

What has the Council done? Since last November
the Council has been at a standstill in the debate on this
subject. In this debate we have heard flimsy arguments
and wholly irrelevant politicking. Regrettably, we have
heard only silence from many of those who are
champions of human rights and who talk about the
need to protect human rights and to adopt the doctrine
of so-called humanitarian intervention in cases of
severe violations taking place in a given region. We
have also heard talk of human security and the
responsibility of the international community to
provide the elements and conditions for all to enjoy
that security. Regrettably, the majority of those who
talk about this either abstain in the voting on draft
resolutions brought before this and other forums of the
United Nations, or simply ignore many of the
principles they advocate for political reasons totally
outside the scope of the question.

An important legal point raised by some
delegations during the debate on the Arab request to
protect Palestinian civilians concerned the acceptance
by an occupying force of the deployment of an
international presence in the occupied territories. We
detect an obvious confusion in those views and
approaches, which we must now correct. The question
of consent to the deployment of any personnel by the
Organization to the territory of a Member State with a
view to maintaining international peace and security,
under Chapter VI of the Charter, is a condition that has
to do with territory under the sovereignty of a given
country. But a State occupying territory that is not
under its legal jurisdiction cannot be said to have
sovereignty over that territory, and there is therefore no
requirement to seek the acceptance of that country in
order to deploy troops on that territory. This is
perfectly clear to us, and I hope it is now as clear to
everyone else.

With regard to all the talk about so-called
cooperation by the occupying Power, that is a different
matter altogether. That cooperation is not a prerequisite
to the adoption of a resolution by the Council. If the
occupation force refuses to cooperate with the Council
in the implementation of its resolution, then it is in
violation of the Council's resolutions, thereby adding
another resolution to the series of resolutions that have
been violated by that Power - a matter that should
make it subject to international accountability.

The truth of the matter is that for the last six
months the Council has failed to live up to Arab
expectations and to the expectations of many Member
States of the United Nations and the international
community. It has failed in its mission to defend
Palestinian civilians. It has failed to assume the
responsibilities mandated to it by the general
membership of the Organization. It has failed to
understand the nature of what is asked of it. It has also
failed to understand its role, both politically and with
regard to security, in providing an appropriate climate
conducive to restoring peace and security in the
occupied Palestinian territories and to protecting
Palestinian civilians. Consequently, it has up to now
failed to fulfil its role.

Despite that continuing failure, we will not waver
in demanding that the Council assume its
responsibility. We have yet to find a single convincing
reason why the Council should remain silent on the
issue of the Palestinian civilians who are being
subjected to acts of aggression. Those acts make it
imperative that appropriate protection be provided to
them. Will we be able to do this, or will the Security
Council remain a useless organ as far as the protection
of Palestinian civilians is concerned? That is the
question we pose to the Council.
I should like in conclusion to express to you,
Mr. President, our deep gratitude for having convened
this open debate and for having given us the
opportunity to address the Council on this issue.

