Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by stating how pleased I am to see your
delegation, Sir, presiding over the work of the Council
during the month. Yours is a brotherly African country
with a deep and valuable involvement in the
international community and my delegation wishes to
thank you for holding this very important debate. The
initiative is particularly important because it addresses
conflict prevention and resolution, in particular in
Africa, our mother continent. We hope that today's
discussion will follow an operational and objective
approach that will contribute to strengthening the role
of the Security Council in preventing conflicts, in
keeping with the goal of eliminating the root causes of
such conflicts through peaceful settlement, in order to
achieve lasting peace and security.

Over two years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1625 (2005), which
stressed the importance of drafting global and effective
strategies and seeking to build the capacity of the
United Nations in preventing conflicts and in building
the national capacities of individual countries involved
in conflicts by remedying the underlying causes. That
leads us to stress an important idea, namely, the need to
create priorities through the work of the Security
Council. As a first stage in addressing such problems,
we must establish priorities and then move on to
tackling those problems.

Defining the causes of conflict and settling
conflict through dialogue are matters of the highest
priority. However, the Security Council has always
taken the view that the settlement of conflicts should
be dealt with in political terms only as a second stage.
For that reason we have not been able to develop
strategies to resolve conflicts in the past because
peacekeeping operations, whatever their names and the
numbers involved, cannot recreate peace from nothing.
Thus, it is very beneficial for the Security Council to
include among its priorities the question of the political
settlement of disputes.

The prevention of armed conflicts also rests on
the particularly important premise, namely, the
constant and important role of regional and subregional
entities. Early recognition of the root causes is likewise
important, and the Security Council must emphasize
this as well. Keeping within the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter and without undermining the
importance of the regional and subregional bodies that
have played an important role and have much in
common with the countries directly involved, the
African Union has shown itself to be a prime example
of regional involvement in its dealing with the situation
in Darfur. The imperative of resolving conflicts means
that the United Nations has a leading role to play here.

Another matter that should be given consideration
is strengthening the role of the United Nations in
economic and social sectors. We must also bolster the
various United Nations bodies: the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, and the agencies and
funds relevant to these concerns, while also building
national capacities to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDG). We must also bolster
national reconstruction and economic recovery,
technology transfer, combating climate change and
deterioration of the environment. Expertise needs to be
shared in these regards.

Development is a key and prime factor in
preventing conflict, and the United Nations should,
therefore, enhance its economic and social role rather
than deal with conflict prevention in a reactive manner.
Tackling the root causes of conflict will guarantee that
the peace that is developed is of a lasting nature. It also
ensures that there will be no return to war. The United
Nations could thus avoid the tremendous expenses of a
return to war and the ensuing costs of peacekeeping
operations.

