Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): At the outset, I would
like to thank Japan, which holds the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December, for
convening today's debate on the theme "Maintenance
of international peace and security: addressing
complex contemporary challenges to international
peace and security".

The debate is most timely, for it provides an
important opportunity to examine emerging challenges,
in particular the non-traditional security threats to
international peace and stability. As we approach the
end of the year, it is important to recognize that 2017
was an extraordinary year in the history of the United
Nations. In its resolution 2349 (2017) of 31 March, the
Security Council recognizes that climate change has
an adverse impact on security. With that resolution,
we have surpassed the tipping point in the debate on
climate change and security - the moment at which
we put behind us the question of whether or not climate
change poses a security threat.

It is now time for the Council and the General
Assembly to clearly spell out how the United Nations
can take practical measures in responding to climate
change and other non-traditional security threats,
which could include requesting the Secretary-General
to prepare regular periodic assessment reports that
could serve as a type of early-warning mechanism
about both proximate and long-term threats. The reports
should be presented to both the General Assembly and
the Security Council, and should contain cutting-edge
analysis about the threats that a particular region or
country faces.

The Security Council and the General Assembly
could also consider examining the feasibility of
establishing a regular coordination mechanism,
through which all the principal bodies of the United
Nations and the relevant United Nations agencies,
such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change or the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, could contribute to the design of conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping operations.

Another encouraging development in 2017 was
the Council's increasingly progressive approach to
its conceptualization of security. That approach was
most visible in the Council's decision to redefine the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti in order to assist the Government of that country
to maintain order and uphold the rule of law. Strong
institutions are the key to preventing internal conflicts
and to resolving ongoing conflicts. As such, one way
in which peacekeeping operations can help countries to
create peace is by assisting in the establishment ofa set
of institutions that can deliver peace dividends to every
corner of the country. Small States are most vulnerable
to non-traditional and emergency security threats. That
is a fact that the General Assembly has long recognized
in, for instance. its resolution 44/51 of 8 December
1989, which the Maldives sponsored.

As the Security Council takes a more progressive
view in considering such threats, it is absolutely
necessary that small States, particularly the small
island developing States (SIDS), have a seat on the
Council. Yet, over the past 72 years, only eight SIDS
have served on the Council. The Maldives is determined
to change that and give a voice to SIDS. We hope to get
elected to the Council for the term 2019-2020 in order
to represent SIDS on the Council, contribute to the
shaping of decisions that affect the smallest members of
the international system and help the Council to forge
meaningful partnerships that can result in the crafting
of shared solutions for a shared destiny.

