Mr. Shareef (United Republic of Tanzania):
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish you every success in these
troubled times.

I welcome the efforts that the Security Council
has been exerting to bring peace and stability to the
Great Lakes region in general, and, in particular, to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In that regard, the United Republic of Tanzania
wishes to reiterate its support for the work of the Panel
of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is for this reason
that the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania and its institutions extended its full support to
the Panel when it paid a visit to my country in pursuit
of its mandate.

The Panel visited the United Republic of
Tanzania on 17 and 18 September 2001.
Notwithstanding the short notice, during the visit it met
with senior Government officials from the ministries of
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation,
Defence, Energy and Minerals, Industry and Trade,
Finance, Transport and Communications, and Home
Affairs, as well as the Tanzania Railways Authority.
The Panel also met with the Governor of the Bank of
Tanzania and the Acting Director General of the
Tanzania Harbour Authority. The discussions were
conducted in a cordial and frank atmosphere.

Regrettably, the addendum to the report of the
Panel has made unsubstantiated allegations against my
country. To start with, in paragraph 7, the Panel alleges
that information was not forthcoming from, among
others, the United Republic of Tanzania and this factor
"as well as the constraints of its short mandate, limited
the Panel's ability to present a more complete
addendum". In the second paragraph of annex I of the

addendum, the Panel also "expresses its
disappointment at the lack of adequate cooperation
from the Governments of the United Republic of
Tanzania".

It is further regrettable that my Government is
accused of demonstrating hostility towards the Panel
during its visit to Dar es Salaam. On the contrary, the
Panel was accorded every possible assistance to
facilitate its work while in Dar es Salaam.

Further reading the report shows that the United
Republic of Tanzania is accused of facilitating the
transportation of diamonds, timber and coltan through
the port of Dar es Salaam. Allow me to take this
opportunity to comment on each item referred to in the
report.

During its visit to the Bank of Tanzania, the Panel
was assured that the Central Bank, which is modelled
on the British system, the Bank of England, deals with
fiscal and macroeconomic management. It is thus
neither a marketing board nor a clearing house for
exports and transit goods. Our Central Bank, therefore,
does not deal in diamonds. Moreover, diamonds in the
United Republic of Tanzania are exported legally by
licensed dealers, as acknowledged by the
supplementary report of the Monitoring Mechanism on
Sanctions against UNITA, document S/2001/966, in
paragraphs 188 to 200. We are therefore dismayed that
the Panel is repeating the same accusation contained in
the report in document S/2001/357 of 12 April 2001 to
the Council without making available any evidence
which would have helped the Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania to conduct further
investigations.

As regards timber exports, available records show
that the Tanzania Harbour Authority did not handle
timber for export during the period under review.
However, as the Panel was informed by the
Government, the United Republic of Tanzania has been
handling cinchona bark from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and not timber. The Panel claims that it
has obtained documents indicating that at least two
shipments of timber originating in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were transported through the
United Republic of Tanzania. We are surprised,
however, that the Panel did not share this so-called
evidence with the Government of the United Republic
of Tanzania.

Another example is that of coltan, or columbo-
tantalite. It is not true that the Government and the
Tanzania Harbours Authority "vehemently denied"
(S/2001/1072, para. 24) that coltan originating in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo had ever been
exported from the port of Dar es Salaam. However, the
reference in the report to the vessel Karina S as having
shipped coltan and as having left the port of Dar es

S/l'VA437

 

Salaam on 13 July 2001 is totally inaccurate
information. No ship by that name docked and left with
the reported cargo at that date or in that period of time.
My Government would appreciate being furnished with
evidence that the said ship visited the port of Dar es
Salaam as reported.

The United Republic of Tanzania, as a transit
country, has international obligations to serve its
landlocked neighbours in the import and export trade.
Those countries use our ports, railways, roads and
airports. As such, unless there are United Nations
sanctions imposed by the Security Council against a
country or reasons to suspect a particular shipment, the
shipping authorities of Tanzania respect the documents
of the pre-shipment inspection companies and of the
exporting countries. The Government of the United
Republic of Tanzania expected the Panel to provide it
with its evidence that could prove the authenticity of
those claims.

During its visit, the Panel was told that the
United Republic of Tanzania does not support or
administer on its territory rebel camps of the groups
mentioned in the report. We strongly deny the
allegation that some Mayi-Mayi groups are based or
have established a vaguely structured presence in the
United Republic of Tanzania. We regret that those
allegations are contained in one sweeping statement
without a tinge of evidence, explanation or detail. Such
allegations not only damage the credibility of the Panel
but also could adversely affect my country's relations
with its neighbours, for my country is on record as
having played a neutral role with respect to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, right from the
beginning of the conflict, and it continues to play such
arole.

In the same vein, the United Republic of Tanzania
does not serve as a transit point for arms belonging to
rebel groups involved in the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is therefore surprising and
highly regrettable that the Panel saw fit to accuse the
United Republic of Tanzania of acting as a conduit for
weapons to the armed groups. I believe the Council is
aware that the United Republic of Tanzania has been
playing a leading role in the search for peace and
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the Great Lakes region as a whole. In that regard,
the United Republic of Tanzania is one of the architects
of the Lusaka Accord, whose full implementation
would lead to lasting peace in the Democratic Republic

of the Congo. We are gratified that the Council has
been actively seized of the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The United Republic of Tanzania will continue to
cooperate with the Council on this question, and it is
our hope that the final report of the Panel will address
the shortcomings I have outlined. It is also our
expectation and our sincere hope that the Panel will
make available to my Government the so-called
credible evidence it claims to have obtained on the
matters raised in its report. The cooperation of the
Panel in that regard would be in the interest of
furthering the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in particular and of ensuring
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region as a
whole. We look forward to the day in the not too
distant future when the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will be so stable as to allow the
refugees - of whom the new caseload currently in my
country numbers more than 170,000 - to return home.

Another important observation: the report would
have been more comprehensive had it included also the
end users of the natural resources plundered from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I am here not only because the credibility of my
country has been called into question by the
accusations in the report, but also because those
accusations undermine the United Republic of
Tanzania's efforts in the pursuit of lasting peace in the
Great Lakes region. We respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its rights over its natural resources for the
benefit of all its people. We expect the other
neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and indeed the international community at large, to do
the same. I hope that the Council will understand our
concerns. Nevertheless, I would like once again to
reiterate that the Council can count on our continued
support and cooperation. We have nothing to hide.

