Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free Trade
Association country Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

Conflict prevention lies at the heart of the
mandate of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In its presidential
statement of July 2000, this Council underlined the
overriding humanitarian and moral imperative as well
as the economic advantages of preventing the outbreak
and escalation of conflicts. Over the last couple of
years, the Security Council has paid increasing
attention to the significance of preventive activities and
to the need to create a culture of prevention. The report
by the Secretary-General on the prevention of armed
conflict, before us today, mirrors the commitment on
the part of the Security Council, as well as of the wider
United Nations system and its Member States, to
strengthen our collective measures in this field.

The European Union commends the Secretary-
General for his long-standing effort to move the United
Nations from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention. We warmly welcome his recent report as
part of that effort, appreciating its thorough review of
progress achieved in developing the conflict-prevention
strategy of the United Nations, as well as the report's
many concrete recommendations for further
improvements. One of the report's particular strengths
lies in its comprehensive approach and its emphasis on
the importance of coordination and cooperation
between the wide range of actors to ensure effective
preventive strategies. As the Secretary-General points
out, many United Nations actors - as well as the
Bretton Woods institutions, Member States,
international and regional organizations, civil society
and the private sector - have important roles to play.

Improving coordination is vital for effective
prevention. The European Union recently adopted a
programme for the prevention of violent conflicts, in
which cooperation with the United Nations is a
prominent feature. The programme declares that
European Union (EU) actions will be undertaken in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter, in keeping with the primary
role of the United Nations in conflict prevention. It
recalls that the main responsibility for conflict
prevention rests with the parties concerned and
reiterates the importance of local and regional
capacity-building. Also, it stipulates that the European
Union will set out clear political priorities for
preventive actions, improve its early warning, action
and policy coherence, and enhance its instruments for
long- and short-term prevention.

The EU programme, like the Secretary-General's
report, emphasizes moreover the need to build and
sustain effective and mutually reinforcing partnerships
for prevention, between the United Nations system,
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society. To this end, and in line with the modalities for
such cooperation agreed on by the High-level United
Nations-Regional Organizations Meeting in July 1998,
the European Union has recently adopted guidelines for
an intensified interaction with the United Nations in
the areas of conflict prevention and crisis management.
Specific themes for this cooperation include regional
issues, civilian and military aspects of crisis
management and, in the particular field of conflict
prevention, exchange of information, cooperation on
fact-finding, coordination of diplomatic activity and
field coordination and training.

The Secretary-General's report contains close to
30 recommendations, aimed at mobilizing the
collective potential of the United Nations system, with
greater coherence and focus on conflict prevention.
The recommendations are pertinent and wise, and
several of them can be implemented without requiring
additional resources. For example, the European Union
supports the proposal for closer interaction between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, and considers that
practical arrangements for this should not be hard to
find.

Noting that the recommendations are addressed to
a wide range of organs and actors, the European Union
looks forward to elaborating its position when the
proposals are dealt with in the various relevant forums.
The deliberations in the General Assembly, envisaged
for mid-July, will provide an opportunity to present at
greater length and in more detail the comprehensive
position of the European Union on the totality of the
Secretary-General's recommendations. In that
connection, we stand ready to participate in the
development of a practical road map to implement the
specific recommendations contained in the report, as
proposed by the Secretary-General.

However, the report also contains a number of
interesting recommendations addressed specifically to
this Council. The European Union notes with
satisfaction statements made by Security Council
members in today's debate indicating their willingness
to take action in follow-up to the Secretary-General's
report. The European Union believes that these
recommendations merit close attention, including the
proposal that the Security Council consider some
innovative mechanisms for discussions on prevention
cases on a continuing basis, with regard either to
reports submitted by the Secretary-General or to early
warning or other prevention cases brought to the
Council's attention by Member States.

In this connection, we recall the crucial role given
the Secretary-General in Article 99 of the United
Nations Charter: to bring to the attention of the
Security Council any matter which in his opinion may
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. The intention of the Secretary-General to
initiate a practice of providing periodic regional and
subregional reports to the Security Council is important
in that regard. As to the contributions by Member
States, the European Union notes with appreciation the
innovative and valuable provision in the recent
Security Council resolution on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo requesting both the Secretary-
General and Member States to make proposals on how
to address the interrelated crises in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Other important recommendations addressed to
the Security Council, among others, include to make
more active use of preventive deployments before the
onset of conflict; to support peace-building
components within peacekeeping operations; to include
a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
component in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building operations; to make
full use of information and analyses emanating from
the United Nations human rights mechanisms and
bodies; to invite the Office of the Emergency Relief
Coordinator to brief the Council on situations where
there is a substantial risk of a humanitarian emergency,
and to call for and support the implementation of
preventive protection and assistance activities by
United Nations agencies in such situations; and to give
greater attention to gender perspectives in its conflict-
prevention and peace-building activities.

These are all useful and practical proposals with
the potential to enhance notably the capacity of the
Security Council in the field of prevention, and to
mirror the European Union's own efforts to enhance its
own conflict-prevention and crisis-management
capabilities. The European Union encourages the
Security Council to consider carefully these
recommendations as well as possible complementary
and additional measures.

The Secretary-General points to several important
principles for replacing the prevailing culture of
reaction with a culture of prevention. Among them, the
European Union notes in particular that conflict
prevention is one of the primary obligations of Member
States set forth in the United Nations Charter. Other
core principles include that prevention should be in
conformity with international law and that will not be
successful without local ownership and a firm
commitment to its principles by national actors. As the
Secretary-General points out, early action taken
nationally to alleviate conditions that could lead to
armed conflict can help strengthen the sovereignty of
States.

The European Union considers that conflict
prevention calls for a cooperative approach to facilitate
peaceful solutions to disputes, and that preventive
strategies should be developed so that action can be
initiated at the earliest possible stage of a conflict
cycle. In that way, actions can be most effective and,
ideally, large-scale operations can be avoided. The
European Union looks forward to working with other
Member States in developing such strategies. Conflict
prevention efforts create an environment that reinforces
sustained and equitable development, and vice versa.
As the Secretary-General points out, investing in
conflict prevention offers the potential for multiple
returns for national development over the longer term.

The report also highlights the comprehensive
nature of conflict prevention, involving operational and
structural elements, and short- and long-term measures.
An effective preventive strategy requires that deep-
rooted socio-economic, cultural, environmental,
institutional and structural causes be addressed. And it
entails political, diplomatic, humanitarian, human
rights, developmental, institutional and other measures.
In this context, the European Union stresses the
importance of adherence to international law, not least
the conventions on human rights and international
refugee law, and reiterates that applying the rule of law
in relations between States and ensuring respect for
human rights reduce the risk of violent conflict. Good
governance, basic principles of democracy and
transparency, and the responsibility and commitment of
political leaders are similarly important elements in the
context of conflict prevention.

Finally, in his report the Secretary-General recalls
that the United Nations has a moral responsibility to
ensure that genocides such as that perpetrated in
Rwanda are prevented from ever happening again.
History has taught us - at times through horrendous
lessons - our shortcomings. But the present also
reveals that preventing widespread human suffering
remains a commanding challenge for individual States
and our collective organ, the United Nations. We, the
Member States, must improve our common
understanding and approach, build and support
sustained political will and commitment, and increase
our readiness to take action, combining in creative and
coordinated ways the tools at our disposal. The
European Union recognizes the dimensions of the task
but remains convinced that progress can, and must, be
made.

