Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Slovenia was among the
sponsors of the resolution just adopted, and voted in
favour of its adoption. We believe that this is a timely
and necessary resolution that contains all the necessary
elements with which the Security Council must address
the situation in Kosovo. Let me recall some of them.

With this resolution, the Security Council
realistically recognizes the existence of the threat to
international peace and security and, acting under Chapter

 

VII, provides the legitimacy for the necessary measures of
implementation of the resolution.

The resolution provides for comprehensive
international military and civilian presences in Kosovo. The
mandates of the missions are clear and precise and, at the
same time, sufficiently flexible.

The resolution provides for credible military force and
authorizes it to use all necessary means to fulfil its
mandate. This is a prerequisite for the force to establish a
safe and secure environment for the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

Finally, the resolution delegates overall responsibility
for civilian operations to the United Nations, with the
specific responsibility of working with all other institutions
and organizations so that the operations will be conducted
in an integrated manner. We expect the security and civil
presences to cooperate towards the same goal and in a
mutually supportive manner.

The resolution reaffirms the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
over Kosovo. Full cooperation of all concerned is required.
It is our understanding that the personnel of the United
Nations Tribunal should be granted immediate and
unimpeded access to Kosovo and that they will be provided
with the appropriate support and protection by the
international security presence.
An important part of the resolution is devoted to
humanitarian issues, which will constitute an essential
priority in the immediate future - especially the return of
refugees and caring for children in the post-conflict period.
Slovenia fully supports these provisions and stands ready to
strengthen its cooperation in the humanitarian field,
including the priority tasks in the activities of demining and
other activities in the field of mine action.

The focused character of the resolution and its clear
setting of priorities do not mean that the Security Council
is neglecting any of the relevant aspects of the Kosovo
crisis. In the area of humanitarian action the Security
Council remains committed to all the relevant tasks,
including those related to the security and safety of
humanitarian personnel. In this context, my delegation
would like to repeat its concern over the fate of the two
Australian aid workers, Steve Pratt and Peter Wallace, who
were convicted by a military court of charges that are
difficult to reconcile with international standards of
humanitarian law and protection of humanitarian workers.
We hope that they will be released soon, which would
improve the confidence needed for effective humanitarian
work.

With regard to the military and security aspects, we
would like to emphasize the need for the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to
terminate the state of war in the country immediately. In
particular, the state of war and related measures must not
be used against the Republic of Montenegro, which has
demonstrated a reasoned and constructive approach
throughout the conflict, including by accepting and taking
care of tens of thousands of internally displaced persons.
The pressures exerted by Belgrade against Montenegro
under the pretext of military needs must stop. Montenegro
has suffered economically, socially and politically as a
result of those pressures. We expect that the military
presence in Montenegro will be reduced to normal levels.
We are concerned that without such a measure the
situation in Montenegro could escalate into a new threat
to international peace and security in the region.

At the political level, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia must understand the importance of the
normalization of its relations with its neighbours and with
other States. The requirements in this domain constitute
a large agenda and include normalization and
establishment of diplomatic relations, acceptance by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of the basic principles of
State succession and, above all, a far greater degree of
realism. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must finally
accept the principle of equality with the other successor
States that emerged as a result of the dissolution of the
former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which
ceased to exist many years ago. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia must thus stop its attempts to create the
erroneous impression that it is the continuing Member
State of the United Nations and should apply for
membership in the United Nations, as expressly required
by Security Council resolution 777 (1992) and General
Assembly resolution of 47/1. Political wisdom and
legality require that this issue be resolved on the basis of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

Let me now reflect in a slightly broader context
upon the resolution that was adopted a few moments ago.
This is necessary because the resolution adopted today
provides the platform for the future engagement of the
entire international community in the effort to resolve the
Kosovo crisis. Its implications can be seen as belonging,
broadly speaking, to two groups. First, the resolution and

 

the tasks that will be necessary for its implementation
suggest that there are serious obstacles on the road to peace
that will need to be overcome. Let me briefly refer to those
obstacles.

Ensuring security in Kosovo means having to create
something that did not exist in Kosovo for many years. The
Kosovo conflict was not a sudden eruption - it has
persisted for decades in different forms, ranging from latent
tensions to violent outbursts. This vicious spiral of violence
needs to be stopped, and security must become irreversible.
The international security presence will therefore face a
wide range of tasks reaching beyond the traditional military
functions. The willingness and ability to perform these tasks
will be an important test of its success.

Complete security will, in turn, require the
establishment of an adequate civil administration, a task
which presupposes carrying out an ambitious agenda
inspired by internationally agreed standards of human
rights. The difficulties in securing conditions for the full
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
Kosovo for all - the Albanians, the Serbs and the
others - must not be underestimated. Particular care
should be given to the need to prevent any provocation
calculated to generate an atmosphere of insecurity or to
provoke the emigration from Kosovo of people belonging
to the Serb or any other ethnic group.

The fact that basic human rights were denied to the
people of Kosovo throughout its past and, most brutally, in
the past decade, represents a formidable obstacle to the
establishment of normalcy for the future.
Let me repeat that justice will be an essential
condition for the durability of peace, and the role of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
as an independent criminal court will be indispensable.

The second set of implications relates to the
opportunities that the current resolution presents. The
success of the international effort in and around Kosovo
would show that the international organizations involved in
this undertaking are capable of ensuring the essential
humanity of the people concerned as well as the
preservation of international order and stability, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter. Success in this specific case would give an
example of the balance between the considerations of State
sovereignty on the one hand and humanity and international
order on the other. It is true that international organizations
must be careful in all their efforts and that they must
respect international law, including the principle of the
sovereignty of States. However, it is at least equally clear
that State sovereignty is not absolute and that it cannot be
used as a tool of denial of humanity resulting in threats to
peace. While the situation in Kosovo last year and early
this year escalated to a serious threat to peace, there is
now a genuine opportunity to reverse the situation and to
create the balance necessary for political stability and
durable peace for the future.

Today, the Security Council is resuming its
legitimate role in the Kosovo crisis. This is an important
beginning. The Council is put to a test of whether it will
be able to maintain and strengthen its role as envisaged in
the Charter. Success depends primarily on the unity of the
Security Council. Determined efforts will be necessary in
the implementation of the present resolution. Skilful
navigation will be essential so as to avoid the Scylla of
the marginalization of the Council and the Charybdis of
engaging the Council in micromanagement. With the right
decisions in the coming months, the Council will have an
opportunity to shape the future of Kosovo and the
stability and prosperity of its immediate international
environment. Moreover, the Council will have an
opportunity to define the patterns of the division of work
and new forms of cooperation between the United Nations
and the regional organizations concerned. This is an
opportunity of great significance.

It is too early today for optimistic conclusions. Now
is the time for the restoration of the unity of the Security
Council, for the recommitment to its purposes and for the
determination to strengthen the efforts to resolve the
Kosovo crisis and other crisis situations on the Council's
agenda.
