Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report dated 13 March 2001 on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
would like to welcome the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans Haekkerup, and
thank him for his very enlightening briefing. We would
like to take the opportunity of his being here with us to
reiterate Mali's full support for his efforts to find
solutions to the many challenges remaining in Kosovo.

Despite the many political, economic and security
problems that UNMIK has faced in the past, and
unfortunately still faces today, my delegation believes
that much progress has been made in the execution of
its mandate. While we welcome the tangible progress
made, my delegation strongly supports the efforts made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) Commander in the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

My delegation endorses the priorities of Mr.
Haekkerup, as set out in paragraph 2 of the report
before us: the establishment of an effective legal
framework for the provisional self-government of the
province, the establishment of an effective judicial and
law enforcement system and the rebuilding of the
economy. We believe that all of this would help to
establish a solid foundation for a stable and democratic
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo.

On political matters, my delegation welcomes the
establishment of a Working Group, headed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
entrusted with elaborating the legal framework for
provisional self-government. From my delegation's
point of View, the importance of this legal framework is
fundamental because it will be the pillar on which to
build the organs and powers of the future provisional
autonomous self-government in advance of the holding
of Kosovo-wide elections.

For the elections to be held properly, some
preliminary conditions must be met, such as the full
implementation of the results of the municipal
elections of October 2000 and the creation of a reliable
voter registration list. The free and full participation of
all ethnic groups is a major challenge that the
international community must overcome, through
UNMIK and KFOR.

On security matters, my delegation remains
deeply concerned over violence in the southern part of
Serbia, the Presevo Valley and the border area between
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Kosovo. We strongly condemn the violent and illegal
terrorist actions perpetrated by Albanian extremist
groups. We believe that ethnic extremism only weakens
the Balkans in general and Kosovo in particular. It is
clear that the violence that persists in the province
represents the biggest obstacle to realizing the
objectives of peace, democracy and prosperity sought
by the international community.

My delegation welcomes the signing of a
ceasefire agreement on 12 March 2001 and calls on the
parties signatories to abide scrupulously by their
commitments. We recall that mindless violence has
never resolved a crisis situation. It is only constructive
dialogue among all parties to a conflict that can ease
tensions and end a crisis.

My delegation pays tribute to the Governments of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for showing restraint
and moderation amid this escalation of violence in
southern Serbia and northern Macedonia. We strongly
support the peace plan of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, intended to end repeated raids by terrorists
in southern Serbia. Mali is committed to the stability,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and of Macedonia.

My delegation strongly supports the specific
measures taken by UNMIK and KFOR regarding the
monitoring of the administrative borders. We are
pleased to learn that relations between the new
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
UNMIK are improving. The opening of an UNMIK
office in Belgrade is encouraging. Other specific
actions, such as the return of the Serb representative to
the Working Group on the legal framework, the release
of all detainees and the clarification of the fate of
missing persons, are also desirable. We believe that
such measures would help create and strengthen
confidence between the parties.

One important aspect in strengthening security is
to make every effort to ensure respect for the rule of
law. We welcome the efforts of UNMIK to establish a
reliable judicial system capable of providing sound
justice to the population. It is equally essential that a
framework for dialogue be established between
Kosovar political leaders and the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Finally, on the economic level, we pay tribute to
the work done by UNMIK over the past 18 months and
encourage it to persevere in the implementation of
effective economic structures capable of establishing
conditions for lasting, endogenous economic
development in Kosovo.

