At the outset, I express my warm thanks to Mark Lowcock for his presentation. The spread of the coronavirus disease in Syria is extremely worrisome. The pandemic is becoming a multiplier of humanitarian needs in a country where more than 11 million people rely on humanitarian assistance. An immediate and sustainable nationwide ceasefire is more than necessary - there is no alternative to fight the pandemic effectively. This is all the more crucial as the ceasefire in the north-west remains fragile. Unfortunately, the regime has not responded to the appeal by the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire. We call on all parties, and especially the regime, to work actively in that direction. The United Nations must remain at the forefront of these efforts, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). I would like to reiterate the obligation on all parties to respect international humanitarian law. The protection of civilians should be at the core of every party's concerns. All parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must ensure humanitarian access. It is crucial to overcome the shortage of essential supplies and equipment to prevent and respond to the spread of the pandemic. They need to be shipped by the most direct routes to reach their intended beneficiaries, the most vulnerable. It can never be repeated it enough: the cross-border mechanism has never been so relevant, in the north-west and the north-east alike. France remains determined to preserve that life-saving mechanism. Its extension for 12 months, as required by the Secretary-General, is essential. In the north-west, the scaling up of the humanitarian delivery through the two crossing points must absolutely continue. The risks are immense, both locally and for the region. In the north-east, gaps in medical supplies have widened as a result of the loss of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point. The delivery of a World Health Organization convoy last week is a positive step but should not fool us: Damascus is not providing the United Nations with the sufficient and timely authorizations needed to compensate for the loss of Al-Yarubiyah. The figures speak for themselves: only 31 per cent of health facilities previously supported through cross-border assistance are receiving aid. As highlighted in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/401), the cross-line modality is clearly not sufficient on its own to meet current needs in the north-east. Indeed, cross-line coverage is largely similar to that recorded in 2019. This means there has been no improvement in cross-line since 10 January. This is all the more worrisome as the pandemic is spreading in the north-east. North-east Syria needs cross-border assistance through a dedicated crossing point. We support all efforts to prevent and punish human rights violations. Mass atrocity crimes will not go unpunished. France will continue to strongly support all efforts to collect and preserve evidence to support proceedings before competent jurisdictions. We reaffirm the importance of sharing the full report of the Board of Inquiry with the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism and the Commission of Inquiry to further investigate incidents and bring their perpetrators to justice. Lastly, as indicated yesterday (see S/2020/420), only a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) will bring an end to the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.
