I, too, want to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and her presentation. It is a pleasure to see her, even virtually. France fully supports the International Criminal Court (ICC), which must be able to act independently and impartially within the framework of the Rome Statute. The Prosecutor and her team must be able to exercise their prerogatives without obstruction or impediment. Justice for victims of mass atrocities is one of the key factors to resolving the conflict in Libya. That is why the Security Council referred the Libyan situation to the ICC in 2011 through resolution 1970 (2011). Unfortunately, violations of human rights and international humanitarian and refugee law are widespread. Attacks against the civilian population and medical infrastructure may constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute, as the Prosecutor rightly recalled. Trafficking in persons, migrant smuggling, arbitrary detention, mistreatment of detainees, enforced disappearance, torture and sexual violence are unacceptable. There can be no doubt that anyone who incites or commits such crimes in Libya today is liable to prosecution, whether by the Libyan justice system or by the ICC. In that regard, France welcomes the rigorous approach adopted by the Office of the Prosecutor based on the principles of cooperation and complementarity with domestic courts. We take note that the Appeals Chamber confirmed the admissibility of the case against Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. We commend the cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor and the highest level of the Government of National Accord, including with regard to the execution of the requests for assistance. However, like others, we are deeply concerned by the obstacles the Office still faces in the execution of the arrest warrants for three fugitives. Full cooperation from all stakeholders is required, first and foremost from the Libyan parties. France will continue to cooperate with the International Criminal Court and calls on all States, whether parties to the Rome Statute or not, to do the same. Moreover, France welcomes the assistance provided to the Office by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. Finally, we reiterate that the most serious crimes committed in Libya since 2011, and which continue to be committed today, must all be investigated and prosecuted, including the crimes committed by extremist and terrorist groups and crimes against refugees and migrants. Only a political solution and the restoration of the rule of law can put an end to the Libyan crisis and avert further deterioration on the ground. The Libyan parties must immediately and sustainably cease the hostilities and engage in the United Nations-led dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the recent proposal by the Libyan National Army to declare a truce for the month of Ramadan. We also call on the Government of National Accord to make the same commitment. Both parties must endorse and sign the draft ceasefire agreement agreed by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission on 23 February. In that context, the swift nomination of a new Special Representative is essential.
