Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
French delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Security Council today. We
associate ourselves with the appeal this draft resolution
makes to the Taliban to abide by Security Council 1267
(1999). We hope that it puts an end to all support for
terrorist activity. With regard to drugs, we call on the
Taliban to halt all trafficking and to implement their
decree of 28 July 2000 totally prohibiting the
cultivation of opium poppy.

France is particularly concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and the
continuation of operations of assistance to the Afghan
people, to which this draft resolution should not be an
obstacle. To that end, the draft resolution provides an
exception for flights organized by humanitarian
organizations that are duly registered. We demand that
the Taliban ensure the security and freedom of
movement of United Nations and humanitarian
organization personnel in Afghanistan and to ensure
them free and unimpeded access to the population so
that they can continue their activities to assist all
vulnerable individuals.

The draft resolution we will be adopting takes
into account two other concerns of the French
delegation. First, the sanctions are established for a
limited time period, although they are renewable if the
Council so decides. This will be the third time this year
that the Council has issued a time-bound sanctions
regime. Thus, we see in practice the formation of a new
Council doctrine that is conducive to avoiding the
perpetuation of sanctions for indefinite time periods.

Secondly, we are satisfied with the provisions of
the draft resolution regarding the one-month period
provided for drawing up the list of humanitarian
agencies and organizations authorized to organize
flights. The importance and urgency of humanitarian
assistance in Afghanistan means that the Committee
will have to work as quickly as possible to draw up that
list, which, in my delegation's view, must be as broad
as possible.

