Major Patrono: It is a great pleasure and honour
for me to attend this meeting, and I thank the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief its members on
Italy's commitment in the field of stability policing,
a sector in which the Carabinieri have established
themselves as one of the most innovative and reliable
partners for international organizations, including the
United Nations.

In April 2017, 1 had the honour to act as team leader
during the first female policing course delivered by the
Carabinieri for the Iraqi Federal Police in Baghdad.
Indeed, the Carabinieri have been exercising a
leadership role in the framework of Operation Inherent
Resolve in Iraq since 2015, when a task force was
deployed to lead and coordinate all training initiatives
for the Iraqi Federal Police. Our main mission is to
enhance the capabilities of Iraq's police forces through
training, advising and assisting them so that they can
play a primary role in the stabilization of the country.
The Train, Advise and Assist Task Force was recently
renamed the "Police Task Force-Iraq" in order to
emphasize the specificity of this contribution within
the framework of the Global Coalition.

The Police Task Force-Iraq coordinates the training
initiatives delivered to all religious and ethnic groups
represented in the Iraqi Police. In this context, the respect
for gender balance truly constitutes the backbone of the
Carabinieri strategy in crisis management. The reason
for this is simple: strengthening women's participation
in the police and improving women's role and influence
in post-conflict environments can dramatically improve
the overall effectiveness of stabilization efforts,
especially at the local level. This objective is achieved
by performing a dedicated training for female police
personnel through separate female policing courses. In
total, in two courses performed in Baghdad in April
and July, some 100 police personnel have already been
trained, and our plan is to continue training many more
in the coming months.

The main purpose of the first female policing
course was to increase the knowledge and awareness of
fundamental human rights in order to deliver a suitable
training on gender-related law-enforcement techniques
and tactical procedures. The course, which took place
at the Civil Defence Training Centre in Baghdad
over a two-week period, was specifically tailored to
40 Iraqi female police officers, warrant officers and
non-commissioned officers.

Trainees took part in classes and lectures on the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which we
consider an essential precondition for every training
initiative. Special attention was devoted to enhancing
the ability to carry out investigations designed to
counter sexual and gender-based violence, as well as
crimes against the most vulnerable groups. This is a
crucial point that I wish to emphasize - there is a direct
correlation between the availability of well-trained,
empowered female police officers and the ability of
effectively counter sexual and gender-based violence.

The second part of the course was focused on
increasing trainees' basic competence and skills in self-
defence, search and handcuffing techniques, inter alia.
There were also interactive debriefings and discussions
to promote respect for professional ethical principles
and the code of conduct. The increased efficiency,
integration and interoperability of the female police
officers we have trained are now confirmed by their
successful deployment for the purposes of stabilizing
areas liberated from Da'esh, especially at the local level.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that the
Carabinieri strongly believe in the police training
initiative in Iraq. We are of the view that the project
has been a successful operational paradigm that we
have also been able to apply to female police officers
participating in Carabinieri training in Palestine,
Djibouti and Somalia. With that in mind, I would also
like to emphasize the innovative formula for stability
policing that our Carabinieri in Iraq have adopted,
driven by an inclusive approach and based on the
goal of achieving long-term normalization, which has
proved more effective when seen as an autonomous
pillar of crisis-management operations and a catalyst
for fostering lasting peace and stability.

On a final note, I would like to give special thanks
to all of the women who have bravely pioneered the
project and have worked tirelessly, painstakingly
and with great sacrifice and commitment. Somebody
asked us what we would bring back to Italy from the
experience - as far as we are concerned, it has been
seeing the desire to learn that shone in the eyes of our
female students, the very mirrors of their souls.

