Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. Minister, we welcome you once again to New
York. We thank you for honouring with your presence
the New York part of East Timor's independence
ceremonies. It is truly a beautiful symbol that the only
member of the Security Council belonging to that
region holds the Council presidency on the new
country's independence day.

The representative of Spain has made a statement
on behalf of the European Union; France fully endorses
it. My remarks will therefore be brief.

As you have said, Mr. President, this moment is
exceptional. It is a historic moment. We are gathered to
celebrate the first independence of this century. East
Timor has come so far in two and a half years. Long
oppressed, wounded by the tragic events of September
1999, today the East Timorese nation is victorious and
sovereign, reconciled with itself and at peace with its
neighbours. It has finally taken its destiny in its hands.
Tomorrow, as soon as possible, the Democratic
Republic of East Timor will join us, and the United
Nations family will gain a one hundred ninetieth
Member State.

Independence, so greatly desired and so long
awaited, was achieved by the East Timorese people
themselves, by their courage and extraordinary
political maturity, by the outstanding qualities of their
leaders: those same individuals whom the Council
knows so well - Xanana Gusmao, Jose Ramos-Horta,
Mari Alkatiri and many others. France pays tribute to
them. These individuals have made history and
continue to do so.

We must also welcome the role of Indonesia
during this decisive period. The presence in Dili of
President Megawati Soekarnoputri bears witness to the
will of Indonesia to establish constructive and peaceful
relations of cooperation with the new State.

As we speak, the independence celebrations are
ending in Dili and throughout the territory of the new
State. Everywhere, and with a remarkable unanimity,
the East Timorese people have expressed their
jubilation, as well as their gratitude for the impressive
work accomplished by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, under the enlightened
leadership of Sergio Vieira de Mello. At times, the
United Nations has offered its good offices; at times it
has protected; at times it has developed; at times it has
administered. But rarely have all those tasks been
carried out by the United Nations - in any case, never
so successfully.

The support of the United Nations will not be
withdrawn from the East Timorese. Its role will only be
adapted. That is the mission of Mr. Kamalesh Sharma,
whom we all know well and in whom we all have
complete confidence. Less than in the past will it be a
question of replacing the East Timorese authorities;
they will have rather to be assisted. Other actors will
see their role grow: the bilateral and multilateral
donors, as well as the regional organizations that East
Timor will now join.

The East Timorese can with full confidence
pursue the implementation of the country's highest
priorities: national reconciliation, economic
development and the country's integration into its
regional and international environment. All France's
warmest wishes are addressed to them, and France will
continue to lend the East Timorese its full support.

