Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
wish to begin by thanking you, Sir, for presiding over
this meeting. Indeed, it signals the United Kingdom's
commitment to an issue that is so important to us all.

I thank the Prime Minister of the Federal
Government of Somalia, the Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer of the
African Union and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, for their interventions. I
wish to pay tribute, through the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, to those United Nations
personnel who have paid with their lives in their
commitment to assisting the Somali people.

We have just adopted resolution 2245 (2015), on
redefining the logistical assistance mandate entrusted
to the entity that will henceforth be known as the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). I thank
the British delegation for drafting the resolution, which
implements the conclusions of the strategic review
conducted by the Secretary-General. The mandate of
the entity is clarified and the procedures are simplified,
with a focus on increased operational effectiveness in
the field. Those changes were necessary.

France salutes the courage and dedication of
the troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the Somali security forces in leading
the fight against Al-Shabaab. Ipay tribute to all soldiers
of the African Union who have made the supreme
sacrifice in the fight against Al-Shabaab. The efforts
of the international community, especially the African
Union, with the support of the European Union and the
United States, are paying off, but they can be reversed.
Much more progress is necessary.

Al-Shabaab is demonstrating significant resilience,
and while international and Somali forces theoretically
control 80 per cent of the territory, the terrorist
organization remains capable of operating over a
large part of the same. Our common objective is to
continue the fight against that terrorist group, which
persists in carrying out murderous attacks against

Somali institutions and AMISOM, as well as in
Kenya. Al-Shabaab remains undefeated, as was again
demonstrated by the 1 November attack, which caused
many casualties. France extends it condolences to the
Prime Minister and, through him, to the people of
Somalia over this new, heinous attack.

Given the situation, it is essential that AMISOM
quickly resume the offensive in order to exert maximum
pressure. The need for a surge in effectiveness would
correspond to a qualitative improvement in the
functioning of AMISOM. and its troops, as affirmed by
resolution 2124 (2013) and recalled in resolution 2232
(2015) of last July. That should result in concrete and
operational improvements. AMISOM. troops must be
fully integrated under a single, clear chain of command,
with joint planning and execution, and full sharing of
information; necessary force multipliers must be made
available. AMISOM. would greatly benefit from such
implementation without further delay. We call on the
African Union and the troop-contributing countries to
follow up.

Qualitative improvements in logistical support,
through the adoption of a new mandate for UNSOS,
will remain dead letter without the active involvement
of the Somali Government in building a credible Somali
National Army that is responsive and financially
sustainable. That is one of the main challenges of the
current period. The international community stands
ready to tackle this issue, in support of the Somali
authorities; however, international support in the
area of security-sector reform must be contingent on
an increased demonstration of the will of the Somali
Government in this respect. The issue of the payment of
salaries and bonuses must also be resolved as a priority
matter, failing which the security situation could
deteriorate.

As previous speakers have noted, the headway made
in the military drive against Al-Shabaab will be lasting
only if it goes hand in hand with a robust, dynamic and
credible political process. France welcomes the efforts
of the Somali Government to reach agreement on a
federal structure and better governance, particularly

through the creation of regional interim administrations
and a strengthened effort to combat corruption.

Beyond that, from a political point of View, 2016
will be a decisive year because of the elections. This
will help to confer indisputable legitimacy on the
country's authorities, which will be able to continue
and consolidate their efforts to bring Somalia back
onto the path towards lasting peace and long-awaited
development.

