Ms. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As
Mahatma Gandhi once said, ifwe are to reach real peace
in the world, we shall have to begin with the children.
Given that nearly half of the world's population is under
the age of 24, it is crucial to address their needs and
vulnerabilities and, even more, to harness the great
potential of young people when it comes to building a
peaceful and safe society.

Iwould like to focus on two areas that the Secretary-
General recommended in his progress study on youth
and peace and security (see S/2018/86): inclusivity
and education.

First, young people will have to live tomorrow with
the choices that we make today. It is therefore essential
that we include them in today's decision-making.
That is not only an ethical imperative; it is also in the
interests of an international community that is serious
about its future. preace is to be successfully sustained,
it has to be supported, embraced and implemented by
the youth - women and men.

There are numerous initiatives on political
participation, some of which we have heard and
admired today. I would also mention the African Youth
Parliament and the European Youth Parliament. They
are proof that young people want to take an active
part in shaping the future of our countries. We should
encourage them so that they also inspire those who so
far have chosen not to participate in referendums and
elections. Democracy is a work in progress and has to
be constantly worked on and defended, in my country
as well as in all others.

Youth inclusivity is particularly important in
conflict situations. In Syria, young people will play an
instrumental role in the search for a sustainable solution.
It is for this reason that Switzerland has supported the
Civil Society Support Room in Geneva since 2016.
More than 1,000 participants, most of whom are under
30 and represent over 400 Syrian non-governmental
organizations, have participated in these negotiations
under United Nations auspices. They have played a
constructive role in identifying priorities for the future
of Syria's young people. We shall continue to support
them as much as we can.

Secondly, I turn to education, defined by the poet
William Butler Yeats as "the lighting of a fire". It is
by educating young minds that great change becomes
possible. We need a great change. All young people
should have access to inclusive and equitable quality
education, as called for in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. However, violent conflict
and persecution have uprooted many young women and
men, with displacement reaching record levels. Half
of refugees today are under 18 years of age and spend
more time in displacement and exile than in school.
That is the seed of future lost generations. A small
minority may even embrace alternatives with regard to
their sense of belonging, status and power, and the risk
of violence is thus exacerbated.

This is where we have to step in to break the vicious
circle of misery, radicalization and conflict. Switzerland
has therefore increased its budget for education
activities in fragile contexts by 50 per cent. Over the
past few years, for example, we have rehabilitated 128
schools in the Middle East, thereby facilitating access
to schooling for around 86,000 young people, among
them many Syrian refugee children.

An estimated 408 million young people aged
between 15 and 29 are living in contexts of organized
violence or armed conflict throughout the world. We
need to intensify our efforts to allow this generation
to have a future and to enjoy peace, security and
prosperity. There are great challenges ahead, and it is
difficult to predict how long it will take to overcome
them. But as the saying goes, the best way to predict
the future is to create it. I suggest we do exactly that,
together with our young people.

Today's debate and the resolution to be adopted
are a further step in the right direction and for this,
Mr. President, I warmly thank you.

