Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): It is my great personal
pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over this important
organ of the United Nations.

In order to respect the time limit of four minutes, I
will circulate the full text of my statement and deliver
only the salient points.

Japan joins others in celebrating the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
and commends the efforts of the Committee established
pursuant to the resolution to strengthen its activities. We
highly appreciate the concept note that the presidency
kindly circulated to us (S/2014/313, annex) to streamline
the discussion. Today, I would like to make comments
related to the section "Looking ahead: challenges and
ways forward" in the concept paper.

In order to effectively raise awareness of the
importance of non-proliferation efforts, in particular
among high-level policymakers, we should keep in
mind that some States believe that export controls
impede trade and investment. They also believe
that non-proliferation efforts may pose obstacles to
economic growth, but we do not think they do. In this
context, I would like to share what Japan has been doing
in the Asian region, where awareness of the importance
of export control is rising.

At the commemorative summit meeting of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and Japan held in Tokyo in December 2013, leaders
agreed to intensify efforts to implement relevant
measures for non-proliferation, including cooperation
in strengthening export control capabilities of ASEAN
Member States. When Japanese Foreign Minister
Kishida delivered a speech on nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation in January, he emphasized the
strategic effects of export control. What he meant was
that strengthening export controls would help foster
confidence in the reliability of trade or investment
among the States and companies involved. Export
control would thereby create a favourable environment
for economic growth, rather than impede trade and
investment. With this in mind, Japan has been carrying
out technical assistance programmes for capacity-
building, and we will continue to expand these activities.

Let me continue with our activities in support of
resolution 1540 (2004). Japan has been hosting the
Asian Export Control Seminar in Tokyo for more
than 20 years. This year, we were pleased to enjoy
the participation of the Panel of Experts of the 1540
Committee. We have also been organizing seminars
under the rubric Turtle Bay Security Roundtable, here
in New York, on non-proliferation and disarmament, in
partnership with the Missions of Poland and Turkey. We
held the sixth round of the Roundtable in March with
the participants of many Member States and, again, of
the Panel of Experts of the 1540 Committee.

I would like to conclude my statement by
reconfirming Japan's continued commitment to being
deeply involved in the long-term process and reiterating
our strongest support for work towards the full and
universal implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

