Mr. Kolby (Norway): It is a pleasure to welcome
High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch to the Council
and to hear his comprehensive briefing on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I can assure him of my
Government's continued support in his efforts to
implement the Dayton/Paris Accords.

Norway commends the High Representative's
peace implementation initiatives in the areas of
economic reform, refugee return and the consolidation
of State institutions. We recognize that important
progress has been made in these areas in 2000. But
many challenges remain. The Dayton/Paris process has
proved far from self-sustaining. We emphasize the
fundamental responsibility of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State, entity and local authorities in this
regard. The High Representative's decision to establish
constitutional commissions in both entities is an
important, though temporary, measure to protect the
vital interests of the constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Norway is concerned about the political and
economic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
welcome the formation of non-nationalist Governments
at State and entity levels following the general
elections in November last year and call upon the
respective Governments to implement policies in
accordance with the priorities given by the Peace
Implementation Council meeting in May 2000.

My Government firmly condemns attempts by the
Croat National Congress to establish a Croat entity
within Bosnia and Herzegovina. This clearly
contradicts the Dayton Peace Agreement and threatens
the political stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Following repeated undermining of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, the High Representative had no other
option but to remove Mr. Jelavic from the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as other officials
holding public office and positions within the Croat
National Congress.

Norway appreciates the efforts of the High
Representative to ensure that the Agreement on Special
Parallel Relations between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska is in accordance with
the Dayton Peace Agreement and the Constitutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska.

Norway underlines the crucial role of
neighbouring countries in promoting a viable, stable,
multi-ethnic and unified State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We expect that the recent democratic
changes in Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia will have a positive impact on the political
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My Government would like to stress the
importance of taking a regional approach to the
problems in the Balkans. The tensions in southern
Serbia, Kosovo and on the Macedonian side of the
border could also adversely affect political and
economic developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The increasing problems of organized crime, illegal
trafficking, economic stagnation and political
instability can be adequately dealt with only within a
regional framework and with a unified international
approach.

Norway has over the years been a consistent
provider of personnel and financial assistance to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as part of the significant
efforts of the international community to bring lasting
peace and stability. It is now time for the governments
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its constituent entities
to shoulder a greater share of the responsibility in
developing a sustainable, peaceful and democratic
solution for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

