Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): I wish to express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
comprehensive briefing.

Coinciding as it does with the passing of 10 years
since the genocide in Rwanda, our debate provides a
grim reminder of the failure of the international
community, including this Organization, to act
effectively and in time to protect hundreds of
thousands of innocent victims caught in the vortex of
the conflict.

The Council's deliberations today are an
expression of its continued commitment to keep the
protection of civilians in armed conflict a priority item
and an integrated element of global peace and security.
At the same time, it is a sad acknowledgement that
despite the panoply of international humanitarian and
human rights laws, civilians have become the most
affected and least protected in armed conflicts. Article
48 of Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions, 1977,
states that "In order to ensure respect for and protection
of the civilian population the Parties to the conflict
shall at all times distinguish between the civilian
population and combatants ...".

Regrettably, disproportionate rules of engagement
and indiscrete deployment of high-yield weapons have
rendered these injunctions meaningless. As a result,
despite growing awareness and increased focus on their
protection, civilians continue to be the prime victim of
conflict situations. Almost all conflict situations, both
inter-State and intra-State, occur in least developed or
poor countries. Often conflicts erupt in areas rich in a
single commodity, like diamonds or oil, which, besides
being the bone of contention, soon becomes the fuel for
a full-time war economy.

All these conflicts have security, political,
diplomatic, economic, social and humanitarian
dimensions. Human rights violations constitute an
unfortunate, but unavoidable, consequence of conflict
situations. Mass displacement of people results in
discrepant provisioning of food and medicine.
Hindered humanitarian access is often the result of
such situations, accentuating hunger and disease.
Evolving a comprehensive, integrated and
coherent response to these complex conflict situations
remains the daunting challenge for this Organization
and the international community it represents.
Emerging conflicts and new dimensions of old
conflicts pose unprecedented challenges demanding
innovative approaches and bettered standards of
international conduct and action.

We are thankful to the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2004/431). It examines the progress
made during the 18 months since his last report and
reviews the issues outlined in the ten-point platform on
the protection of civilians, presented to the Security
Council in December last year. The Secretary-
General's report touches upon new dimensions in
protection, posing new challenges and making some
innovative recommendations. I would like to make a
few points of a general and specific nature.

First, conflict prevention remains the single most
important dimension of protection. There are several
means at the disposal of the Council, ranging from the
Secretary-General's good offices, the initiative that can
be taken by the General Assembly and the mechanism
prescribed in Article 34 of the Charter. All these can be
usefully employed to address situations the continuance
of which could endanger the security of civilians.

Secondly, there has to be a clear recognition that
conflict prevention is possible only by effectively
addressing the underlying causes of conflict. The root
causes of conflicts are many and diverse: political,
social, economic, historical and cultural. However, on
the long list of root causes, poverty and
underdevelopment seem to be omnipresent. The
interlinkage between peace and development is well
recognized.

Thirdly, most of the contemporary conflicts are
complex in nature, requiring a comprehensive, coherent
and multidimensional response. In the United Nations,
we have an institution best suited to generate such an
integrated approach, with the Secretary-General, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
its relevant functional commissions and the General
Assembly, as well as the United Nations system as a
whole, working in synergy within their respective roles
and mandates.

Fourthly, we fully endorse the Secretary-
General's views on impunity and compliance.
Systematic and gross violations of human rights of
civilians, especially crimes against women and
children, and genocide committed during conflicts,
should not be allowed to go unchallenged and
unpunished. This is essential both as a deterrent against
future violations and to create the basis of political
reconciliation and sustainable peace. Since it may be
difficult to establish tribunals for each conflict, the
appointment of a special advisor on the prevention of
genocide, as mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2004/431), is a welcome proposition.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General's report refers to a
stronger focus on protection in peacekeeping mandates.
Pakistan, as a leading troop-contributing country, has
been making its due contribution in protecting civilians
in extremely challenging situations in Bosnia, Sierra
Leone, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia
and elsewhere. We fully agree that the swift
deployment of peacekeeping troops is often critical in
efforts to avert an immediate crisis of protection and to
restore order. Cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations to ensure early intervention
is of equal importance.

Sixthly, the protection of civilians becomes more
complex in situations in which the regular army confronts
non-State actors. When organized forces are called upon
to respect the norms of the Geneva Conventions and
Protocols, non-State parties cannot be allowed to
remain in non-adherence. In irregular warfare,
especially in the war on terrorism, it is often difficult to
distinguish between civilians and combatants, yet there
are minimum standards that must continue to be
observed in the treatment of suspected combatants.

Seventh, a regional approach to protection is
obviously essential. However, such an approach will
have to rely essentially on regional parties. This is
emerging in West Africa. The Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), which has played a
key role in addressing regional conflicts, both through
its engagement at the political level and also by a
timely deployment of peacekeepers under difficult
circumstances, deserves our appreciation. This concept
needs to be further concretized and used in other
regions as well.

Finally, justice and the rule of law play a truly
crucial role in post-conflict peace-building and the
return to normalcy. In this context, financing the
reconstruction process becomes a critical contribution
by the international community. Generous international
assistance and expertise remain the most vital elements
for the sustainability of a peace process. Failure to
provide such financial and technical support can
unravel efforts for the restoration of peace and security
and even cause a relapse into conflict.
I would like to conclude by fully endorsing the
observation made by the Secretary-General in his
report:

"Compliance by all parties to conflict with
international humanitarian, human rights, refugee
and criminal law is critical in all of these
situations, whether they are situations of armed
conflict, occupation or transition" (S/2004/431, para. 3).

