Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing and his important
contribution as Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). We support the
important role of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa in addressing issues in the Central
African subregion, in line with its mandate. The role of
the Office in the areas of preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention and mediation remains crucial and needs to
be further reinforced and strengthened.

An increase in the incidence of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea is a matter of grave concern and requires
a comprehensive regional strategy specific to the
regional circumstances. Such a regional strategy will
strengthen the legal framework at the national and
regional levels for criminalizing and prosecuting acts
of piracy, developing mechanisms for cooperation
and information-sharing between law enforcement
agencies of the States of the region, and addressing
the underlying causes of piracy. The early convening
of the Heads of State summit of the Gulf of Guinea on
piracy and maritime security, with the help of UNOCA,
will be a crucial step towards forging a comprehensive
regional and international response to the challenge of
piracy.

The presence and activities ofthe Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) remain a major threat to the security
and safety of civilians in the subregion. Addressing
the scourge of the LRA will require a comprehensive
approach aimed not only at eliminating and bringing to
justice its remaining leadership, but also at strengthening
the capacities of the relevant States. At the same time,
it will be crucial to address the long-term development
needs of the areas affected by the LRA.

Effective implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy against the LRA, especially the early
implementation of the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the LRA, remains
crucial to addressing this threat. We welcome the
troop contributions made so far by the countries of the
region to the African Union Regional Task Force under
the Initiative, and look forward to learning about its
concept of operations. The international community
should provide the necessary political, technical and
financial support for the sucessful implemention of the
Initiative, in line with the priorities identified by the
African Union and the principle of national ownership.

We welcome the important role that UNOCA,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic and United Nations
peacekeeping missions continue to play in the region in
the fight against the LRA. In particular, we commend
the important work of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Mission's role, through training and
capacity-building of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo, support for the Joint
Information Operations Centre, and implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programmes remains an
important and integral component of the international
response to the LRA.

Pakistan remains committed to peace, security and
stability in the Central African subregion. We hope that
the region will continue to receive the full support of
the international community and the Security Council
to help it address the numerous challenges it is facing.
Pakistan will continue to play its part in that regard.

