Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank France, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

An independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel, is the only
solution to the question of Palestine. We believe that
the only viable way to that end is for Israel to withdraw
from the occupied territories to the pre-1967 borders
and allow refugees to return to their rightful lands.

The Security Council did the right thing by adopting
the historic resolution 2334 (2016) in December 2016,
demanding that Israel immediately and completely
cease all settlement activities in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem. The Security Council made
it crystal clear that it will not recognize any changes
to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to
Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the two sides
through negotiations.

The Maldives strongly condemns the restrictions
imposed by the occupying Power to alter the historic
and legal status quo in East Jerusalem, notably
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
The Government of Maldives calls on the occupying
Power, Israel, to immediately stop its illegal activities
and respect its international legal obligations, including
relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Maldives also welcomes the third report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), and supports the calls for substantive
written reports in support of the Council's duties to
advance the resolution's objectives. We believe that
proper documentation is necessary, especially when
Israel, as the occupying Power, continues to disregard
the Council's legally binding resolutions.

The Maldives calls on the Council to intensify its
efforts in implementing the resolution so as to ensure
that Israel brings an end to the illegal occupation of
Palestine and the Syrian Golan, recognizes and respects
the sovereignty of the independent State of Palestine,
and allows for the return of refugees. The Council
has the solemn responsibility of enforcing its own
resolutions. It carries with it the hopes and aspirations
of the oppressed and victims of oppression. Let us keep
those hopes alive.

Such hopes are indeed in short supply in Syria. The
conflict in that historic country is in its seventh year.
Since the start of the conflict, hundreds and thousands
of people have been killed, millions have been
displaced, hospitals and basic infrastructure have been
reduced to rubble and entire cities have been destroyed,
along with the country's cultural heritage. The people
of Syria continue to live in fear of an uncertain future.
The Maldives calls upon the international community
and the members of the Security Council to bring an
immediate end to the conflict.

Both in Palestine and Syria, one important
human rights value is missing, which is at the core
of the conflict. That is the value of respect for basic
human rights. It should not cost the warring parties
in Syria too much to respect the human rights of one
another. Similarly, it should not cost Israel too much
to respect the basic human rights and human dignity
of the Palestinians. Respecting Palestine's right to self-
determination, independence and sovereignty is in
everyone's interests.

Those are values that the Maldives will promote
and bring to the work of the Security Council if it is
elected to the Council in the elections held next year
for the term 2019-2020. We will work with everyone
concerned to craft shared solutions for a shared destiny,
a destiny of sustainable peace.

