Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone): My final
intervention will focus on four basic areas. First, the
United Nations intervention in Sierra Leone is clearly a
success, but there are a few things that need to be done
to ensure that that success can be sustainable. One of
them is to ensure continued assistance for peace-
building, bringing into focus some of the basic issues
that need to be addressed quickly; the reintegration of
ex-combatants, the recovery of the country and of its
institutions, and making sure that refugees in other
countries return. That is the situation as far as Sierra
Leone is concerned. But on Sierra Leone, the final
issue is that any withdrawal by the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) must be phased,
with a build-up of the security apparatus to ensure that
there is a continuum and sustainability.

My second point is that the Security Council has
a lot of resources at its disposal: resources from the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
new United Nations Office for West Africa. All this
could be brought to bear on the process initiated to
ensure that the lessons learned in Sierra Leone are
applied in a regional dimension. This could probably
lead to a General Assembly resolution that would bring
into sharp focus some of the activities that need to be
carried out to ensure that we do not have to go from
country to country to country to have a regional
solution in the West African subregion. By that I mean
that we need a comprehensive solution; the United
Nations has a lot of resources at its disposal to achieve
that comprehensive regional solution.

Thirdly, on Liberia, there could be a Lome-type
conference, similar to the conference that was held for
Sierra Leone between the Government and the
Revolutionary United Front. But that conference must
be backed by support from the United Nations,
ECOWAS and the African Union. An attempt to hold a
conference between the Government and Liberians
United for Reconciliation and Democracy within
Liberia might not yield the desired results without the
necessary backing from regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations system.

Fourthly, a conference on Liberia would include
provisions for a timetable that will tie in carefully with
the 2003 elections in Liberia. This should be backed by
strong United Nations and international support and
presence, possibly with the involvement of United
Nations observers or military observers from the
international community.

