The President: I thank Ambassador Lauber for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of
South Africa.

We thank the former President of Burkina Faso,
Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Burundi, and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
Chair ofthe Burundi configuration ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings on the
evolving situation in Burundi and for their unwavering
commitment to the process.
South Africa takes this opportunity to express our
sincere gratitude to the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for Burundi for his tireless efforts aimed at
leading the supportive role of the United Nations in
the inter-Burundian dialogue being led by the East
African Community (EAC). We thank him for his role
in engaging with all the stakeholders in the Burundi
process and for working with all Burundian parties to
develop much-needed confidence-building measures
to improve the human rights and security situation in
the country. His work with the Government and the
East African Community leadership has fostered an
environment conducive to political dialogue and an all-
inclusive reconciliation process.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Burundi (S/2019/837), which reflects on
the most recent developments in the country. We take
note ofthe proposed suggestions on how best to enhance
an inclusive dialogue and the possible role of the United
Nations in the run-up to the general elections scheduled
for 20 May 2020. This would bolster the efforts of the
East African Community, which is charged with the
responsibility of overseeing the Burundi process.

South Africa continues to fully support the EAC-
led process in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, with the support
of the African Union (AU) and the United Nations. We
welcome the recent engagement between President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, as the mediator of the
process, and Special Envoy Kafando on 23 August.
We note with interest the three-point non-paper, which
speaks to strengthening mediation efforts and injecting
much-needed momentum into the Burundi process. In
that regard, the work of former President Benjamin
Mkapa of Tanzania remains invaluable. We look forward
to the leadership of the East African Community and
the African Union in charting the course on Burundi
with the assistance of, and in coordination with, the
United Nations.

South Africa urges the Council to continue to
coordinate its positions with those of the AU Peace and
Security Council when dealing with African issues.
Africa has very clearly defined regional organizations
that deal systematically with issues related to African
peace and security. We maintain that it is only through
an inclusive dialogue that we can address any political
impasse in Burundi and that this requires that the
international community support the East African
Community initiatives. There should be an environment
conducive to dialogue among the key stakeholders in
the East African Community-led process.

As a guarantor of the Arusha Agreement and
as part of the legacy of former President Nelson
Mandela, we in South Africa will always stand ready
to support the Government and the people of Burundi
as they consolidate peace, as well as to assist with
the development of their country. We congratulate
the Government of Burundi on initiating a number of
preparatory processes for the elections, especially the
establishment of the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the adoption of the Burundian electoral
code and the publication of the 2020 election calendar.
Furthermore, the establishment of new political parties
and the decision by the Government to set up nationwide
mixed committees to include the youth from all political
parties in a bid to avoid election-related violence is to be
commended. All parties must be permitted to canvass
support countrywide without hindrance. There should
be no no-go areas for any politician or political party.

South Africa welcomes the commitment by
President Pierre Nkurunziza not to stand as a candidate
for the presidential election in 2020, and we look
forward to seeing the Government and political parties
work together to hold inclusive and peaceful elections.
Burundians must be the beneficiaries of free and fair
elections that can deliver democracy and development
with the assistance of the region. We are encouraged by
the continued stable security situation in the country,
and we commend the decision of the Government of
Burundi to finance the elections with their national
budget as its sovereign responsibility. However, we
encourage Burundi to work closely with the East
African Community and the African Union to deliver
a truly conducive environment in the spirit of the
Arusha Agreement.

We commend Burundi's contribution to
international peace and security through its deployment
of more than 6,000 Burundian men and women in
various peacekeeping operations, mostly in the Central
African Republic and Somalia. As a member of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, Burundi
is to be congratulated on remaining committed to the
promotion of peace and security by contributing to
silencing the guns in Africa.

South Africa remains gravely concerned at the dire
humanitarian situation in the country. Nearly 1.8 million
Burundians are need of humanitarian assistance, with a
large proportion suffering from malnutrition. We urge
the Security Council and the international community to
do more to alleviate the socioeconomic challenges and
the humanitarian situation facing the people of Burundi
and call on its partners to support the implementation
of the national development plan for the benefit of the
Burundian people.

We are encouraged by the ongoing voluntary
repatriation of Burundian refugees, which since
September 2017 has seen the voluntary repatriation
of 78,000 refugees to Burundi. The increased return
is a manifestation of a return to peace and stability
in the country, and we call on the international
community to provide assistance for their repatriation
and reintegration, as the humanitarian response plan
continues to remain severely underfunded.

In conclusion, we appeal to the Security Council and
the international community to support the Government
of Burundi and the East African Community mediation
process as it lays the foundation for an environment
that is conducive to the holding of democratic elections
and to support a peaceful transfer of power in order to
ensure peace and stability beyond 2020.

We thank Mr. Lauber and Mr. Kafando for their
work and for their briefings to the Council today.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

