Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset I wish to congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I wish him every success, and I thank him
for his briefing today. I also would like to welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. J eremic, and to thank him for his statement. I also
wish to thank Mr. Hoxhaj for his statement.

I wish to renew our support for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for
its role in facilitating reconciliation, supporting
security and enhancing human rights. We also wish to
indicate the positive role that it plays in several issues,
such as missing persons and the protection of religious
and cultural heritage, as well as in facilitating contacts
between the different groups. We consider it important
that coordination and cooperation continue between
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) within the
status-neutral framework in Kosovo, as stated in
resolution 1244 (1999).

With regard to security, we would like to note the
coordinated measures adopted by local authorities to
combat money-laundering, smuggling and the drug
trade, and the resulting decrease in the crime rate.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
over the deterioration of the security situation in
northern Kosovo and the accompanying tension and
polarization among the different communities in the
north. The developments concerning Gates 1 and 31
have shown, over the past few months, that any
outstanding issue between the two sides may quickly
become contentious and a source of tension and
violence, seriously hampering the dialogue process. It
is therefore important, in the coming stage, to refrain
from taking any unilateral action or resorting to
violence, and to focus efforts on achieving
reconciliation among the communities and setting the
stage for dialogue.

In that context, we urge all influential parties in
the region to play a facilitating and supportive role in
efforts to build confidence among the communities and
the parties. That will have a positive influence on the
dialogue and on the security situation in the north.

We take note of the periodic coordination
meetings held with representatives of northern Kosovo
Serbs, the United Nations and the European Union
Missions and KFOR, as part of efforts to build
confidence among local communities.

We welcome the continued cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina, in coordination with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, to clarify
the fate of those persons still missing. Despite the fact
that progress in disclosing the fate of missing persons
is still slow, we nevertheless view such efforts as a key
component of any reconciliation among communities.

In conclusion, as to allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo in 1999, we stress the importance of
adopting measures that will guarantee effective
protection for witnesses. We call for a comprehensive
and transparent investigation that will reveal the truth
and hold the perpetrators to account, as there can be no
genuine reconciliation or sustainable peace without
justice.

