Mr. Dabor (Sierra Leone): The Sierra Leone
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of August. We are grateful for the opportunity
to address the Council once again in its consideration of
the situation in Sierra Leone.

After lengthy and often painful discussions in Lome
with the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the
Government of Sierra Leone signed a comprehensive
Peace Agreement with the RUF on 7 July. President
Kabbah's signature on that document, on behalf of the
children of Sierra Leone, was the culmination of his
untiring and consistent determination, since his election
three and a half years ago, to bring about lasting peace in
our country through dialogue. He took calculated risks to
end a conflict which he had inherited. As he said recently,
in signing the Lome Agreement we went the extra mile,
to the extent that the Government is now seen in some
circles as having given far too much to those who had
terrorized our people for more than eight years. Today,
we are grateful to the Security Council for recognizing
and commending, in the draft resolution before it today,
the courageous efforts of the Government to achieve
peace. We also note with appreciation that the Council
has recognized the legislative and other measures that the
Government has taken to implement the Lome Peace
Agreement.

We welcome the expansion of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) and are
grateful to the Council for authorizing it. We fully
understand the political and financial constrains involved
in the deployment of observer and peacekeeping missions.
We wish, however, that today's decision had come a little
earlier, considering that the expansion is only provisional
and that under the terms of the Peace Agreement the
disarmament and demobilization process was to
commence two days ago, that is six weeks after the
signing of the Agreement.

The Government's objective in the conflict was
certainly not to score a military Victory, but to defend
innocent Sierra Leoneans, including children, who had no
means of defending themselves in what has been
described as one of the most atrocious conflicts in Africa.
All along we had made solemn appeals to the
international community, and to the United Nations in
particular, at least to help the Government contain those

 

who were perpetrating the atrocities. All along we had
maintained that it was not enough to issue statements
calling for an end to the so-called fighting. The situation
had deteriorated to the point where it was no longer fair to
exert undue pressure on the Government literally to
abandon its responsibility for the safety of the people of
Sierra Leone and to make concessions to the rebels. We
pleaded with the Security Council, especially with those
members with the necessary political and material
wherewithal to exert pressure on the perpetrators of the
atrocities and their external supporters, to end the eight-year
terror in our country.

Despite the destruction of life and property and the
maiming committed by the rebels against the people of
Sierra Leone, including children as young as six months
old, they are prepared to bury the hatchet for the sake of
permanent peace. It is a bitter pill to swallow, but that is
the price they are prepared to pay for peace. Therefore, we
call on the international community to support the people
of Sierra Leone in their search for peace and not to do
anything that would undermine the Peace Agreement which
about six weeks was delicately negotiated by the parties in
Lome.

The security and safety of our people were and still
are vital. We are convinced that the Peace Agreement
which we signed in Lome will remain fragile until we
succeed in disarming the combatants. Indeed, any inordinate
delay in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process will render the entire Agreement meaningless.

While we are happy that in the draft resolution the
Security Council calls on the RUF and other armed groups
to begin immediately to disband and give up their arms,
and to participate fully in the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, the Government of Sierra
Leone would like to express the hope that the additional
United Nations military observers will be deployed as soon
as possible in order to build confidence in the disarmament
and demobilization process which has just begun, and that
the ongoing consultations on the future peacekeeping
mechanism in Sierra Leone, involving the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) and the United Nations, will be
expedited, thus ensuring that delays in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process as a whole are not
used by anyone as a pretext for reneging on the Peace
Agreement.

In our view, the United Nations should take advantage
of the existing momentum generated by the signing of the
Peace Agreement, by initiating the disarmament process
without further delay, before frustration and even
resistance to disarmament begin to develop among the
combatants. The void which has been created in the
process since the signing of the Agreement is very
dangerous.

As far as the ongoing consultations on the revised
mandates of ECOMOG and UNOMSIL are concerned, we
would like to emphasize that ECOMOG has acquired
considerable experience in both the Liberia and Sierra
Leone conflicts. This fact cannot be ignored. The Security
Council itself, in the present draft resolution, commends
ECOMOG for its outstanding contribution to the
promotion of a peaceful settlement in Sierra Leone. It
recognizes the need to maintain the critical presence in
the country of ECOMOG, which has executed a similar
disarmament process in Liberia, which is familiar with the
terrain as well as the operational tactics of the combatants
in Sierra Leone, and which has performed the equally
important job of retrieving hidden weapons.

We should add that since the signing of the Peace
Agreement more than a month ago, a great deal of
confidence has been built between ECOMOG and the
combatants. ECOMOG has even played host to many of
the key field commanders of the RUF in several parts of
the country.

The Government of Sierra Leone wholeheartedly
welcomes the various provisions in the draft resolution
concerning the need for international assistance in support
of ECOMOG, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, humanitarian relief and for
long-term reconstruction, economic and social recovery
and development.

In the current post-conflict settlement programme,
we attach importance to the welfare of ex-combatants. We
attach equal importance to the needs of the Victims of the
rebel war. Therefore, we welcome the emphasis that the
present draft resolution places on the mobilization of
international assistance for a special trust fund to enable
the Government to design and implement a programme
that will address the special needs of war victims, in
particular those who have suffered maiming and
mutilation.

In closing, permit me to quote from a statement
made by President Kabbah during his recent visit to
London.

 

"It is unfortunate that the scale of magnitude of the
human tragedy which engulfed Sierra Leone, a
democratic and sovereign member of the committee of
nations, over the past several years, is now being
realized and assessed in the context of the recent crisis
in the Yugoslav province of Kosovo The conclusion
is that the situation in Sierra Leone-Kosovo
comparison will continue to be highlighted in the
context of generating resources for post-conflict
reconstruction in both places."
