Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing on
Afghanistan. China also wishes to congratulate Mr. Kai
Eide on his appointment as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan. We look
forward to working closely with him and with the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

China has noted with satisfaction that, with the
support of the international community and of the
United Nations, Afghanistan has made some progress
in the area of national reconstruction and development.
On the political front, the Afghan Government has
established the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance to monitor local administration and to
combat corruption and illegal drugs. In the economic
arena, the Afghan national economy has experienced
stable growth and a steady rise in projected gross
national product for four consecutive years. With
regard to regional cooperation, the Afghan Government
has worked together with other countries in the region
to combat terrorism and to promote economic
development and the return of refugees.

However, we must deal with one fact: Afghans
continue to face many severe challenges, such as a
deteriorating security situation and constant acts of
violence and terrorism. All levels of Government in
Afghanistan need to be greatly strengthened,
particularly the security and justice sectors. The
Afghan people continue to live in poverty, and the drug
issue remains unresolved. Meeting those challenges
will require further efforts by the Afghan Government
and the international community. China attaches great
importance to the problems facing Afghanistan, and we
look forward to further improvements in the situation
there.

Here, I should like to emphasize the following
points. First, the achievement of security and stability
in Afghanistan will require joint efforts by the security
forces in Afghanistan, UNAMA and the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). China appreciates
the efforts being made by UNAMA and ISAF in that
regard. We hope that the parties concerned, while
carrying out military actions against terrorists, will
strengthen their communication and cooperation with
the Afghan security sector and UNAMA, so that each
party will bring its own advantages and working
synergies fully to bear. The international community
must invest additional resources to help Afghanistan
further rebuild its military and police forces so that
they can assume, independently and at an early date,
the responsibility of maintaining national security and
social stability.

Secondly, the keys to lasting peace in
Afghanistan are economic development and
improvement in the quality of life. Experience has
shown that military actions cannot fully resolve all the
problems facing Afghanistan. The international
community must provide additional support to the
Afghan Government, and efforts must be made to fully
implement the Afghanistan Compact and the National
Development Strategy so that all people in Afghanistan
can enjoy the benefits of development and regain their
confidence in the country's future. China appreciates
all the efforts made by the countries neighbouring
Afghanistan to promote economic development.

Thirdly, in its efforts, UNAMA must continue to
be guided by the principle of fairness and neutrality
and must play a central coordinating role. China
supports an extension of UNAMA's mandate and a
greater role by UNAMA in coordinating international
support for Afghanistan. Here, it should be pointed out
that UNAMA, while working with the relevant
international organizations, must abide strictly by its
mandate and consistently maintain a position of
fairness and neutrality. While coordinating the
multifaceted international assistance to Afghanistan,
UNAMA must remind donors of the need to respect the
will of the Government and the people of Afghanistan.
As for the issue of domestic reconciliation, UNAMA
can provide constructive support at the request of the
Afghan Government, but it cannot make decisions for
the Government.

As a friendly country neighbouring Afghanistan,
China has attached great importance to development in
the country. We have great sympathy for the sufferings
of the Afghan people. We sincerely hope that, with
strong support from the international community,
Afghans will be able to restore security and stability
and achieve development and prosperity at an early
date. China will, to the best of its ability, to continue to
provide support to Afghanistan.
