Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for this month. We wish
you every success in guiding the Council's
deliberations to the desired outcome. I would like to
thank you for responding so promptly to our request to
convene an emergency meeting of the Security Council
to discuss the grave situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Norway and to
congratulate him on the wisdom he showed during his
presidency of the Council during the month of March.

The bloody events in occupied Palestine confirm
what we have said before: Israel does not desire or seek
peace. The current Prime Minister of Israel promised
his country that he would bring about conditions of
security there. He decided that peace would not bring
about security for Israel, and therefore engaged in acts
of inhumane oppression and aggression, affecting both
the Palestinian people and its territory. He used every
cheap trick he could, on the pretext of providing
security and with the claim that he was fighting
terrorism. Comparing the terrorism committed by Israel
with the national Palestinian resistance further
exemplifies the gross injustice that is being inflicted on
a people seeking to liberate its lands, realize its rights
and maintain its dignity and freedom.

The State terrorism committed by Israel is not
being undertaken in self-defence or as a means of
protecting its citizens. It is being undertaken as a
means of protecting its occupation and of consecrating
its usurpation of Palestinian territory. Israel has no
legitimate right to be in the West Bank, East Jerusalem
or the Gaza Strip - areas that it entered in the 1967
war and which it has never left. Palestinians, like any
other people living under occupation, have a right -
indeed, they are duty-bound - to liberate their land
and recover their freedom.

In the face of the ugliness of the Israeli
occupation and the carnage committed by its occupying
forces, Israel is blaming the Palestinians. The
Palestinians should not - Israel claims - have paid
attention to occupation; they should have ignored the
fact that heavy artillery was used against them. They
should have forgotten the thousands of dead and
wounded. They should have forgotten about their
property and their rights, which were usurped, and
about their homeland, which was destroyed. The
Palestinians should not have expressed any
indignation; they should not have resisted. They should
have enjoyed the bounties of Israeli occupation and the
peace of indiscriminate killing; the security of physical
liquidation, siege and starvation; the peace of tyranny
and destruction. They should have enjoyed the peace
represented by arsenals brimming with nuclear arms
and other weapons of mass destruction, and the
security brought about by pressure, threats and
provocation - the peace of false promises; the
unimplemented agreements; the fact that international
legitimacy was ignored. They should have enjoyed the
peace represented by the building of settlements - the
peace of Palestinian parcels of land, created here and
there, and under siege by Israelis.

The Palestinian people resorted to resistance after
many long years of bitter frustration and lack of hope
that justice and equity would come about through a
peaceful settlement. Their objectives were not realized
because of Israel's intransigence and prevarication, as
well as of its failure to implement its commitments.
The Palestinians had no option but to turn to the
intifada and resistance when the Security Council
failed to enforce the resolutions that it adopted and
when it rejected the idea of sending international
observers to the occupied Palestinian territories. Such
observers, if not able to put an end to the situation,
could at least have prevented its further deterioration.

What could the Palestinians do, now that they
faced humiliation by day and by night? How could they
act, given that the international community had turned
a completely deaf ear to their rights and had failed to
enforce respect for international legitimacy? What
could that people do - the people who have been
prevented from enjoying peace and stability and the
most elementary requirements for a life in dignity, like
that enjoyed by all other peoples? How could they face
the policies of closure, siege, starvation and collective
punishment?

Are the inhumane acts perpetrated by the
occupation forces in keeping with the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention as they apply to occupied
areas? After all that we have seen, heard and read in
newspapers, on radio and on television, can we still
wonder why the Palestinians have descended into such
hopelessness and despair? The aggressive behaviour of
the Israeli Government shows how far it has moved
from dialogue and the language of peace, and how
much it has resorted to war and destruction as a means
of realizing its expansionist goals and policies.

The theory that Israeli might can stifle Palestinian
demands is totally and utterly invalid. If Israel planned
to turn its aggression into a war between victor and
vanquished - a battle that ends up with the
Palestinians raising the flag of surrender - it must
remember that never in human history has a
defenceless people surrendered to brute power, no
matter how mighty or strong. The struggle of a people
will be rewarded, as long as they stay the course and
absorb the strikes of the occupier. The ability to stand
is part of right and of justice. Just as other peoples
under occupation have won their independence, God
willing, the people of Palestine will win its
independence, too.

The senseless acts of aggression in occupied
Palestine highlight the tyranny of occupation. The
Israeli leadership, which came to power under
extremely grave and complicated circumstances, seeks
to explode the situation in the region, to invert the
balance of power and to ensure new faits accomplis
before it agrees to sit down at the negotiating table to
discuss a final settlement. Now that it has realized that
it cannot achieve its ambitions through a process of
peace and just settlement, it imagines that time will be
in its favour. It imagines that the Palestinians will be
forced to accept a new fait accompli because of the
Security Council's hesitancy to enforce its resolutions
and to send international observers to the occupied
Palestinian territories - as it has done to other
regions -and because of the fact that the international
community has been satisfied simply to denounce the
situation without taking measures to force Israel to
respect international legitimacy.

That is a flawed vision, and flawed logic. If Israel
has succeeded in pushing the Palestinians to despair, it
has at the same time brought fear and insecurity upon
itself from the Palestinian people, who have lost
everything, including their hope of enjoying what other
peoples enjoy: liberty, dignity, security and stability.

His Royal Highness, Crown Prince Abdullah Bin
Abdul-Aziz, Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, presented an initiative to attain peace,
security and stability for all the region's peoples. The
Arab Summit adopted the initiative. That alone
confirms the Arabs' desire for peace and stability for
all.

We expect that the Israeli people will not let
another opportunity for peace go to waste. We would
like the Israelis to bet on justice and fairness and to
realize that security will not be achieved through
aggression, but through understanding, mutual interests
and cooperation.

We call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities and act swiftly to press Israel to
implement the resolutions of international legitimacy;
to immediately end its acts of aggression and lift its
siege, without conditions, from the Palestinian people
and Yasser Arafat, recognized as its elected leader by
all the world's countries; and to withdraw at once from
the occupied Palestinian territories, in accordance with
the provisions of relevant Council resolutions.

We also call on the Council to deploy
international observers and peacekeepers to supervise
the Israeli withdrawal and disengage the Palestinian
and Israeli parties. In addition, we call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to respect the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and the Hague
Agreement, as well as the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

Here, I should like to call attention to a statement
by the Secretary-General concerning the Middle East,
to the effect that the problem there has been the Israeli
occupation, which has led to the undermining of
security and to an increase in violence and terror in the
region, not to speak of economic deprivation and
suffering. These problems are interlinked as one
problem, and any attempt to treat it as a problem of
security alone will not solve it. We must address the
security problem and the political issues at the same
time so that we can revive hope among the Palestinian
people for a better and more secure future.

