Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Mali, to today's meeting, and thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing.

We are pleased that on the political front, the
situation in Mali has remained generally stable. We
welcome the efforts by Bamako and the Platform
coalition and Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad
signatory groups to implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We hope that in the run-
up to the assessment of the parties' implementation
of the peace agreement planned for March that they
will take additional steps, particularly regarding the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants and the issue of territorial and administrative
restructuring reform. If that is successfully achieved,
the parliamentary elections postponed to the summer of
2019 will be held in much more favourable conditions.

We note Bamako's efforts to restore Government
institutions in northern Mali. The establishment of 10
interim district-level administrations in Kidal, Menaka
and Timbuktu is unquestionably a big step forward. In
our view, using the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to support the effectiveness of the work of these
transitional structures would also be very helpful. The
Government and MINUSMA should be more active
in their outreach efforts to explain the essence and
meaning of the peace agreement and the role and tasks
of the United Nations Mission to the people. As time
has shown, the signing in October 2018 of the Pact for
Peace between Bamako and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has played a positive role
in events in Mali. The fact that representatives of
the Platform coalition and the Coordination des
mouvements de l'Azawad have joined it has given extra
impetus to the implementation of the peace agreement
and the road map.

However, we want to point out that introducing
more and more new sanctions will hardly help to
genuinely consolidate the Malian parties around the
agreements. While we acknowledge the obvious positive
advances in the Malian settlement, we feel obliged to
point to other trends there that are unfortunately less
encouraging. We are concerned about the continuing
increase in the numbers of terrorist acts and we mourn
the peacekeepers who have died in Mali. Human
rights violations are ubiquitous, and inter-ethnic and
intercommunal conflicts continue to simmer in central
Mali. The presence of the authorities will be crucial to
ensuring that they are fully resolved. In that connection,
we take note of the results that the United Nations
Mission has achieved in reconciling warring parties.

We are also worried about the worsening
humanitarian situation. The numbers of people
requiring assistance have gone up almost one and a half
times over the past year. That is not normal. We call
on all outside donors to fund the humanitarian appeal
immediately. We should remember that in conditions of
despair the only option that remains for Mali's young
people is joining the ranks of terrorist, extremist or
criminal groups. In that regard, it will be extremely
important to ensure that efforts to stimulate economic
activity and restore social services in the central and
northern areas of the country do not slow down.

We welcome the Government of Mali's eagerness
to take the process into its own hands and actively
advance on a path to political normalization and
economic stabilization. However, we want to point
out that the situation in Mali is an important factor in
African security as a whole. Achieving peace there
would be easier if the situation in the region as a whole
were normalized. The Libya factor continues to play
a negative role in this. The ties between the terrorists
operating in Mali and in the region as a whole are
becoming increasingly clear. In that regard, we support
the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel in
taking concrete steps to form a Joint Force to combat
terrorism and organized crime and hope that their role
in ensuring regional security will grow.

