Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate and for
providing an opportunity to address mediation, which
is an important tool of diplomacy. I also thank the
briefers for their interesting perspectives.

The notion of mediation reflects a long-standing
principle of international law. However, it was only in
article 3 of the 1907 Hague Convention for the Pacific
Settlement of International Disputes that such an
approach was first formally affirmed. Following that
initiative, both in the Covenant of the League of Nations
and under the Charter of the United Nations, Members
assumed a larger obligation than heretofore to settle
disputes in a peaceful manner. Hence, opportunities for
mediation were afforded greater scope.

Mediation, on the face of it, is based on the interest
in and consent and commitment to a peaceful settlement
by all parties. In its very essence, mediation is premised
on faith in the key principles of independence,
sovereignty and freedom of choice, which all actors
involved in disputes so zealously desire. The issue is
therefore not whether mediation is a useful tool for
peaceful settlement. Where acceptable to all parties, it
is, in a manner of speaking, settled international law.

For us, as practitioners of multilateral diplomacy,
the questions to be addressed are whether the apparatus
of the United Nations, as currently constituted, can
perform many of the basic functions required for
effective mediation or, more acutely, is it more than
a structural issue and one of functionality? Are there
inherent characteristics that place limitations on the
abilities of the United Nations? Are the mechanisms at
the disposal of the United Nations sufficiently coherent
and flexible to guide dynamic negotiations with an
effective strategy? Can improving them help?

The United Nations does not come to mediation
unencumbered. The problems of the United Nations
apparatus as a mediator are ingrained in the nature
of intergovernmental organizations. Add to that the
specificities of the Charter of the United Nations,
which is premised on cooperation among the permanent
members. That cooperation is clearly not visibly
evident these days. Where it is manifest, it invariably
takes the form of the lowest common denominator. In
the practice of day-to-day diplomacy, mediators need
to be fully backed by Member States. However, States
members of intergovernmental bodies inevitably tend
to speak with different voices.

Policymaking within an international organization
adds another layer of bargaining and trade-offs. That
tortuous decision-making process, imbued with
political trade-offs, saps the energy of the United
Nations and its flexibility in pursuing mediation.
Once the United Nations-authorized entities agree on
a mediating proposal or framework, it cannot easily be
modified in response to changing circumstances. Will
pursuing Secretariat reforms change those inherent
inadequacies? Limitations that are embedded in the
very nature of intergovernmental organizations are
not resolved by the revamping of the Secretariat. Since
the problems are functional, it may be more realistic to
look at functional solutions rather than structural ones.
Rather than try and throw intractable issues into the lap
of the United Nations, a more pragmatic approach is
perhaps required.

As the Charter of the United Nations itself
recognizes, disputes can be settled peacefully through
a variety of mechanisms. Today, there are numerous
actors and many forms of pacific settlement that may
be better suited to addressing the different issues.
Instead of putting the United Nations at the centre
of mediation efforts and exhorting States to support
them, the international community should perhaps give
encouragement to those most motivated and having the
capacity to do so to settle such issues, as appropriate.

Of course, there could be many forms of division
of the tasks of pacific settlement of disputes between
the United Nations and other concerned actors that can
undoubtedly be devised. However, it is important not
to charge the United Nations with responsibilities that
it may be ill-suited to perform. Mediation, in every
circumstance, is one such task that it is not geared
to fulfil.

In line with that approach, allow me to take this
opportunity to remind Pakistan - whose representative
is the only speaker who has made unwarranted references
to an integral part of India - that pacific settlement
requires pacific intent in thinking and pacific content
in action. Regurgitating a failed approach that has long
been rejected by the international community is neither
reflective ofpacific intent nor a display ofpacific content.
We hope that, rather than indulge in polemics, the new
Government of Pakistan will work constructively to
build a safe, stable, secure and developed South Asian
region free of terror and violence.

