Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Ambassador Skoog, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, and Mr. Martin Kobler for
their valuable briefings today. I would also like to thank
Mr. Kobler for his tireless efforts, along with those of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, to restore
stability to our brothers in Libya.

We highlight the efforts made by Egypt over the
past few months to provide the necessary support to
enable our brothers in Libya to reach a settlement based
on the Libyan Political Agreement, re-establish stability
in the country and restore Libya's natural status in the
Arab world, Africa and the international community.
Our efforts to bring our Libyan brothers together have
always relied on the historical link between the peoples
of Libya and Egypt.

The dialogue sponsored by Egypt has continued
with the participation of all the Libyan national
factions in the east, west and south of the country,
with the participation of all legitimate institutions
under the Libyan political agreement. One of the most
important results of that dialogue is the creation of a
dialogue committee to discuss amendments to the
Libyan Political Agreement, including to the provisions
regarding the supreme command of the Libyan
National Army and other issues that have hindered the
implementation of that agreement. Such a committee
would comprise 30 members, designated by the House
of Representatives and the High State Council.

In order for this endeavour to be successful, all
Libyan parties must show the necessary political will
and ability to assume the responsibility of choosing
members of the proposed committee. They must
also show flexibility if they are to facilitate the work
of the committee, keeping in mind the best interests
of the country. If this endeavour is to be successful,
international and regional support is also absolutely
necessary. In that regard, we would like to express our
appreciation for the constructive efforts of Algeria and
Tunisia and other regional efforts undertaken through
the mechanism set up by Libya's neighbours, which held
its most recent meeting in Cairo, as well as the efforts
of the League of Arab States and the African Union.

At a time when Egypt is seeking to establish the
necessary conditions for distancing the Libyan political
dialogue from narrow interests fuelled by certain
regional parties, these same regional parties known to
all continue to play a subversive role in Libya. A clear
example of this situation is the recent attack by extremist
elements on the oil crescent area of the country in
March, at a time when the Libyan parties were preparing
to launch a dialogue based on the agreements reached
in Cairo. This attack came after the Libyan National
Army had been able to place the oil facilities under
the authority of the National Oil Corporation for the
benefit of all Libyans. These subversive actions against
Libya are clear and explicit, and the Security Council
must assume its role and compel all these subversive
regional powers to rethink their positions and avoid any
manipulation of the resources of the Libyan people and
of the region.

Occasional instability in the capital, Tripoli,
shows the dangers of allowing militias to blackmail
and terrorize Libyan civilians. Egypt believes that
international efforts should focus on supporting
the construction of professional-calibre national
security institutions. Egypt believes that the Libyan
National Army should be at the heart of any unified
Libyan armed forces under the supervision of elected
civilian authorities. The National Army has proven its
patriotism more than once, whether by successfully
combating terrorists in the eastern part of the country
or by ensuring the return of oil facilities to the authority
of the National Oil Corporation.

It goes without saying that in order to eliminate the
terrorism of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and other groups posing a threat to Libya, a genuine
national effort must be carried out, and we believe that
the Libyan National Army is in the best position to fulfil
such a role. Therefore, the international community
must recognize that in order to eliminate the dangers of
terrorism and organized crime originating from Libya,
the highest degree of support must be provided to the
Army as soon as possible.

