Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on a productive presidency this
month and on the holding of this timely debate. In your
concept note (S/2018/524, annex), Mr. President, you
correctly invited us to consider the historical context
of conflicts. I fully agree with you, as well as with
Antonio's utterance in Shakespeare's The Tempest that
what is past is prologue. I will explain.

One hundred years ago around this time in 1918,
the Arabs put all their hopes in the Allied Forces,
which were occupying one Arab city after another,
from Jerusalem to Damascus, Aleppo to Beirut, while
dismembering and carving up the Ottoman empire.
The Arabs' hopes were for independence, freedom and
unity. As we now know, promises were not kept, hopes
were dashed, the Arabs felt betrayed, and their land was
divided and distributed like an abandoned cake. Today,
100 years later, we are looking at history in the mirror
and finding out that the wounds of the past 100 years
have never healed. They just were added to the new
wounds of a people who seem to be destined to live that
history and cope with the seeds of conflicts that were
planted a century ago.

Look at the Security Council's schedule for every
month of the year. The Middle East, its people and their
hopes and pains are in members' note books every
month. Look at the news coming from the Middle East,
which includes the occupation in Palestine and the fact
that millions of Syrians, Yemenis, Iraqis and Libyans
have become refugees or displaced in their own
countries or scattered around the world. The Palestinian
issue and the Arab-Israeli conflict remain for the Arabs
the most important and protracted problem that has
defied any solution. Following years of negotiations,
dozens of United Nations resolutions, agreements and
initiatives, and countless concessions on the Palestinian
side, there is no horizon for peace today. Confidence
among the parties is at its lowest point ever, and the
very cornerstone of a political solution - ending the
occupation, international legitimacy and an independent
state of Palestine based on the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital - is being eroded or completely
abandoned. The Palestinians seem to have lost hope, but
they continue to insist on their legitimate political and
historic rights in Palestine, while stressing that those
rights are the prerequisite for any peace in the region.

Lebanon is committed to the Arab Peace Initiative
and to East Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Palestine because it knows that, only through a
comprehensive and just settlement, can the region know
real peace. With regard to other issues in the region,
Lebanon is committed to preserving its stability, and
there is consensus in the country on the importance of
distancing Lebanon from Arab States' conflicts. The
Lebanese Government upholds that dissociation as a
cardinal tenet of its policy. The situation in southern
Lebanon remains governed by relative stability and
quiet thanks to the presence and vigilance of the
Lebanese Armed Forces, but the quiet and Lebanese
sovereignty are violated by Israel on a daily basis
by land, air and sea. I repeat what we have said here
before and in the numerous letters that we have sent
to the Secretary-General and the Council: those Israeli
violations are not conducive to peace. On the contrary
they are inviting conflict.

Time and again, Lebanon has reaffirmed its
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) and the need for
a permanent ceasefire, as well as its commitment to
prevention and mediation to avoid any miscalculation
or escalation that could lead to conflict. That is why
Lebanon has called on the Secretary-General and the
United Nations good offices and reiterates its firm belief
that the tripartite mechanism is the appropriate forum
in which to discuss and solve any issue and de-escalate
any tension along the Blue Line in the south. Lebanon
has also been at the forefront of combatting terrorism,
and it is one of the few countries in the region that
defeated Da'esh through the determined will of its
armed forces and the help of its friends. But Lebanon
also knows that defeating terrorism cannot happen only
on the battlefield. It has to be done through providing
young people with an education, job opportunities
and hope.

It is high time that the major Powers see our region
with different eyes from those of the past 100 years.
The Middle East should not be seen mainly as an arena
for competition over spheres of influence. It is time to
view the people of the region as people with hopes and
aspirations for a better and alternative future. To do so,
the Council can take lessons from the past and address
the problems of today differently. If the political will
of the Council is coupled with collective leadership
and armed with a new Vision, then there is hope for the
Middle East. The Security Council represents the will
of the international community, and the whole array
of tools at the United Nations disposal should be used.
It can implement its resolutions to end occupation and
oppression and fulfil the role with which it was entrusted
upon its founding. The United Nations can use its
international authority to usher in a new season to the
Middle East - one of peace, reconciliation, healing,
progress and development. The region has tremendous
potential, if given the chance, not as a battlefield, but
as a source of ideas, creativity and a place where peace
can be born to circle the world.

