Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to extend our deepest gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his detailed and useful briefing and
his unrelenting efforts during his mandate as Head
of UNAMA.

The Middle East and Central Asia share the same
interest in and need for stability. Therefore, Egypt has
always supported the Government of Afghanistan in its
war against terrorism and in its tireless efforts to assert
its control and sovereignty on all its territories. We also
support the authorities of Afghanistan in their social
and political efforts to ensure security and promote
development and prosperity for all Afghanis.

We stress that drug trafficking threatens the security
and stability of Afghanistan, as well as of Central Asia.
In this regard, we highlight the importance and need
for close coordination at the international and regional
levels with the Afghani authorities to fight drug
trafficking. This is part and parcel ofthe efforts to fight
terrorism because drugs are one of the main financing
sources for terrorist groups and armed militias. In this
regard, we commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and relevant regional
organizations, which have helped Afghanistan address
this problem which undermines efforts to promote
development and peace in the region.

In line with the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/532); General Assembly resolution 70/77,
entitled "The situation in Afghanistan", adopted in
December 2015; and Security Council resolution
resolution 2274 (2016), which was adopted in March, it
is clear that the international community has sounded
the alarm against the ever-growing presence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province.
Indeed, that terrorist organization has managed to
maintain its stronghold over the east of the country.
It is a cancerous tumour that must be treated, fought
and eliminated wherever it is, in line with the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In the same regard, we stress our ongoing readiness
to train army and police officers through high-level
specialized sessions because Egypt's sole interest is
to ensure security and stability in Afghanistan by
helping the Afghan National Army in its war against
terrorist organizations. We therefore hope to promote
the tripartite cooperation programme in this vital field
so that donors are able to provide the necessary funding
to cover the costs of these very important specialized
training sessions.

Egypt is promoting its constructive role as a
supporting country of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
process. At the international level, we note the need
to address the issue of Afghanistan effectively and
extensively in all relevant forums, especially at the
ministerial conference on Afghanistan to be held on
4 and 5 October in Brussels.

In conclusion, Egypt continues to closely follow the
political and security situation in Afghanistan because it
believes it share a common goal: to support the capacity
of Afghanistan, which has suffered for many decades,
to overcome these difficult challenges and achieve
peace, stability, security and sustainable development.

