The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
their briefings.

The situation in Afghanistan remains complicated.
Unprecedented terrorist activity persists, and the
number of civilian casualties as a result of the recent
fighting has reached a steady, very high level. We
are alarmed by the escalation in the internal political
conflict in the country following the news of the death
of Taliban leader Mullah Omar. In such circumstances,
the prospects for a political settlement in Afghanistan,
which seemed possible this past spring and summer,
have become even more uncertain.

We are also concerned by the resumption of shelling
from Pakistani territory along Afghan border regions,
which has resulted in the loss of civilian lives. We also
continue to devote special attention to the situation
along the border with Tajikistan, where militants control
the Afghan districts of Imam Sahib and Dasht-e-Archi,
in Kunduz province, and a number of districts in
Badakhshan province. We are furthermore alarmed
by the situation in areas bordering on Turkmenistan,
where an attack in August against the head of counter-
terrorist operations, First Vice-President Dostum, took
place, along with armed attacks by Taliban fighters
against Turkmen soldiers.

In addition to the presence of Taliban forces in the
provinces of Faryab and J owzj an -provinces bordering
Turkmenistan - Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) groups remain active. There are reasons to
expect a strengthening of ISIL, whose ranks currently
number approximately 6,000 members and which has
a presence in 25 of the 34 provinces of the country.
Members include the Afghan Taliban and foreign
fighters - which include Arabs, Punjabi Pakistanis,
Waziristanis, Pashtuns, Chechens, Uzbeks and Tajiks.
According to the Afghan intelligence services, over the
past several months ISIL has established more than 10
training camps in order to prepare fighters throughout
the country, and three of those camps are in the north.

Russia supports the policy of the Government of
Afghanistan in implementing the concept of national
reconciliation. We stand ready to assist in advancing
the peace process, which includes a flexible approach
to issues entailing a possible easing of sanctions
established under resolution 1988 (2011) against the
Taliban - if such an approach does not contradict
Afghan national interests and adheres to the three well-
known tenets of national reconciliation.

We hope that, after having almost completed the
process of forming a new Cabinet, the leadership of
Afghanistan will finally be able to tackle the problems
that have accumulated in the country. Russia stands
ready to forge constructive cooperation with the new
leadership of Afghanistan in order to maintain the
stability and independent policy course of the country
as one that is free from terrorism and drug trafficking.
We will continue to assist Kabul in the training of
Afghan security forces through the relevant Russian
authorities. Russia will continue that work bilaterally
and in cooperation with international partners - despite
the changed approaches taken by the United States,
NATO and a number of Western countries regarding
the implementation of joint projects with Russia to
assist Afghanistan.

We View the current NATO Resolute Support
Mission as a direct successor to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), which failed,
unfortunately, over its 12 years of existence, to resolve
a single one of the issues that it tried to deal with. It is
our view that NATO's efforts in Afghanistan should be
aimed at strengthening the national security sector and
that NATO's leadership - pursuant to resolution 2189
(2014) - should continue to report its mission's activity
to the Security Council at meetings on the situation in
Afghanistan.

At the same time, we are forced to note that the
new NATO mission has, at this stage, also not been able
to achieve its objectives. Afghan security forces have
suffered significant losses in fighting the opposition
and have shown themselves, to date, to be incapable
of independently holding off attacks - as was
demonstrated by the renewed participation of United
States military forces in combat operations in the south
of the country.

We note the world's growing understanding
regarding the importance of a regional context for
an Afghan settlement, as well as an increase in the
number of regional formats and platforms focused
on Afghanistan. At the same time, we believe that it
is important for countries in the region to play the
primary role in carrying out activities according to
those formats, especially as laid out by the Istanbul
Process.

We are convinced that regional efforts to assist
Afghanistan should be promoted mainly through tried
and tested platforms, first and foremost the Shanghai
Corporation Organization (SCO), into which we have
incorporated virtually every country of the region,
including Afghanistan, as member States, observers
or dialogue partners. Russia welcomes Afghanistan's
official request for SCO membership, which was
submitted by the President of Afghanistan, Ashraf
Ghani, during his meeting with the President of Russia,
Vladimir Putin, on the margins of the SCO summit in
Ufa.

Following the withdrawal of ISAF contingents,
the problem of drugs - the illicit production and
trafficking of which further destabilizes an already
difficult situation both in the country and in the region
in general - has deteriorated. The merging of criminal
activities related to Afghan opiates with international
terrorism continues, thereby strengthening the financial
position of those actors through drug revenues. Russia
looks forward to a comprehensive discussion on the
Afghan drug issue within the broader format of the
upcoming special session of the General Assembly
devoted to narcotics throughout the world in 2016.

According to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime's World Drug Report, Afghanistan remains
the world leader in opium cultivation and production,
accounting for 85 per cent of the total global volume.
The total area under opium poppy cultivation in 2014
increased to 224,000 hectares. Opium production
grows by more than 1,000 tons annually. Whereas in
5,500 tonnes were produced in 2013, the production
in 2014 was 6,400 tons. According to forecasts by
international experts, this year it will increase to 7,800
tons. One reason for that situation is the emergence of
new, improved opium poppy strains, potentially making
possible three harvests per year. The level of eradication
of opium poppy cultivation remains low. In that respect,
2014 was an especially poor year. According to the
2015 Afghanistan Opium Survey, the number of drug
users in Afghanistan has nearly doubled since 2012, to
over 3 million individuals. Over 1 million of them are
children under the age of 15.

United Nations experts believe that, following
the withdrawal from Afghanistan of the main groups
of the international coalition forces, the volume of
Afghan drugs being trafficked along the northern route
through Central Asia has increased. The situation
is exacerbated by the fact that ISIL's leadership is
attempting to seize control of Afghan drug trafficking
in order to gain access to new sources offinancing for its
terrorist activities. There is evidence that ISIL fighters
already control part of the illegal supply channels of
drug shipments from Badakhshan province. In that
regard, we believe that the Security Council must
continue to carefully monitor and promptly respond
to developments in the drug situation in Afghanistan.
We would like to take the opportunity provided by the
presence in the Chamber of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime at
Vienna, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, to express our support for
the consistent efforts of the Office he leads in assisting
Afghanistan to find an appropriate response to the
problems posed by narcotics.

Furthermore, in the context of an Afghan
settlement, we consider it important to take fuller
advantage of the potential and practical experience of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
which since 2003 has been carrying out Operation
Channel, aimed at suppressing drug smuggling routes,
with the additional participation of the CSTO member
States and counter-narcotics officers from agencies
in Afghanistan, China, Iran, Pakistan, the United
States of America and a number of other countries.
Furthermore, a test of the operational readiness of the
CSTO Collective Rapid Reaction Force to carry out
counter-terrorist operations was conducted in May in
Tajikistan and demonstrated the capacity of the armed
forces of CSTO member States to combat attacks by
fighters from terrorist and extremist groups.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of India.

