Ms. Mindaoudou: It is a great honour for me to
address the Security Council for the first time since I
assumed my responsibilities as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for C6te d'Ivoire, in July 2013.

Cote d'Ivoire continues to make good progress, and
the country is firmly on the path to lasting peace and
stability. Socioeconomic reforms implemented by the
Government are beginning to have tangible results, with
good economic growth, an influx of foreign investment
and a renewed private sector. The Government has
initiated a series of institutional reforms aimed at
enhancing political inclusiveness, including putting in
place legislation requested by the political opposition
on the financing of political parties.

As the report before the Council (S/2013/76l)
underscores, the Government, under President
Ouattara's leadership, has made significant conciliatory
gestures towards the political opposition, notably
by provisionally releasing from prison several high-
ranking individuals associated with former President
Laurent Gbagbo. The Government has also taken
steps towards addressing the root causes of the Ivorian
crisis, including by enacting legislation on land tenure
issues and nationality, which are critical for the
national reconciliation process. Dialogue between the
Government and ll opposition parties in the context
of the permanent framework of dialogue continues,
and has resulted in important progress in the political
reconciliation process.

While the former ruling party, the Front populaire
ivoirien (FPI), still refuses to participate in the
permanent framework of dialogue, important advances
were made with respect to direct dialogue between the
FPI and the Government as well as with the ruling party.
In early December, the FPI and the Rassemblement des
republicains (RDR) met for the first time in a decade.
The holding of that meeting in a cordial atmosphere
generated important momentum, and I welcome the
shared commitment expressed by both parties to
continuing further dialogue in a reconciliatory manner.

The FPI also resumed direct dialogue with the
Government in September and held meetings, most
recently on 15 January. Although there was no
concrete breakthrough on outstanding issues, those
meetings are an important demonstration of the will of
political stakeholders in Cote d'Ivoire to address their
differences through constructive dialogue. As the report
before the Council indicates, the FPI has proposed the
establishment of a new dialogue forum - the etats
generaux de la Republique, which would include a
wider spectrum of civil society - that the President
has agreed to review closely.

The Government has made efforts to advance
security sector reform. It has also set an ambitious target
of disarming the full caseload of former combatants by
June 2015. In the area of human rights, the Government
has extended the mandate of the special investigation
and examination cell, which is tasked with investigating
crimes committed during the post-electoral crisis.
Meanwhile, during his New Year address to the nation,
President Ouattara announced that he had requested the
Minister of Justice to review the possibility of releasing
additional prisoners detained during the post-electoral
crisis. He also reiterated the Government's commitment
to intensifying efforts to ensure the voluntary and

safe return of political refugees, with the support of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the respective countries where the
political refugees reside. We have already witnessed
the return of several senior officials and military
personnel affiliated with former President Gbagbo and
the FPI, and refugees across the borders with Liberia,
Ghana and Guinea. Those actions have contributed to
enhancing the political climate in C6te d'Ivoire.

cote d'Ivoire's economy is on a fast track to recovery
and growth rates are impressive. That is due in part to
enhanced political stability and the financial support of
its international partners. It is also worth noting that the
Government has continued to strengthen its presence at
the local level, including through the recent nomination
of members of the corps prefectoral. At the same time,
local and traditional leaders are increasingly engaged
in supporting social cohesion. They are also closely
engaged in addressing intercommunity tensions and the
challenges with regard to the evacuation of protected
forests, particularly in the west.

Notwithstanding the good progress that is being
made and the Government's genuine resolve, Cote
d'Ivoire has continued to grapple with security-related
challenges and the situation remains fragile. Recurrent
incidents of intercommunity and ethnic violence, as
well as armed robbery and organized crime, continue
to pose a major challenge to stability and security. The
national security apparatus still requires considerable
reform, including in order to rid it of those elements
that are involved in incidents of violence and abuse.
The lack of clarity with regard to the status of dozos,
or traditional hunters, further contributes to the
insecurity and poses a threat to the human rights of
citizens in many areas of the country. The Government
has responded proactively to addressing the violence
by launching in November, with the support of the
United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI),
an operation aimed at disbanding armed groups and
removing illegal checkpoints.

In the west of the country, serious threats to peace
and security persist due to the illegal circulation of
weapons, coupled with networks affiliated with the
former regime, former combatants and other criminal
elements on the border with Liberia. In addition, most
of the root causes to the conflict are still to be fully
addressed in that region. On a positive note, the good
cooperation between the Governments of Cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia, as well as between UNOCI and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), continues to
yield good results and we have not witnessed a major
cross-border attack in nearly a year.

Earlier this month, I visited several localities in
the west of Cote d'Ivoire, where I met community and
religious leaders and local authority representatives.
There, I again witnessed the fragility of the situation on
the ground and the need for the international community
to remain alert and fully engaged in order to ensure
that the times of chaos, violence and insecurity are
buried deeply in the past. My interlocutors stressed the
importance of promptly addressing the root causes of
the conflict and of ensuring thatjustice is served.

UNOCI is in the process of reconfiguring its
military component and of consolidating its presence in
the west and other high-risk areas, as requested by the
Council. By the end of December, the Societe General
de Surveillance had been withdrawn from the country
and the national security institutions had assumed full
responsibility for providing the security of high-ranking
members of Government and other political figures. By
the end of June, we will have completed the drawdown
of 1,700 troops, as requested by resolution 2112 (2013),
ensuring a strengthened force capacity in the west.
UNOCI is also working closely with the Secretariat
on planning for the appropriate composition, posture
and strength of the UNOCI force up until and during
the Ivorian elections, which will be developed in the
context of a strategic review of UNOCI and UNMIL
that will take place next month. Specific proposals will
be provided to the Council in our May report.

The promotion of a culture of respect for human
rights is essential to successful national reconciliation.
It is of crucial importance that impunity for human
rights violations end and that the perpetrators be
brought to justice, irrespective of their status or
political affiliation. I remain concerned about the lack
of progress in bringing to justice the perpetrators of
the most heinous attacks committed in 2012, including
those on the Nahibly camp for internally displaced
persons and the killing of seven United Nations
peacekeepers in Para.

The United Nations in C6te d'Ivoire and the
Government have worked closely to develop ambitious
yet realistic benchmarks for sustainable peace, which
are annexed to the report before the Council. We will
continue to work closely with the Government in order
to achieve those important benchmarks. As requested
by the Council, UNOCI and the United Nations country
team conducted an extensive evaluation of UNOCI's
mandate with a view to identifying those tasks that
could eventually be handed over to the country team
and the broad timelines for that possible handover. The
preliminary results of that exercise are provided as an
annex to the report before the Council.

However. I wish to underscore two points raised by
the Secretary-General in his report. First, the resource
constraints facing the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes in a stabilizing context such as that of
C6te d'Ivoire have put severe limits on the capacity of
those bodies to assume additional tasks. Many agencies
have been forced to close or limit their operations
in Cote d'Ivoire owing to more pressing challenges
elsewhere in the world. Secondly, more fundamental
is the importance of ensuring that peacekeeping
transitions, both security and civilian, in any country
underscore the primary goal and objective of handing
over any residual peacekeeping tasks to the sovereign
authorities of the country. Going forward, that is what
we will be prioritizing in cote d'Ivoire, working closely
with the Government.

Looking ahead, as Cote d'Ivoire and many of its
neighbours in the West African region move towards
presidential elections in 2015, it is important to work
now to put in place the conditions for an environment
conducive to peaceful elections. In that regard,
considerable progress will be needed in key areas,
notably with regard to electoral reforms, disarmament
and security sector reform. cote d'Ivoire will continue
to need support in consolidating the gains achieved to
date.

It is essential to continue to press upon the Ivorian
leaders the need to preserve the gains made so far and to
engage in dialogue in a spirit ofmutual accommodation,
in particular in the preparation of the election in 2015.
That is particularly important as there has been a recent
resurgence of hate speech in some media outlets. The
international community cannot allow for such a trend
to take root or to be tolerated as that was one of the
triggers of the 2010 crisis. In that regard, I am engaging
closely with political, religious and community leaders,
who have an important role to play in defusing tension
and condemning such behaviour.

The continued support of the Security Council,
Member States and international and regional partners
remains essential in order to enable the country to
overcome the numerous challenges, particularly with
regard to security, national cohesion and genuine
political dialogue. It is equally important that the
United Nations be fully equipped to continue to fulfil its
responsibility in supporting the Government's efforts
to stabilize the security situation, protect civilians,
strengthen State authority and promote reconciliation.
I wish to thank the Council for its continued support
for our collective effort in support of the people and
Government of C6te d'Ivoire as they stride towards
sustainable stability.

