Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
One of Gabon's concerns during its term in the Security
Council has been to see Iraqrejoin the concert of nations.
This, of course, implies that Iraq respect the rules
governing relations between actors of the international
community. It also implies that Iraq comply with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April 1991, which
stated that Iraq should unconditionally accept the
destruction, removal or rendering harmless, under
international supervision, of all prohibited weapons, as
well as control of its armament programme.

Our greatest hope was to arrive at a draft resolution
that would broadly take into account the comments and

 

fundamental suggestions made by most of the Security
Council members.

We deeply regret that the efforts made over a period
of several months have not led to this outcome. It is even
more regrettable that, in some areas, experts' views seem
to be fairly precise. For example, Ambassador Amorim,
Chairman of the evaluation panel set up by the Security
Council on 30 January 1999, quoted the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the effect that there was no
indication that Iraq currently possessed nuclear weapons or
that it retained any practical capacity to produce such
weapons.

However, the same does not apply in the area of
chemical, biological and other weapons, where many
questions still require further clarification.

The draft resolution on which the Council is about to
vote today offers Iraq an opportunity to resume its dialogue
with the United Nations and to shed light on those shadowy
areas that lead one to think that there is still something
hidden concerning its programme of weapons of mass
destruction.

In this context, the Gabonese delegation would
encourage the Iraqi Government to take this opportunity to
provide unfailing cooperation with the new United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) referred to in operative paragraph 1 of the
draft resolution before us. Such cooperation would allow
the Council to take, inter alia, the measures set forth in
paragraphs 28, 33, 37 and 38 of the draft resolution.

Those paragraphs deal with an increase in resources
currently allocated for spare parts for the oil industry,
suspension of the prohibitions on the import of Iraqi
products and on the sale to Iraq of civilian goods, and the
lifting of the prohibitions imposed under Security Council
resolution 687 (1991).

If Iraq were to help create the necessary conditions for
implementation of those measures, it would be helping to
ease the suffering endured by its people for the last nine
years; it would be promoting a return to a normal life; it
could make it possible to enjoy free trade with
neighbouring countries; and it could help consolidate peace
in the Middle East.

Cooperation must also be extended to the Tripartite
Commission and the Technical Subcommittee established to
investigate the cases of missing Kuwaiti nationals and third-
country nationals, and to facilitate the return of Kuwaiti
property and archives seized by Iraq.

On that important aspect of the situation between
Iraq and Kuwait, the evaluation panels chaired by
Ambassador Amorim reaffirmed that these issues were
eminently humanitarian in nature and indicated that it was
essential to provide information to the families of missing
persons, whatever the circumstances. In this connection,
we are pleased that the Secretary-General has been called
upon to appoint a high-level coordinator to follow up and
report on these matters to the Council every four months.

Lastly, we are very glad that, in paragraph 6 of the
draft resolution before us, emphasis is placed on the need
to provide high-quality technical and cultural training for
the members of the new United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission. In fact, it was a
lack of attention to Iraqi cultural sensitivities that in the
past often jeopardized the relations between Iraq and the
former Special Commission.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution contained in S/1999/1232 of 14 December
1999.

