I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for their briefings. Throughout 2020, South Sudan has achieved important progress on both the political and the security fronts. As the Secretary-General stated during the high- level debate on cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union early this month, the ceasefire in South Sudan "has mostly held, and ... improved political stability across the country has generated cautious optimism" (see S/2020/1179, annex I). Such progress is very encouraging, given the fact that this young nation has been facing various challenges due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, heavy floods and other natural disasters in recent months. It is our sincere hope that in 2021 South Sudan will make further significant progress in achieving peace and development. Despite the positive developments, progress in the implementation of the 2018 peace agreement in general has remained slow, as Mr. Shearer mentioned. While the permanent ceasefire has largely been holding, intercommunal violence remains an issue of concern. In that regard, I would like to highlight the following four points. First, we call on the South Sudanese parties to put in their best efforts to fully implement the peace agreement, particularly in reconstituting the Transitional National Legislative Assembly and forming the necessary unified forces. We are encouraged to see female representation in the Government at the federal and local levels and reiterate our support for women's further participation and leadership in the peace process. We would also like to emphasize the role of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and other international partners in promoting peace and stability in the country. It is crucial to further strengthen confidence-building measures and technical assistance to the South Sudanese parties. We encourage IGAD, as the guarantor of the peace agreement, to increase its mediation efforts in that regard. Secondly, the permanent ceasefire must continue to be upheld. Furthermore, it is imperative that the Government take effective and long-term measures to address intercommunal violence in the country in order to avoid adverse effects on the current peace process. We also commend the role of UNMISS in the protection of civilians in this difficult period of the COVID-19 pandemic. We take note of the Mission's continued transition of its protection-of-civilian sites to camps for internally displaced persons, under the ownership of the Government. In that regard, we encourage UNMISS to strengthen its support to improve South Sudan's capacity in the protection of civilians. Viet Nam will continue to contribute to the work of UNMISS and promote the participation of its female peacekeepers in the Mission. Thirdly, the economic and humanitarian challenges in the country must be addressed. The Government is facing a fiscal deficit of more than 50 per cent for the period from 2020 to 2021. We are particularly concerned about the high level of food insecurity, which affects more than half the population and has reached a catastrophic level in several areas. We urge the international community to strengthen humanitarian assistance and financial support for South Sudan, as well as to provide further assistance to it in the fight against COVID-19. Fourthly, Viet Nam reiterates its consistent position that sanctions should be only a tool applied by the Security Council in a temporary and case-by-case manner to facilitate the maintenance of international peace and security. Such measures and their implementation should not adversely affect the livelihoods of the people, the essential functioning of the Government or the legitimate development of the country concerned. They should be subject to review in accordance with developments on the ground and should be removed when the conditions are met. In that regard, we look forward to the timely establishment of benchmarks on the arms embargo, with the aim of facilitating the review and ultimately the lifting of its measures.
