Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Mali, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, and all
of his staff for their important work, as well as Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/866), and
through Under-Secretary-General Lacroix we pay
tribute to the bravery of those working in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), in the very challenging
environment in which the military and civilian
personnel operate. And, of course, we unequivocally
condemn all attacks against MINUSMA personnel.

I would like to congratulate President Keita on his
re-election and the Malian people and their institutions
on the relatively peaceful elections, despite terrorist
attempts to disrupt the process. We also commend
the support provided by MINUSMA and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif in
bringing all parties together for a peaceful conclusion.
The United Kingdom encourages President Keita
to redouble efforts to secure a lasting peace and to
improve the lives of all Malian people, including those
facing increasing insecurity in the central region.

I join my colleagues in welcoming the signing
of the pact for peace by the Agreement Monitoring
Committee. The parties that have reconfirmed their
commitment to accelerating the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali must
now take action and fulfil their commitment to make
tangible progress against the 22 March road map. Their
credibility is on the line. Progress must also include
the meaningful participation of women in the peace
process, and we welcome the steps taken by President
Keita to ensure that the 30 per cent quota for women in
elected positions is met, as per Malian law.

The price of lack of progress is clear: the
humanitarian and security situation continues to
deteriorate across Mali, particularly in the central
region; and 287 civilians have been killed in the past
three months, the highest number since MINUSMA
deployed. Today 5.2 million people require life-saving
and protection assistance, up from 3.8 million in 2017.
It is therefore more vital than ever that the Malian
Government and the international community fulfil
their humanitarian and security commitments. In that
context, we welcome the role of the Group of Five for
the Sahel.

An integrated security plan is needed to address
the causes of the humanitarian crisis and civilian
casualties. We are concerned about the number of
human rights violations and cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse; all such violations must be thoroughly
investigated in order to bring perpetrators of crimes
to account, including those that involve the Malian
defence and security forces. This is a global priority
for the United Kingdom. Yesterday in London we
hosted an international safeguarding summit as part of
our commitment to driving up standards and tackling
sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment.

Returning to MINUSMA, we welcome its ongoing
efforts to focus its mandate on core political and
security tasks, and we encourage further progress in
this regard as we look towards MINUSMA'S six-month
review, in February.

The bottom line is that rapid progress is needed by
the politicians on the implementation of the Agreement.
This is the best and only sustainable way to improve
the lives of the people of Mali and to enhance collective
peace and security.

