Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
pleasure for the delegation of Brazil to participate in
this very important debate under the Panamanian
presidency. The presence of the Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs at this morning's part of
our meeting reflects Panama's commitment to the
United Nations and also highlights the importance of
the issue of children for the countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean.
(spoke in English)

I wish to thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for
her excellent work as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

I would like to refer to the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/757), which presents a
comprehensive picture of the situation of children
affected by armed conflict around the world. The report
confirms that, although some progress has been made,
the situation of children in armed conflicts remains a
source of grave concern for the international
community.

Creating a world fit for children is tantamount to
guaranteeing the future of all humankind. In recent
years, United Nations efforts to focus international
attention on child-specific issues in the context of
armed conflicts have been expanding in order to
respond to the demand for action, given the seriousness
of the issue and the growing number of conflicts
affecting children in various parts of the world.

We expect the Security Council to perform its
work in close coordination with the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. An effective
response to the issue of children affected by armed
conflict only stands to benefit from being placed
squarely within the context of the more general
problem of children in need.

Ending all forms of violations against the rights
of the child affected by armed conflict is our common
goal. It is unacceptable that armed conflicts continue to
subject children to all forms of violence, including not
only the recruitment and use of children, but also
killing and maiming, rape and other forms of sexual
violence, abductions, and attacks against schools and
hospitals. A strong commitment by Governments and
the full cooperation of all relevant United Nations
entities are essential elements in order to reverse that
situation.

The work of the United Nations on children and
armed conflict should be guided by the existing
international framework, in particular the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and all relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council. The
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict is of particular importance in guiding the work
of the United Nations.
My delegation agrees with the recommendation,
contained in the Secretary-General's report, that
Member States should take effective action to bring to
justice perpetrators of violence against children
through national justice systems. While we are
encouraged by efforts of Governments in that regard,
we also strongly support the strengthening of the
International Criminal Court and the full
implementation of its decisions in cases of violations
against children in armed conflict falling within its
jurisdiction.

Brazil is particularly concerned about the
continuation of gender-based violence affecting girls,
in particular sexual violence, which leaves a long-term,
devastating impact on children and their families.
Another aspect to be considered is the efforts to
reintegrate former child soldiers in countries emerging
from conflict and to protect such children in specific
situations in which they are vulnerable, such as
exposure to cluster munitions and landmines. My
delegation considers that the Peacebuilding
Commission has an important role to play in this area
and that it should include the discussion of concrete
measures for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of children as part of its long-term
recovery and development programmes.

The complexity of the question of children
affected by armed conflict demands that all relevant
entities of the United Nations, in close cooperation
with Member States and non-governmental
organizations, adequately address its many
components, including the social and economic
components, particularly with regard to demobilization
and reintegration. Such broad and comprehensive
coordination is essential to maximize the effect of the
Council's actions in its efforts to make the best
possible use of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism established under resolution 1612 (2005).

In addition to the involvement of UNICEF and
other relevant agencies, funds and programmes, I
would like to mention the need to fully integrate into
this process the newly established post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children. As mandated in General Assembly
resolution 62/141, the new Special Representative and
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict will cooperate and coordinate their activities,
taking into account the complementarity of their
respective mandates.

Brazil is fully committed to the promotion and
protection of the rights of the child in general and is
determined to contribute to maximizing the
effectiveness of the United Nations system in
responding to the issue of children affected by armed
conflict. If we are to secure a better world for future
generations, we cannot fail to protect the rights of
children affected by armed conflict. By doing so, we
will be helping to ensure that today's victim does not
become tomorrow's aggressor. We believe that the
United Nations plays an essential role in preventing
childhood from being victimized amid warfare and in
guaranteeing a future in which children can be bearers
of hope and confidence as they emerge from conflict
situations.

