Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me at the outset thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and assure her
of Poland's full support for her work and that of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Our support is
based on the strong conviction that the work done by
the ICC and her Office in particular remain essential
in ensuring accountability and fighting impunity. Her
work therefore lies at the very core of the mandate of the
Security Council - the maintenance of international
peace and security - because atrocity crimes are
not only features of most conflicts but also their root
causes. We therefore fully agree with the conclusion
in her report that the Security Council should take
concrete action to uphold accountability for atrocity
crimes, including in Libya.

On Libya, we can fully subscribe to Ms. Bensouda's
statement of 16 April calling on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law. Let me stress here
that respect for and compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law is not a matter
of choice; it is a legal obligation of both States and
non-State actors. All those responsible for violations
and abuses of international humanitarian and human
rights law should be held accountable.

We attach particular importance, as a top priority
of our Security Council membership, to the protection
of civilians. Again, we concur with the Prosecutor's
concerns regarding the situation of the civilian
population in Tripoli as a result of recent developments
and the ongoing conflict. Let me also remind everyone
in this Chamber that as an integral part of international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians has been

highlighted in a number ofSecurity Council resolutions,
which are also part of international law. Just one month
ago we agreed to Security Council press elements in
which

"The United Nations Security Council reminded
all parties of their obligation under international
humanitarian law, including the imperative of the
protection of civilians",

which is something that is very close to our hearts. As
Ms. Bensouda said, the Libyan people deserve to live in
peace and safety.

Poland recognizes that an indispensable step in
ensuring accountability in Libya is the arrest and
surrender to the Court of individuals named in arrest
warrants issued by it. Noting that Libya remains
under an obligation in that respect, we support the
Office's call on all States to take steps to ensure
that those warrants are executed and the suspects
transferred to the ICC. That means that the outcome
of Ms. Bensouda's work depends very much on the
cooperation of Member States. Once again, it is notjust
our duty and responsibility to work with her, it is our
obligation. Without cooperation in good faith on the
part of Member States, the Prosecutor will be unable to
move forward with her proceedings.

We are also very concerned about the ongoing
crimes and serious human rights violations and abuses
suffered by migrants and refugees in Libya, as well as
the continuing impunity for the smugglers, traffickers,
members of armed groups and State officials involved
in them. We also recognize that the business of human
smuggling and the associated alleged crimes have an
impact on peace and security not just in Libya but
beyond it. I said earlier that accountability is also a
tool for conflict prevention, and that is because if we
can provide accountability, it can serve as a deterrent
both to potential violations and abuses of international
human rights law and to conflict. It is a very important
tool for preventing conflict.

Poland also welcomes the Office's efforts to monitor,
investigate and analyse allegations of crimes committed
against migrants and refugees in Libya in order to
determine whether they fall within the jurisdiction
of the Court. We also appreciate and encourage the
Office's cooperation with Libya and other States, as
well as with national and international organizations,
to enhance the coordination of investigative and
prosecutorial strategies aimed at closing the impunity
gap with respect to the Rome Statute, transnational
crimes and organized criminal activity.

In conclusion, I would like to urge that we assist
the Court in ending violations and ensuring full respect
in Libya for international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law, in order to
support the ICC's efforts with regard to the situation
there, as well as the political process, and to work
towards strengthening the rule of law and achieving
peace in Libya.

