Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council and assuring you of my
delegation's full cooperation. I should also like to
congratulate Ambassador Kafando and the delegation
of Burkina Faso on their skilful leadership of the
Council last month.

My delegation would like to welcome the five
new Council members and looks forward to working
closely with them in the coming months.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and his comments, and Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for sharing his Government's perspective
with us today.

I would like to offer special thanks to Special
Representative Kai Eide, not only for his
comprehensive briefing today, but also for his tireless
work at the helm of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The Special
Representative's leadership has been essential to the
international community's efforts in Afghanistan. My
Government is greatly appreciative of his efforts and
his commitment, and wishes him every success in his
future endeavours.

This is a crucial moment in Afghanistan. The
Government of Afghanistan, together with the Afghan
people, is pressing forward on a bold agenda to halt the
worrisome deterioration of the past several years. The
international community must now act deliberately and
urgently to help the Afghan's themselves to turn things
around.

The United States commitment to Afghanistan is
enduring. Our objective remains unchanged: to disrupt,
dismantle and eventually defeat Al-Qaida and to
prevent its return to either Afghanistan or Pakistan.
Our focus is on building up the capacity of Afghan
institutions to withstand and diminish the threat posed
by violent extremism.

To achieve that goal, President Obama has
ordered an additional 30,000 United States to
Afghanistan. Those troops will target the insurgency,
secure population centres and train Afghan security
forces. Many of the 43 other members of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) have
also announced troop increases. Together, we will
partner with Afghan forces so that we can begin
transferring security responsibility to the Government
ofAfghanistan by the summer of 2011.

For truly sustainable progress, our troop increase
must be matched by a stronger civilian effort and by
additional foreign assistance. Our civilian effort will
emphasize the development of more responsive and
accountable Afghan institutions at the provincial,
district and local levels. We will also encourage and
support the Government of Afghanistan's reinvigorated
plans to fight corruption, including through concrete
measures of progress towards greater accountability.

The United States is substantially increasing the
number of its civilian experts in Afghanistan. In fact,
we are on track to triple our civilian presence. At the
end of January 2009, 320 United States civilians were
on the ground; we are to have 920 Americans on the
ground this month, and we expect to achieve our target
of just under 1,000 civilians shortly thereafter. These
civilian experts are partnering with Afghans to enhance
the capacity of the country's national and sub-national
institutions to govern effectively. United States experts
are also working with their Afghan partners to help
rehabilitate Afghanistan's key economic sectors so that
Afghans themselves can defeat the insurgents, who
promise only more violence.

Economic growth is critical to Afghanistan's
future, both to undermine extremists' appeal in the
short term and to provide sustainable economic
development over the long term. To help reverse the
Taliban's momentum, we are focusing our
reconstruction effort in areas where we can quickly
create jobs, especially agricultural ones. Rebuilding
Afghanistan's once-vibrant agricultural sector will sap
the insurgency not only of foot soldiers but also of
income from narcotics. And let me underscore one key
element of our political strategy: to support Afghan-led
efforts to reintegrate Taliban members who renounce
Al-Qaida, lay down their arms and engage in the
constitutional political process.

The United Nations, and particularly UNAMA,
continues to play a vital role in the international
community's civilian efforts in Afghanistan. Its work
on institution-building, governance, security sector
reform and donor coordination is central to our goal of
empowering the Government of Afghanistan. But we
must all do a better job of coordinating the
international community's efforts to assist the Afghan
people. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2009/674), coordinating such a large array of
national assistance programmes with the goals
identified by the Government of Afghanistan is a
substantial undertaking, for which UNAMA needs
additional resources and support from Member States.
We strongly echo the Secretary-General's call for
strengthened coordination, and we support his proposal
to bolster UNAMA with experienced staff from key
donor countries. For our part, the United States stands
ready to support such a request with appropriate United
States personnel.
We also see the usefulness of appointing a senior
civilian representative within ISAF, as recommended
by the Special Representative, to improve the
coordination of ISAF's political and development
activities, in particular those carried out by provincial
reconstruction teams.

The success of UNAMA's mission also depends
on its presence throughout the country. In this regard,
we note with satisfaction the continued progress in
opening UNAMA's regional and provincial offices. We
are pleased that the Secretary-General's report affirms
that, despite the brutal 28 October attack on the Kabul
guest house, the United Nations remains committed to
opening additional offices throughout Afghanistan in
2010. We reiterate our support for UNAMA's efforts to
strengthen the security of United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan, and we are open to working creatively
with UNAMA to support those efforts.

The United Nations has played a critical role in
supporting the political process in Afghanistan,
including support for elections. We agree with the
Secretary-General's observation that the 2009 Afghan
presidential and provincial council elections exposed
serious flaws in the Afghan electoral process. Along
with our international partners, we are committed to
working with the Government of Afghanistan to
address these shortcomings before future elections are
held.

The upcoming Conference in London, to be
co-chaired by Afghanistan, the United Kingdom and
the United Nations, will be an opportunity for the
international community to demonstrate its support for
the Government of Afghanistan's agenda, as outlined in
President Karzai's inaugural address. We look forward
to the conference in Kabul this spring, in which the
Government of Afghanistan will have the opportunity
to present more detailed plans and programmes for
achieving its ambitious goals. President Karzai's
inaugural speech sent the right message about moving
in a new direction, including his commitment to
reintegration and reconciliation, to improving relations
with Afghanistan's regional partners, and to steadily
increasing the responsibilities of Afghan security
services. We must now see action, and we must now
see progress.

