Mr. Roed-Larsen: Since the Secretariat's last
briefing to the Security Council on 12 November, the
security and political environments have seen
developments which, in the near future, could further
complicate an already fragile situation on the ground.
However, there have been some positive developments
related to the diplomatic front.

Sadly, first, three United Nations staff members
lost their lives in recent weeks as the result of actions
of the Israel Defence Forces (IDF): Iain Hook in Jenin
on 23 November and Osama Tahrawi and Ahlam
Kandil in Gaza on 6 December. All three were
employed by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). A preliminary United Nations investigation
into Mr. Hook's death indicates that he was killed at a
time when there was no threat to IDF forces in the
vicinity of the UNRWA compound in Jenin. It also
determined that there had been no fire aimed at IDF
forces at any time originating within the UNRWA
compound. Needless to say, it is in the interest of all
that the facts surrounding the event be resolved, if only
to ensure that incidents such as these are not repeated.

The killing of Iain Hook, along with the recent
destruction by the IDF of a World Food Programme
storehouse in Gaza containing food supplies for tens of
thousands of persons, reflect a troubling indifference to
the sanctity of United Nations facilities.

The killings of United Nations staff members also
highlight a larger issue: the need for the IDF to ensure
that its soldiers act in a manner that does not place
civilians in harm's way. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly urged Israel to refrain from the excessive
and disproportionate use of deadly force in civilian
areas. The Government of Israel must conduct itself in
keeping with its obligation as an occupying Power to
protect the civilian population. Once again, the United
Nations urges it to ensure that the IDF behaves with
greater restraint and discipline and in conformity with
international humanitarian law.

Unfortunately, terrorist attacks on Israeli civilians
have also continued since the last briefing to the
Security Council. Two of the attacks, carried out
outside Israel, have added a new and worrying element
to the tragic cycle of violence. The day of the Likud
Party primary election was marred by the death of nine
Israelis in two separate terrorist incidents. In the first,
an Israeli-owned hotel in Mombasa, Kenya, was
bombed and three Israelis were killed. Later that day,
an attack on the Likud polling station in the northern
Israeli town of Beit Shean resulted in the deaths of six
Israelis and the wounding of more than 20, some dozen
of them seriously. Much greater loss of life in Kenya
was narrowly averted when missiles that had been fired
at an Israeli tourist charter plane carrying 271
passengers and crew missed their target.

The toll of casualties in the conflict has tragically
reached new peaks since the most recent briefing to the
Council. At least 88 Palestinians and 37 Israelis have
been killed in the past five weeks. We have called on
Israel to act with restraint and in keeping with
international humanitarian law in its operations in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip. We have repeatedly
demanded - in the strongest of terms - that the
Palestinian Authority take all measures within its
power to apprehend and prosecute those who carry out
terrorist attacks and those who order such attacks. We
have asked the Palestinian Authority to do everything
in its power to prevent the commission of further acts
of terrorism. I made that point to President Arafat again
on Friday, when I last met with him at his Ramallah
headquarters, and emphasized the need for immediate
and bold steps. We have also repeatedly called on all
Palestinian groups to bring an end to such wicked acts.

The humanitarian crisis continues to deepen.
Cities in the West Bank and Gaza Strip suffer from
frequent round-the-clock curfews, and internal and
external closures in the occupied Palestinian territories
have all but shut down the Palestinian economy. We
recognize Israel's right to take reasonable measures to
defend its people, and it would be wrong to
underestimate the security challenges that confront
Israel. However, the IDF's security measures are
creating a humanitarian catastrophe in the Palestinian
areas. Let us also be clear that lasting security for
Israel will be found only through a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.

Meanwhile, the humanitarian crisis cannot, and
should not, be solved through donor support alone.
Over the past two years, the Palestinians have received
more than $1 billion a year in donor assistance. The
World Bank estimates that, even if assistance were
doubled to $2 billion a year, it would have only have a
marginal effect on rising poverty levels. The Office of
the United Nations Special Coordinator in the
Occupied Territories estimates that some 60 per cent of
the Palestinian population of the West Bank and Gaza
Strip is now living below the poverty line. Only a
political solution can provide the underpinnings
necessary for reviving the Palestinian economy and for
improving living conditions.

On 12 November, the United Nations convened
an inter-agency meeting to review the humanitarian
action plan prepared by an assessment mission led by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The Quartet, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and other donors, and the
Palestinian Authority also participated in the meeting.
As decided at the 17 September Quartet meeting, held
here in New York, the Quartet envoys will present
recommendations to the principals meeting in
Washington later this week on the reorganization of
existing international coordination structures to render
them more efficient and more responsive to the
evolving humanitarian challenge.

The Government of Israel recently took a
significant step forward, easing the crisis by
transferring approximately $28 million in withheld tax
revenues to the Authority, and undertook to begin a
regular system of revenue transfers. Such a system of
regular transfers should now commence. The
approximately $580 million that is owed in arrears
should be transferred as well. Regular transfers go a
long way towards lessening the humanitarian crisis and
also towards facilitating Palestinian Authority reform.
Without such transfers and a lifting of internal
movement restrictions, even a drastic increase in donor
assistance would only scratch the surface of the
growing need.

According to the IMF, if the Government of Israel
fulfils its promise of fund transfers, the Palestinian
Authority will have ample funds - which will amount
to roughly $95 million per month - to meet its
budgetary needs for the coming year and will even
have a surplus with which to begin paying off the more
than $500 million in debt that it has accumulated. For
most of the past year, the Palestinian Authority has
been able to pay the salaries of its more than 100,000
employees only through generous contributions of
budgetary support from donor countries. That
assistance has prevented poverty levels from rising
further. Israeli transfers of value added tax owed to the
Palestinian Authority would allow the international
community once again to focus its assistance on
development and State-building.

We have observed little improvement with regard
to the commitments made by the Government of Israel
concerning the humanitarian situation. Those include
shorter waiting times for ambulances, assistance for
Palestinians seeking urgent medical attention at
checkpoints, facilitated passage of water tankers and
free movement of international organizations.

The United Nations is troubled by reports that the
Israeli military is confiscating and demolishing homes
in Hebron in order to build a new road for the use of
Jewish settlers. The construction and expansion of
settlements in occupied territory is clearly prohibited
by international humanitarian law. In the period from
the signing of the Oslo Accords to 2001, the settler
population in the West Bank - excluding East
Jerusalem - and the Gaza Strip expanded 95 per cent,
from 109,784 to 213,672. Each new settlement makes
peace more remote and potentially prejudices a
permanent territorial agreement. Also troubling is the
erection of a new security wall east of the Green Line,
which threatens to sever thousands of Palestinians from
their agricultural lands and from other sources of
livelihood.

On 14 to 15 November, the Quartet Task Force on
Palestinian Reform met at the capital level in Jordan,
hosted by the European Union. The Task Force
reviewed progress in implementing reforms in the areas
of financial accountability, market economics, civil
service, judiciary/rule of law, local Government and
elections, as well as civil society engagement in the
reform process. The Task Force also heard reports
regarding the increasingly severe Palestinian
humanitarian crisis and fiscal crisis, finding that both
are stymying institutional development efforts. On 9
December, the Task Force met at local level in
Jerusalem to assess progress on all of those fronts,
focusing on civil service, the judiciary/rule of law and
election reforms.

The Task Force determined that the Palestinian
Authority has made considerable, but uneven, progress
in advancing the reform agenda. Financial reforms
have been particularly substantial, while progress in the
judicial sector has been extremely slow. Security
reform, which is not within the purview of the Task
Force, has also stalled. President Arafat has appointed
an elections commission that is universally regarded as
independent, and the Palestinian Legislative Council's
legal committee has begun working to revise the
Palestinian elections law. Rapid implementation of the
road map will do much to facilitate all of these
reforms, including creating a climate within which
free, fair and open elections can soon take place.

The Task Force called upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue advancing reform efforts. It also
called on the Government of Israel to end actions
impeding reform, including withholding tax revenues
owed to the Palestinian Authority and restricting the
movement of Palestinian officials involved in the
reform process.

Since the last briefing, the upcoming electoral
contest in Israel has begun to take shape. Each of the
two largest political parties, Labor and Likud, have
chosen their leaders and candidates for Prime Minister.
On 23 November, the Labor Party elected Haifa Mayor,
Amran Mitzna to lead them into the general elections
scheduled for 28 January 2003. Leading up to the poll,
Mr. Mitzna consistently emphasized that once elected
he would re-open negotiations with Mr. Arafat,
evacuate settlements in the Gaza Strip and seek to
close a deal with the Palestinians within a year. If that
were not possible, then he would work for unilateral
separation.

On 28 November, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
once again won the leadership of the Likud Party. In a
further development, on 4 December, Prime Minister
Sharon delivered a major policy speech on Israel-
Palestinian relations. In the speech, he said that he
endorsed President Bush's 24 June vision statement,
which supports the establishment of a Palestinian State.
Prime Minister Sharon described that statement as a
"reasonable, pragmatic and practicable one, which
offers a real opportunity to achieve an agreement". He
also stated that political concessions that Israel has
already made since Oslo are irreversible.

The consensus around the two-State solution is
growing. It is backed by opinion polls that show that
the large majorities of both the Israeli and the
Palestinian communities support the concept, and the
leaders of the two major Israeli parties have expressed
their support. As members well know, there is nearly
unanimous support within the international community,
including in the Middle East, for that vision. The
Quartet has taken the lead in advocating that outcome.

This paradox - the steadily growing gap
between the deteriorating situation on the ground and
the growing consensus about where to go - has to be
resolved. The Quartet road map, which has evolved,
since last time I briefed the Council, through the hard
work of the Quartet's envoys, is the best tool to show
us how to get there. It is, therefore, imperative that the
upcoming Quartet meeting, to be held in Washington,
DC, this week, finalizes a plan for moving forward
and that it sets out, in parallel and with reciprocity,
political, security and economic steps to be monitored
under the auspices of the Quartet. Only this can restart
a process that stops the meaningless and unfathomable
fear and suffering of both peoples. We know where to
go; we should now start. The parties and the
international community must work in tandem towards
our common goal: the establishment of a State of
Palestine living in peace alongside Israel within secure
and recognized borders. Only this can provide
harmony, justice and prosperity for both peoples, and
the beginning of a comprehensive and lasting peace
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002).
I now turn to recent developments in Lebanon.
While the general situation along the Blue Line since
the last briefing, on 12 November, continued to be one
of uneasy stability, there were two elements that raised
tension over the past month. On 8 December, a
roadside bomb placed on the Lebanese side of the Blue
Line was detonated. The explosion was directed at a
passing IDF patrol on the Israeli side of the Blue Line
and injured two IDF soldiers, one seriously. This is the
first serious Violation of the Blue Line from the
Lebanese side since 29 August, when Hizbullah
targeted IDF positions in the Sheb'a farms area. While
the full circumstances and responsibility regarding this
incident are unclear as yet, it is evident that tension has
increased and that the 8 December bombing was a
serious and totally unacceptable Blue Line Violation,
which tragically and severely wounded two Israeli
soldiers.

Since the last briefing to the Council, on 12
November, Israeli military aircraft have continued to
Violate the Blue Line and Lebanese airspace on a
regular basis. These air violations continue to draw
anti-aircraft fire from the Lebanese side of the Blue
Line. On 20 November, two days prior to Lebanese
Independence Day celebrations, there was a sudden and
significant increase in the number of overflights. Six
air violations, involving 15 Israeli jets, were recorded.
The continuation of Israeli overflights and the anti-
aircraft fire that they elicit threaten to further
destabilize the already tense situation along the Blue
Line. These violations contribute to a continuing level
of tension along the Blue Line. They threaten to
destabilize further what is already a fragile situation.
All concerned parties, therefore, are reminded of their
obligation to fully respect the Blue Line and to refrain
from further violations thereof.

I paid a visit to Beirut a few days ago and met
with the President, the Prime Minister and other senior
officials. One of the main reasons for this mission was
to discuss with the Lebanese leadership how to ensure
a reasonable and diplomatic approach to dealing with
the potentially escalatory water issue between Lebanon
and Israel. Since the last briefing to the Council, there
has been no change in the political situation with
regard to the Wazzani springs issue; there is no
meaningful communication between the parties. We are
concerned that unless a mechanism is established soon
to handle future developments through diplomatic
channels, we may see, sooner or later, a dangerous
escalation of tensions between Israel and Lebanon,
with possible regional consequences.
I am pleased to report that the Lebanese
leadership assured me that they would remain within
the parameters of the report on the water issue that they
submitted in October, and that they would also refrain
from any unilateral moves regarding water. They
reiterated their desire to have some sort of mechanism
using the good offices of the United Nations, in order
to establish a diplomatic means for resolving future
water disputes. They agreed to keep their water
activities within the parameters defined in their report
and to abstain from any unilateral action for the time
being, and they committed themselves to notify the
United Nations before going ahead with any such
action in the future. They also seek to reach an
agreement on water quantities, Via the United Nations
as a third party, working with other key members of the
international community. They are willing to install a
measurement instrument - a water meter - after
reaching such an agreement

The Lebanese assurances are of course in
anticipation of this mechanism becoming operational. I
consider this a positive development. The success of
any such arrangement is, however, contingent on a
clear acceptance by both concerned parties. I will, and
I believe we need to, encourage this non-violent
diplomatic option in order to defuse the situation.

We should not neglect the dangers facing the
Middle East or the perils of inaction during this critical
period. The peace process has been at a stalemate for
more than two years, and the entire region has suffered
tremendously as a result. The Quartet road map sets out
a coherent framework for shifting the parties from
violence and confrontation to negotiations and
compromise. A consensus at the upcoming Quartet
meeting must be our highest priority. This is not the
time to hesitate.

