Mr. Zerihoun: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. As the Council
is well aware, the issue of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the Gulf of Guinea is regularly covered in the
biannual briefings by the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General for the Central and West African
regions. However, this is the first time in almost five
years that the Security Council has dedicated a meeting
to the subject.

Over the past few years, there has been a steady
decline in the number of recorded incidents of piracy,
armed robbery at sea and other illicit activities in the Gulf
of Guinea. However, insecurity at sea remains a source
of concern in the region. In the first quarter of 2016,
the International Maritime Bureau's Piracy Reporting
Centre recorded six attacks and six attempted attacks
in the Gulf of Guinea, including nine in Nigeria, one
in Cote d'Ivoire and two within the territorial waters
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Cases of the
hijacking of vessels off the coast ofNigeria for political
purposes by the self-described Biafra militants, and
kidnappings along the coasts of Western and Central
Africa, have also recently been recorded.

The Council may recall that, following an upsurge
in incidents of piracy, armed robbery at sea and other
illicit activities in the Gulf of Guinea, its resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) encouraged the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC) to
develop a comprehensive regional anti-piracy strategy
for the Gulf with United Nations support.

As a result, the ECOWAS, ECCAS and GGC
Summit of Heads of State and Government of on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
was held in Yaounde in June 2013, with the support
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa. During the Summit, the Heads of State
and Government committed to working towards the
promotion ofpeace, security and stability in the Gulf of
Guinea. Notably, the Summit adopted a memorandum
of understanding on maritime safety and security in the
Central and West African regions that set objectives and
areas of cooperation; a code of conduct; and a political
declaration on enhancing cooperation in the Gulf of
Guinea. The Summit also agreed on the creation of the
Gulf of Guinea Interregional Coordination Centre to
implement the regional strategy for maritime safety and
security, and established a clear division of labour that
charged the regional organizations with responsibility
for strategy and coordination, and the States with
responsibility for operations.

The Interregional Coordination Centre was
inaugurated in Yaounde' on 11 September 2014 to
coordinate all operations with regard to the suppression
of piracy and other criminal activities in the Gulf of
Guinea. This marked an important and positive step
in the cooperation between West and Central Africa
in the fight against piracy and crimes at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea region. The Interregional Cooperation
Centre is expected to coordinate two regional maritime
coordination centres: the Regional Maritime Security
Centre for Central Africa (CRESMAC), located in
Pointe-Noire, Republic of the Congo, and the yet-to-be
established regional maritime security centre for West
Africa, to be located in Abidjan.

The regional maritime coordination centre for
Central Africa has been operational since its official
launch in October 2014, while the multinational and
regional maritime coordination centres are at different
stages of operationalization. However, despite its
inauguration in 2014, the Interregional Coordination
Centre itself is not fully operational due to staffing,
funding and other logistical constraints.

An extraordinary meeting of thed Heads of State
and Government of ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission was held in Yaounde on 12 February
to address the challenges in the operationalization of
the Interregional Coordination Centre. Both the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and for Central Africa attended the meeting on
behalf of the United Nations. The meeting reviewed the
staff recruitment and procedures of the Interregional
Coordination Centre, the budget for the second half of
this year and for 2017, as well as a proposed programme
of activities.

With regard to the budget, the meeting
recommended that member States contribute 40
percent of the necessary resources, while bilateral and
international partners would contribute the rest. The
Summit also recommended that ECCAS, ECOWAS,
the Gulf of Guinea Commission and their member
States expedite the disbursement of funds to allow for
the operationalization of the International Criminal
Court between July and December this year. Moreover,
it was proposed that additional sources of funding be
explored through the taxation of beneficiaries of the
ports situated in the Gulf of Guinea region.

The mobilization of resources remains a key
priority for ensuring the effective operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre, particularly
given that a significant component of the Centre's
budgetary resources is expected to come from bilateral
and international partners. For that reason, the Heads
of State and Government of ECCAS, ECOWAS and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission have agreed in principle on
the organization of a future conference of partners and
third-party contributors in Yaounde'. The conference
is expected to be held immediately after the meeting
of the G7++ and Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which
is scheduled to be held on 6 and 7 June in Lisbon.
The United Nations is committed to assisting in this
endeavour through its regional offices in Central and
West Africa.

Tackling international crimes of trafficking, piracy
and theft requires a combination of efforts and an
understanding that suppression, while necessary, is
not sufficient. Those who commit illegal acts at sea
are highly adaptable, increasingly sophisticated in
their methods and often well-informed. This requires
national, regional and global efforts to be flexible and
proactive. Initiatives aimed at addressing socioeconomic
development and lack of job opportunities are
also required to provide prospects to marginalized
populations that may be involved in piracy activities,
most notably young people.

Ultimately, countering the current threats will
require a combination of capacities, including qualitative
improvements in the collection of intelligence; the
sharing and improved analysis of intelligence; the
enhancement of capacities in both the infrastructure and
training of local law-enforcement agencies of the Gulf
of Guinea countries; and the establishment of effective
customs and border-control systems throughout the
subregion. It is also important to avoid the duplication
of international capacity-building efforts with respect
to maritime safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea.
The G7++ and the Friends of the Gulf of Guinea groups
have been serving as useful coordination platforms in
this regard.

Finally and most importantly, the African Union
is scheduled to hold an extraordinary summit on
maritime security and development for Africa on
15 and 16 October in Lome. We believe that the summit
will provide a unique opportunity for the countries
of the region to renew their commitment to jointly
enhancing the maritime security architecture in the
Gulf of Guinea.

