Ms. Lodhi (Paksitan): My delegation thanks the
Swedish presidency for convening this open debate
and expresses its appreciation for the comprehensive
briefing by Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Nickolay Mladenov.

The tide of turmoil and conflict in the Middle East,
far from receding, has continued to rise, with even
greater unpredictability. As a consequence, millions of
people are having to endure unimaginable suffering,
caught up in a vortex of violence driven by the actions
of the occupying Power, as well as the divergent
interests and priorities of regional and external Powers.
The Special Coordinator has presented a deeply
troubling assessment of the situation in the region,
especially in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
facts speak for themselves. Gaza has been dealt another
blow by the Israeli bombardment, thereby resulting
in the further loss of precious lives. In the wake of
the recent escalation, some have called for all sides
to exercise restraint and step back from the brink of
renewed conflict. As much as any resort to violence
is unacceptable, the Palestinian issue is in essence a
struggle between an occupied people and an occupying
Power. Obfuscating that incontrovertible reality would
be tantamount to drawing a moral equivalence between
the acts of the aggressor and the aggrieved. That is
not unacceptable.

The long-suffering Palestinian people continue
to face well-entrenched and systematic violations of
their fundamental human rights at the hands of the
Israeli occupation. Addressing the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid
Ra'ad Al Hussein spoke at length of the endemic and
multi-faceted challenges confronting the daily lives
of the Palestinian people. If there ever was a need to
lend credibility to those words, the so-called Jewish
nation-State law, passed by the Israeli Parliament on
19 July, provides a vivid manifestation of the legally
enshrined policy of discrimination by Israel. By
ascribing privilege purely on religious grounds, that
basic law relegates the indigenous Arab population to
second-class citizens.

Such racist laws should have no place in today's
world. Historical facts cannot be re-written by
legislative fiat. We reject any attempts to diminish the
legal standing of the Palestinians or to deprive them
of their legitimate rights within their homeland. The
international community cannot continue to avoid its
responsibility to promote a just solution to the problem.
The Security Council cannot continue to avoid its
obligations under resolution 242 (1967) and at least
80 successor resolutions to enforce a just solution to
the conflict, which is at the core of the challenges that
confront the Middle East today.

The plight ofthe Palestinian people has reverberated
across this Chamber for as long as the United Nations
has existed, but sadly no end to their suffering seems
to be in sight. In recent days, the Security Council's
inaction with regard to Palestine has led to a more
proactive role by the General Assembly to fill the
void. resolution ES-10/20, overwhelmingly adopted
by the General Assembly at its emergency special
session on 13 June, therefore was a call to action for
the Secretary-General to ensure the protection of the
Palestinian civilian population. We look forward to
the Secretary-General's report outlining concrete and
practical steps to alleviate the pain and suffering of the
people of Palestine.

The Middle East stands at a dangerous crossroads.
As existing conflicts have intensified and new threats
have emerged, the imperative for diplomatic solutions is
more urgent than ever. As Iraq and Lebanon consolidate
their democratic gains as a result of recently held
parliamentary elections, we commend them for turning
a new page in their national quest for inclusive and
representative political participation.

My country will continue to lend its support for
negotiated settlements in other regional situations,
including Syria and Yemen, based on agreed frameworks
and through inclusive political engagement.

It will not be easy to restore peace and stability to
the Middle East. Beyond the diplomacy and the genuine
commitment by all Powers and parties to negotiated
solutions, a comprehensive and enlightened policy
is needed to address and overcome the underlying
political, economic and social causes ofthese conflicts.
Such a comprehensive policy and bold diplomacy,
especially by those who wield power and influence
with the principal parties, is essential if we are to defy
the dire predictions of disaster in the Middle East that
abound today.

