Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
having organized this debate on the Security Council's
working methods, with which you bring to a close a
rich and intense month of November for the Council
under the presidency of Portugal.

No one can deny the gradual improvement in the
Council's interaction with non-member States and
other international and regional actors or the wealth of
information available about the Council's work. They
are unprecedented. That progress can be attributed to
the Council's will to infuse its work with more
openness, transparency and interaction; to the growing
legitimate interest of non-member States to be involved
in and informed about the Council's work and
decisions, which it undertakes on behalf of the entire
international community; and to advances in new
information and communication technology, which
have made the dissemination of information faster and
easier, fostering greater access.

Year by year, the Council has come to consider
new situations and to address multiple challenges that
directly affect international peace and security. The
Council has begun to face challenges that are different

in scope, size and nature from traditional inter-State
conflicts, notably international terrorism, civil
conflicts, weapons of mass destruction and
transnational organized crime. The potential impact of
those challenges on the international community as a
whole has led to an ever-increasing interest on the part
of non-member States in the Council's work.

Responding to that growing interest, the Council
has undertaken commendable efforts to improve its
efficiency and transparency and to interact more
effectively with other parts of the United Nations
system. The Council's adoption, at the initiative of
Japan, of presidential note S/2010/507 and the panoply
of measures it recommends bear witness to the
Council's resolve in this matter. Those efforts deserve
to be pursued and expanded. In this regard, my
delegation would like to offer the following thoughts.

First, the Council's increasing use of open and
interactive debates is an overall positive development.
At the same time, the Council must retain the
discretion to decide on the format of meetings, based
on the sensitivity of the matter under consideration and
an objective assessment of the impact of a given format
on the Council's ability to consider the issue.

Second, the practice of the Council presidency to
hold informative briefings for non-members on the
monthly programme of work gives non-members an
opportunity to interact directly with the presidency of
the Council. The practice should be maintained and
expanded.

Third, consultations with troop- and police-
contributing countries are important not only because
they respond to a pressing need but also because they
promote efficiency. We must take advantage of those
countries' experience and expertise at the various
stages of designing and implementing mandates for
peacekeeping operations.

Fourth, given that the maintenance of peace is the
primary function of the Council, it is important to
make as much use as possible of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and to encourage it to bolster
its collaboration with troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat.

Fifth, the Council's interaction with regional and
subregional organizations is an added value for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council has made significant progress in furthering
such interaction in recent years.

Sixth, while we welcome the increased number of
open thematic debates, we believe that they should be
narrowly focused and that the views of non-member
States should be taken into consideration.

Seventh, the Council has involved the
Peacebuilding Commission and its country
configurations in its debates on an increasingly regular
basis. It is important to strengthen that practice because
peacebuilding is not only built into peacekeeping
mandates, but it is also an element of conflict
prevention that helps to prevent relapse into violence.

Eighth, no effort must be spared in the
development of preventive diplomacy. My delegation
is pleased to note that this theme has gained relevancy
in recent times, both within and outside of the Council.
During our term in the Council, my delegation will
make every effort, together with the other members, to
strengthen the Council's conflict prevention activities,
especially in Africa.

Ninth, the Council's annual report to the General
Assembly has notably improved and is now more
substantive and analytical. We encourage its continued
improvement and welcome the practice launched four
years ago whereby the presidency of the Council
requests the viewpoints of United Nations Member
States well before consolidating the report.

My tenth and penultimate point is that the
monthly assessments made available to all Member
States by the Council presidency are a valuable source
of information on the work of the Council. The practice
of presenting those reports at the end of each
presidency should be reinforced to preserve their
relevance and timeliness.

My final point relates to the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, which plays a crucial role in improving the
Council's working methods. It should strengthen its
interaction with non-members of the Council and work
towards evaluating the implementation of note
S/2010/507 and possible additions thereto, bearing in
mind the views of all United Nations Member States.

In the ongoing endeavour to improve the working
methods of the Council, my delegation considers it
necessary to integrate both the requirements for prompt
and effective action to maintain international peace and
security, and the support of the international
community for measures taken. That is a difficult task,
to be undertaken with pragmatism, open-mindedness
and awareness that the Council acts on behalf of the
entire international community.

I began by thanking the Portuguese presidency. I
wish to conclude on a more personal note and to
congratulate you personally, Sir, for the tact,
effectiveness and the ease with which you have
conducted the deliberations of the Council this month.
You have set a good example for a new member
preparing to return to the Council next year.

