Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate. We should also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing.

In today's world, the nature of conflicts and
disputes is undergoing profound changes. Traditional
inter-State conflicts are evolving into hybrids of inter-
State/intra-State conflicts, and the causes of disputes
are becoming increasingly complex and involve
various factors such as history, territory, religion and
tribe. Experience has demonstrated time and again that
if we are unable to take reasonable and legitimate
action at an early stage in a crisis to seek a peaceful
settlement via mediation, we will have to spend
considerably more time and energy after a crisis breaks
out coping with the consequences of its expansion.
Therefore, the peaceful settlement of disputes is an
investment in the future of mankind and will certainly
reap abundant peace dividends.
09-30825

The peaceful settlement of disputes is one of the
fundamental principles of the United Nations, and the
Charter has provided theoretical guidance and bases for
action in mediation and dispute settlement. As the most
authoritative and representative international
organization in the world, the United Nations has every
reason to play a central role in mediation and dispute
settlement. We appreciate the positive role played by
the United Nations in settling hotspot issues in relevant
areas, and expect the Organization to further enhance
its mediation capacity and improve its mediation
expertise so as to play a bigger role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Strengthening the United Nations mediation and
dispute settlement capacity requires full respect for the
will of the parties concerned. The parties to a dispute
are stakeholders in the settlement of the conflict, and
only when they display full political will can United
Nations mediation produce results. If the parties
concerned explicitly reject United Nations mediation,
the Organization will have neither the possibility nor
the grounds to become involved. The United Nations
should therefore try to obtain the cooperation of the
parties concerned and keep the channels of
communication open so as to lay a sound foundation
for mediation.

On the other hand, mediation is a protracted
process with inevitable setbacks and fluctuations. The
international community should speak with one voice
when the United Nations is engaged in mediation to
support the Organization's efforts and maintain its
input after a peace agreement is reached so that the
results of mediation can be further consolidated.

Strengthening the United Nations mediation and
dispute settlement capacity requires it to facilitate
mutual understanding and accommodation between the
parties concerned while maintaining neutrality and
impartiality. Neutrality and impartiality are the bases of
mediation, and the designation of an appropriate
mediator is the key to the success of mediation.
Mediation should be an inclusive process in which the
mediator hears the views of all sides, has an accurate
understanding of differing views and accommodates
various concerns in a balanced manner. Mediation
should also be a progressive process in which the
mediator should have full understanding of the
background of the issue, effectively coordinate
relations among all parties, maintain patience and
confidence, keep strict confidentiality and a low
profile, focus on facilitation and avoid assuming the
responsibilities of the parties. Mediation should result
in a win-win situation. The mediator should try to
make the parties concerned realize that there is no such
thing as a winner-takes-all solution and that it is only
through flexibility and compromise that they can
achieve reconciliation and a win-win outcome.

Strengthening the mediation and dispute
settlement capacity of the United Nations requires
addressing the question of impunity on the basis of
building durable peace. Ending impunity and ensuring
fairness and justice are prerequisites for upholding the
good and punishing the evil. Peace can be secure only
when it is based on fairness and justice. In that respect,
the State concerned should play the leading role. At the
same time, it is hard to truly put an end to impunity
without a peaceful and stable environment. When
dealing with impunity, it is necessary to take into full
consideration the overall interests of peace and
stability.

Strengthening the mediation and dispute
settlement capacity of the United Nations requires full
use of the advantages of cooperative partnership on the
basis of mobilizing all relevant mechanisms of the
United Nations. In its mediation efforts the United
Nations should rely on the strength of its moral force
and its neutrality and should work in all dimensions
and at multiple levels. In this connection, it is
necessary to take advantage of both the expertise of the
Mediation Support Unit and the convenience offered
by field agencies such as peacekeeping missions. It is
necessary both to engage in shuttle diplomacy and to
employ the Secretary-General's good offices in order
to make best use of the Organization's advantages in
resources to cultivate local mediation capacities.

Strengthening the mediation capacity of the
United Nations is a strategic undertaking which should
be provided with adequate resources. At the same time,
the United Nations should also pay attention to
cooperating with the mediation efforts of its partners
and should actively provide them with political, human
and logistical support when necessary.

The purpose of strengthening the mediation and
dispute settlement capacity of the United Nations is not
to take on all the disputes of the world. We take note of
the unique and important role of relevant regional
organizations in settling disputes in their respective
regions. China always stands for the settlement of
disputes through peaceful dialogue, and we support a
greater role for the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the African Union in providing
mediation and good offices for dispute and conflict
settlement. We will continue to work with all others in
making energetic efforts towards that end.

