Mr. Taula (New Zealand): I thank our briefers this
morning. We welcome this open debate and in particular
the presence of our colleagues from the African Union
Peace and Security Council.

The past 10 years have seen enormous growth in
our relationship, and there is now a genuine consensus
that the Security Council cannot carry out its mandate
effectively without cooperating closely with the African
Union (AU) and the regional economic communities.
Integration with the African Peace and Security
Architecture is key to this, as noted in each of the
United Nations high-level reviews in 2015. Today, New
Zealand would like to focus on two main areas.

First, we need to strengthen practical cooperation
in preventing conflict, as other speakers have
highlighted. In our view, the foundations are very good
for cooperation on conflict prevention. One of the major
strengths of the African Union and its subregional
organizations is that they have dedicated significant
resources and energy to identifying emerging crises
and agreeing collective responses to prevent conflict.
Good examples are the AU's early efforts on Burundi
and the leadership of the Economic Community of
West African States on Burkina Faso. Moreover, in our
experience, the Secretariat and the AU Commission
cooperate well at the institutional level to identify early
warning indicators and develop recommendations for
early action. There is, however, a lot more we can do.

As identified during a seminar on conflict
prevention we hosted for Security Council and AU
Peace and Security Council members in Addis Ababa
last month, we need to be more joined up, and at an
earlier stage. Effective conflict prevention requires early
engagement and political will on the part of all actors,
as well as unified messaging and coordinated action.
What emerged at the seminar was that, at present, there
is a lack of trust on many issues between key actors:
the United Nations, the AU, subregional organizations
and member States. This is a major obstacle to acting
more effectively in cooperation, and is often rooted in
differing conflict analyses and concerns about respect
for sovereignty.

If we are to overcome these challenges, we need to
begin from a basis of shared information and analysis
about emerging crises and their causes, which can
in turn lead to shared objectives and strategies for
preventing conflict. We hope to see such cooperation
in the coming months on emerging issues of mutual
concern. Early engagement on the growing tensions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would be
a useful place to start. To do this, we will need to
translate our rhetoric of partnership into practical and
meaningful engagement between the two Councils on a
more consistent basis.

We had a very good meeting yesterday canvassing
some of these points, and New Zealand very much
hopes that we can institutionalize regular informal
engagement between the Councils that focuses on
substantive action. Key focus areas could include the
following: early joint analysis of emerging situations,
setting out key facts and discussing interpretations and
possible strategies so that all actors can discuss how
to act in concert early and according their respective
comparative advantage; and mandating and actively
supporting information-sharing between the two
Secretariats, increased resourcing for political analysis
and conflict prevention, and actively discussing
relevant information with Member States. We would
like to see regular informal discussions between the
two Councils - be through the Presidents, troikas or
the full Councils - to build common understandings
on crisis situations and agree on common objectives and
credible responses. We also support and deployingjoint
AU-United Nations field missions, where possible, at
both the secretariat and Council levels. In this regard,
New Zealand supports a joint mission withe Peace and
Security Council to South Sudan, in support of effective
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

The other important issue that New Zealand wishes
to highlight this morning is that of the financing of
AU peace operations. We share the view that there is
a strong need for a more sustainable model, and hope
that the international community, including the United
Nations, can be strategic and creative in working out
how to properly support Council-mandated missions
that the African Union is prepared to lead. The urgent
need to make progress in this regard was underlined
again during the Council's visit to Somalia last week.

New Zealand welcomes the efforts of the AU to
mobilize funding from within Africa. We are realistic
about capacity limitations in this regard. Our own
expectation is that United Nations assessed contributions
will need to be a part of any long-term solution, and we
are ready to explore proposals forjoint financing of AU
operations by the United Nations and AU members. We
have no illusions regarding the sensitive and complex
issues this raises, but we believe that ongoing reliance
on ad hoc models for financing AU peace operations
continues to hamper their effectiveness and that this is
not sustainable in the long term.

In closing, cooperation between the United Nations
and AU on peace and security matters has improved
significantly, but it remains a work in progress. It is
in all our interests that we take further steps to unlock
the potential that more effective cooperation holds for
both organizations.

