Mr. Patten (Liberia): I would like to express to
you, Mr. President, and to the members of the Security
Council the deep gratitude and appreciation of my
President and of the Government and the people of
Liberia for the unfaltering support that the Council has
given us over the years and for its continued engagement
with Liberia.

Thirteen years ago, the Council deemed it
expedient to institute measures that would not only
help to restore peace to Liberia but also ensure the
establishment of mechanisms to guide and protect the
peace and stability attained. One such measure was the
imposition of sanctions under resolution 1521 (2003).
The usefulness of sanctions continues to be contested.
Some Members of the United Nations believe that they
serve no useful purpose. Others insist that they are
necessary to address particular situations when they
undermine international peace and security.

In the context of Liberia, targeted sanctions were
very constructive. The sanctions regime contributed
in large measure to the country's stabilization and
stimulated post-conflict economic recovery. They
targeted some of our natural resources, including
timber and diamonds, and imposed restrictions on the
supply and importation of arms, on finances and on
individuals considered a threat to Liberia's peace and
stability. They also targeted individuals who might
have engaged in activities aimed at undermining peace
and stability.

Liberia played its part in cooperating with the
Council over those 13 years. In many instances, capacity
constraints inhibited speedy progress. However, the
Government is pleased that its work with the Council
and its Panel of Experts on meeting their expectations
provided it with another opportunity to make Liberia
a safe and stable country for all Liberians, as well as
for foreign residents. The Council has been particularly
concerned about the enactment of laws regulating
firearms. I can now inform the Council that the House
of Representatives recently concurred with the Senate
in passing the 2015 Firearms and Ammunition Control
Act, which establishes a legal framework for managing
arms in the country. As a complement to that, we have
also passed police and immigration acts.

Liberia would like to once again commend the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1521
(2003), made up of all the members of the Council,
and its various Chairs, with whom we have interacted
directly over the years, for their steadfast support.
We also thank the Panel of Experts, whose members
made many visits to Liberia, neighbouring countries,
the subregion and beyond, to monitor and ensure the
implementation of the sanctions regime.

Liberia has reached a critical juncture. In the next
couple of weeks, the transition, under the transition
plan, from the United Nations Mission in Liberia to
national security institutions will benefit from another
decision by the Council. The termination of the
sanctions regime will further motivate the Government
in its efforts to strengthen the capacity of national
security institutions as they assume their constitutional
role of protecting lives and property and safeguarding
the territorial integrity of Liberia.

The meeting rose at10.25 a.m.
