Mr. Okuda (Japan): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his briefing and commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for its advocacy for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Japan places emphasis on the
protection and empowerment of civilians in armed
conflict from the human security perspective, and we
hope that the Security Council will continue to receive
periodic briefings on this issue from the Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

We welcome the adoption of the text of the
Convention on Cluster Munitions at the conference
held in Dublin in May last year as well as the
participation of 94 countries, including Japan, at the
Signing Conference of the Convention held last month
in Oslo. The Convention on Cluster Munitions is a
significant means for advancing a normative
framework conducive to the protection of civilians.
Japan has been actively contributing to the clearance of
unexploded ordnance in countries affected by cluster
munitions remnants, landmines and other ordnance, in
addition to providing assistance to victims of
unexploded ordnance. My Government will continue to
work cooperatively and generously to further
strengthen the international community's ability to
address cluster munitions.

Japan anticipates that 2009 may well become a
landmark year for the United Nations in realizing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We expect
that the revision of the aide-memoire and an
independent study by OCHA and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on the
implementation of Security Council mandates on the
protection of civilians will help the Council further
deepen its consideration of this issue.

We welcome the completion of the revised aide-
memoire and are pleased to see the draft presidential
statement by which the Council will adopt it today. We
repeatedly requested the revision of the aide-memoire
in order to increase its practical applicability as a
checklist for the Council's consideration of
establishing or extending the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

Regarding the independent study, we believe that
it is extremely useful to clarify how mandates on the

protection of civilians granted by the Council are
implemented in reality and what problems must be
solved for the activities on the ground to be enhanced.
We hope that the outcome of the study will include
concrete recommendations for those responsible for
implementing the mandates of the Security Council in
the field.

In addition, in order to improve the Council's
working methods, we wish to express our support for
the Secretariat's delivery of a timely, appropriate and
informal briefing to the Council's group of experts on
the situation of the protection of civilians in specific
conflict and post-conflict situations. There is no
question that it would be beneficial for the Council to
receive such a briefing, if it is to make wise decisions
regarding the establishment or extension of mission
mandates.

We are gravely concerned about the dire situation
of vulnerable civilians in armed conflict worldwide,
including in Afghanistan, Iraq, Darfur, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Sri Lanka, as
Under-Secretary-General Holmes pointed out in detail.
We cannot accept deliberate attacks against civilians,
journalists and humanitarian workers; recruitment of
child soldiers in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons; restriction of humanitarian access;
sexual violence; or any other violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law.

In this context, Japan continues to be seriously
concerned about the situation in and around Gaza.
Japan fully supports Security Council resolution 1860
(2009), which was adopted with the broadest possible
political support. We would like to emphasize the
importance of the safety and well-being of all civilians,
and we emphasize that the Palestinian and Israeli
civilian population must be protected. Japan condemns
all violence and hostilities directed against civilians as
well as all acts of terrorism.

The people in Gaza require immediate
humanitarian assistance, and Japan will provide
$10 million in aid, of which $3 million will be
immediately provided through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. Japan also renews the call for an immediate,
durable and fully respected ceasefire, leading to the
full withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza. We fully
support and appreciate the diplomatic efforts made by
various countries to bring about a ceasefire, especially
those of Egypt.

As we mentioned last week on the occasion of the
briefing by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (see S/PV.6062), humanitarian assistance and
the deployment of peacekeeping missions cannot
provide lasting peace and durable protection: conflict
prevention is the most effective and efficient means to
protect civilians. We must address the root causes of
conflict and invest more in addressing those causes. We
therefore believe that, from the perspective of
translating the concept of human security into practical
solutions, reconstruction, job creation and the
reintegration of displaced persons must be given a
higher priority in peacebuilding strategies and must be
implemented in all post-conflict situations, realizing a
seamless transition from relief to development.

Lastly, we commend humanitarian personnel for
carrying out their heavy responsibilities under
conditions that are often extremely dangerous and
difficult. We are deeply concerned about the
deterioration in ensuring their safety and security. It is
vital that a humanitarian space be provided in which
humanitarian workers can safely perform their essential
duties. We welcome the recent adoption by the General
Assembly of its resolution 63/139, designating
19 August as World Humanitarian Day in order to raise
public awareness about humanitarian activities
worldwide. For our part, Japan calls upon all relevant
parties concerned to take appropriate action to secure
humanitarian space, fully respecting the neutrality and
impartiality of humanitarian assistance.

