Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
underline that Georgia aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the European Union
(EU). Allow me now to make a brief intervention in my
national capacity.

First of all, I would like to express our gratitude
to Argentina, as the current presidet of the Security
Council, for this excellent opportunity to discuss
the regional aspect of security and the significant
assistance provided by the United Nations to regional
and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. In this context, allow
me to highlight the excellent cooperation developed
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development-GUAM, as
well as the priorities of Georgia as Chair State of the
GUAM. in 2013.

Fifteen years of active work have shaped GUAM
into a full-fledged regional organization with a
well-established institutional infrastructure. This
organization unites countries with common interests
and challenges and gives us a unique opportunity to
speak out in unison on a number of pressing issues
of common concern. The global political landscape
has opened new horizons for cooperation and created
stronger incentives for joint actions within GUAM.

The ever-changing international environment,
new challenges and opportunities have led us to
develop an even closer interaction within and beyond
the organization. In that light, I would like to stress
the importance of resolution 67/109, adopted by
the General Assembly on 17 December 2012, on
cooperation between the United Nations and GUAM.
The resolution envisages deepening cooperation
between the two international organizations and places
such cooperation within an appropriate institutional
framework. The adoption of that text was important
in terms of increasing the involvement of the United
Nations specialized agencies within the GUAM. area in
such fields as anti-terrorism, illegal drug trafficking,
human trafficking, integrated border management and
so on. The adoption of the resolution by consensus
clearly demonstrated the importance that States
Members of the United Nations attach to enhancing
cooperation with GUAM, which we highly value.

Under the current chairmanship of GUAM,
Georgia's priority is to promote political interaction
between the GUAM. States. We have a very close, if
not coinciding, set of foreign policy priorities, and
therefore consider GUAM. as a format that reinforces the
position of individual member States in the network of
international relations. In addition, Georgia is focused
on facilitating sectoral cooperation by implementing
mutually beneficial projects within GUAM. in the
economic, energy, transportation and other spheres, as
well as enhancing cooperation with major partners of
the organization in GUAM+ formats, such as GUAM-
United States and GUAM-Japan. The activation of
the interparliamentary dimension is also one of the
main priorities of the chairmanship of Georgia, as
this direction undoubtedly has a potential for further
evolution, giving a significant impetus to democratic
development within the GUAM. area.

While talking about regional cooperation, I would
like to underline the United Nations active cooperation
with the EU and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to ensure sustainable
security on the European continent. For Georgia, that
interaction acquires a particular importance within
the Geneva international discussions through active
co-chairmanship of the format. We highly appreciate
the mediation that the United Nations and its team
provide between Russia and Georgia. We believe
that the restoration of the full-fledged mission on the
territory of Georgia and its regions would redouble the
United Nations contribution to preserving security and
stability in Georgia and the wider region.

We value the United Nations key role and its
cooperation with the EU within the Incident Prevention
and Response Mechanisms. We are confident that this
format provides solid ground for further developing the
cooperation between the United Nations, the OSCE and
the EU on security issues through thejoint participation
of the United Nations and the OSCE in both of the
Mechanisms mentioned. Unfortunately, given certain
obstacles, the Incident Prevention and Response
Mechanism in Gali has been deadlocked since April
2012, but we are confident that our common diplomatic
efforts will be successful in resuming this Mechanism.

Regional organizations play an important role
in the development of regional cooperation, conflict
prevention, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that context, we deem the United Nations continuous
support to be vital in assisting regional organizations
in facilitating and solidifying the process of regional
sustainability.

