Mrs. Mendili (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at
the outset to express our deep appreciation for the
invitation to the secretariat of the Arab Maghreb Union
to participate in today's Security Council meeting, held
under the presidency of Morocco, which is one of the
founding States of the Union. I take this opportunity to
note Morocco's intensive efforts to maintain peace and
security in the world. I am honoured to express our deep
appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
ongoing efforts to lay firm foundations for security in
the Sahelo-Saharan region. I would also like to express
our good wishes to Mr. Romano Prodi, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. We wish him
every success in his efforts to promote security and
stability in the region.

This meeting is being held under exceptional
and sensitive circumstances, because the various
developments in the Sahel and the Sahara, which
constitute a security belt for the Maghreb and Africa
as a whole, are a great challenge. That is especially true
of the crisis in Mali and the deep repercussions thereof,
which are no longer limited to the West African States
but are spreading throughout Africa, in terms both of
security and stability and of development.

The strategic location of the Union States for Africa
and Europe, and their ties to the Sahel and the Sahara at
the geographic and cultural levels, make us well aware of
the historical importance and dangerous repercussions
of any developments in that region and the threat they

pose to security. That is confirmed by the transnational
and transcontinental challenges we face. It comes as no
surprise that armed violence has erupted at a sensitive
time when economic, environmental and food security
crises are rampant worldwide. Events have proven that
the armed groups and rebel movements involved are
multidimensional and pose a common threat to our
area.

The Al-Qaida network, which is rampant in those
States, recruits the youth of the Maghreb area into its
ranks, and it is clear that our collective responsibility
today lies in refuting the reference points and conceptual
framework of those groups by immunizing our youth
with a correct concept of our civilization, history and
religion, especially since the countries of the Arab
Maghreb and those of the Sahel and the Sahara have
for centuries been linked by a culture that has spread
the values of Islam and the principle of tolerance - a
foundation of our religion.

The developments in our region and the
repercussions of certain events have made the area an
easy channel for drug and human trafficking. They have
also opened new networks and routes for smuggling
arms and other dangerous materials and made it easy to
cross international borders, which are difficult to fully
monitor. The best evidence of that is the huge quantity
of arms that have been smuggled from nearby areas, the
consequences of which could shake the very foundation
of all that has been achieved so far in establishing
democratic systems of governance. That calls for a
firm stance and systematic behaviour that is based on
our common interest in further coordination in order
to promote security, stability and development in our
societies.

We support and express our deep appreciation
for United Nations efforts to establish security and
stability in Mali through a political approach. However,
we believe that it might also be very useful to support
those efforts through campaigns to collect the weapons
that are so plentiful in the area, in cooperation with
relevant United Nations organizations.

There are strong and reciprocal ties among
armed groups, criminal groups, terrorist groups and
organized crime, including the trafficking of drugs,
arms and human beings, as well as illegal immigration
and money-laundering. All of those threaten the
security of the Maghreb area as well as its African and
Mediterranean environment. That was the conclusion
reached by the Arab Maghreb Union's foreign ministers
in a ministerial meeting that was organized to discuss
the security issue. The ministers stressed the need to
intensify efforts within the framework of common
responsibility at the bilateral, Maghreb, regional and
international levels in order to counter all threats and
dangers that could destabilize the Maghreb area. They
emphasized that this fight will be successful only
if it adopts a preventive, integrated and coordinated
approach that is part of a comprehensive strategy.

Given the magnitude of the threat and the pooling
of efforts among the various cells of Al-Qaida and other
criminal organizations, we have no choice but to bolster
security cooperation between the Arab Maghreb Union
and the Economic Community of West African States,
which would help to eliminate the causes of instability
and tension, with tremendous benefit to the Maghreb
and African States.

The international community must establish a new
reality based on common interests and an awareness
that our destiny is shared. It must be approached through
constructive cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and international organizations in support
of strategic policy- and decision-makers and in order
to enhance cooperation in border management and risk
analysis. We must also work on further coordination to
oppose and cut off the sources for terrorism funding
by focusing on human security and enhancing aid to
promote sustainable development.

Enhancing regional cooperation and coordination
in order to arrive at effective mechanisms and find a
common position would help us to confront the root
causes of the problems we are facing now. Our sole
purpose must be to create peace, development and
security.

