Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful to Mr. Kalomoh for having introduced this
very interesting report from the Secretary-General
(S/2004/52), on which I would like to make a few brief
comments.

Regarding the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the progress made in the peace
process since the Security Council mission is
encouraging. Nonetheless, it is essential that the
transitional authorities make progress without delay in
key areas such as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants. They must also
restructure the armed forces and undertake judiciary
reform in order to put an end to impunity. All of this,
of course, is with a view to holding free and
democratic elections in June of next year.

With regard to Burundi, we welcome the progress
made in recent months. We believe that the time has
come to apply, without delay, the process of
demobilization and disarmament and to tackle the
restructuring of the armed forces. It is equally
important that the necessary measures be taken for the
establishment of the truth and reconciliation
commission.

In connection with the future international
conference on the Great Lakes region, we are pleased
to note that during the meeting held in Addis Ababa,
decisions were taken on participation in that
conference and that progress is being made in
clarifying its objectives, desired results and timetable.
We thus encourage the participants in that process to
continue their work, including the establishment of
national preparatory committees by all participating
States and the convening, as soon as possible, of an
initial regional meeting of these committees, which
will make it possible to further the preparations for the
conference. Convening that conference and improving
bilateral relations between countries of the region are
positive initiatives that promote confidence-building
measures and cooperation and strengthen the dynamic
of peace being consolidated in the region.

