Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank the Council presidency for offering us this
opportunity to revisit the crucial issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his commitment to the subject
and greatly appreciate his report (S/2007/643). I should
also like to thank Mr. John Holmes for the detailed
briefing that he has just given us.

Since our last debate on this subject, on 22 June
2007 (see S/PV.5703), the Council has acted in
response to a number of specific situations in which the
issue of protecting civilians was key. By virtue of our
resolution 1769 (2007), the hybrid force in Darfur has
a mandate to protect civilians and to facilitate the work
of humanitarian workers. It must continue to be fully
deployed. Likewise, under our resolution 1778 (2007),
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad has a mandate of protection,
together with the European Union. In both cases, the
protection mandates are placed under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

The Council remains seized of other situations
requiring the protection of civilians, ranging from
Somalia to Iraq and from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to Afghanistan. Incidentally, I should like to
confirm here the French decision - and its
implementation - to accompany World Food
Programme convoys to the coasts of Somalia, effective
as of yesterday.

In keeping with Article 99 of the Charter, the
Secretary-General has always brought to our attention
the most serious situations of violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights.
We are grateful to him for his initiative to further
strengthen the Council's early warning mechanism,
based on paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) of the
2005 World Summit. We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Francis Deng as Special Adviser for the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities, since he can act,
alongside the Secretary-General, as a focal point for
the protection of civilians. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's intention to appoint a Special
Adviser for the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Ed Luck.
Indeed, 20 years after the emergence of the concept, at
the initiative of France, the time had come for concrete
and full implementation, fulfilling the hopes of people
in distress.

The Secretary-General's report contains specific
proposals that should enable the Council to act more
effectively. I should like to highlight some of them.

Regarding action one, related to the conduct of
hostilities, the Council must always remember that
respect for international humanitarian law is mandatory
for all, including non-governmental forces and private
security firms, in all circumstances. Among the most
important principles of international humanitarian law
are those of distinction and proportionality. We share
the Secretary-General's concern at the erosion of
respect for those principles.

We also believe that there can be no lasting or
preventive protection of civilians in a context of
impunity. France thus reaffirms its support for the
activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
recalls in particular that the Council has asked the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the ICC,
on the basis of resolution 1593 (2005). As recalled in
the report, the Court's arrest warrants must be
executed.

Finally, we fully share the Secretary-General's
view that, in the conduct of hostilities, the parties to a
conflict cannot ignore the collateral effect of certain
weapons that they use. We support the recommendation
concerning the development of a legally binding
instrument prohibiting the production, use, stockpiling
and transfer of cluster munitions.

With regard to action two, related to sexual
violence, we have had several opportunities to express
our deep concern - recently, during the Council's
debate on 23 October (see S/PV.5766) and during the
Third Committee's adoption of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States, entitled "Elimination
of rape and other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations," of which my country was a sponsor. In the
spirit of the presidential statement adopted by the
Council on 23 October (S/PRST/2007/40), France
supports the Secretariat in its intention to be as
accurate as possible in reporting to us on possible cases
of sexual violence.

Action three, concerning humanitarian access, is
of particular importance to France. In 1988 and 1990,
we submitted the first two resolutions to the General
Assembly dealing with access to victims and the
establishment of humanitarian corridors. The free
access of humanitarian personnel to civilians in need is
a key requirement set out by the Council in its
resolution 1674 (2006). The Council must be fully
informed about obstacles to humanitarian assistance

and, on the other hand - as our Chinese colleague
mentioned - about excesses or offences that could be
committed by unscrupulous humanitarian

organizations. In that connection, my country is
pleased that Mr. Holmes reports regularly to the
Council on the issue of access, both verbally, through
briefings to the Council twice a year, and in written
form, through an annex to his report.

The Secretary-General has welcomed the
Council's action against the scourge of child soldiers
and in general against the situation of children in
armed conflicts. The success of that action is based on
the detailed information transmitted to the Council by
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. It
is also based on the consideration of that information
by a working group that France has the honour to chair
and the possibility that it will report to the Council and
propose concrete measures.

Finally, through action five, the Secretary-
General proposes the establishment of a Security
Council working group on the protection of civilians.
France supports that proposal, which we understand
will take the form of an expert group. We are pleased
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations have begun a joint study to examine the
effects on the ground of the protection mandates given
to peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, I should like once again to express
to the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-
General our admiration and respect for their
commitment on the ground and their will to strengthen
the Council's means of action. We will carry out our
responsibilities.

