Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Since
this is the final formal meeting ofthe Council under your
stewardship, Mr. President, I thank you and would like
to heartily congratulate you, on behalf of my delegation,
on the excellent work you have done this month. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/539), and his Special Representative, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his detailed briefing.

This Wednesday, Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay, Visited the
United Nations Mission in Colombia and the tripartite
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism. The visit took
place at a historic moment for Colombia, which only
the day before had announced the final laying down
of arms of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP). On that
occasion, Minister Nin Novoa brought a message from
the Government of Uruguay conveying its full support
and readiness to collaborate with the Colombia peace
process, as well as its commitment to the new mandate
requested by the Government of Colombia and the
FARC-EP, which the Council will consider shortly.

We stress that the progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement
demonstrates once again the firm commitment of the
parties to the peace process. We have on many occasions
stated, and once again reiterate, that the people of
Colombia have shown the world through actions that
giving peace a chance is worth it. Their leaders have
staked their entire civic and political capital in opting
for peace. True courage means fighting for peace, not
making war.

The FARC-EP has made its final contribution by
laying down its arms by the end of May, pursuant to the
road map. For a combatant, laying down arms has great
significance, because he ceases to be what he once was
for a long period and exposes himself, as Mr. Arnault
rightly pointed out, to a period of uncertainty in which
he is no longer who he was and is not yet who he will be.
Consequently, a great deal of courage is required, and
we salute them. The laying down of arms made possible
the heartfelt ceremony that Mr. Arnault referenced,
which signalled the closure ofa key stage of the Havana
accords and opened a new chapter towards the future.
As Jean also mentioned, it still remains for explosives
to be removed from arms caches. However, that task is
already under say and will be carried out according to

the timetable.

The Colombian Government has demonstrated its
commitment to the implementation of the Agreement,
using the fast-track procedure to adopt important laws
in order to accelerate the process, as well as adopting
numerous decrees related, inter alia, to the economic
and social development of areas affected by the conflict,
the socioeconomic reintegration of FARC-EP members
and the reintegration of children.

The United Nations Mission in Colombia, for its
part, has carried out many tasks of a different nature,
while playing a fundamental role in the success of the
various implementation stages of the Agreement that,
until now, had been easily circumvented. That confirms
that the Security Council acted wisely in establishing
the current Mission in Colombia. In this new phase, we
believe that it must continue to act in the same manner.

Given the remaining difficulties in the
implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and
understandable concerns, we consider that the
request made by the President of the Republic of
Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos Calderon, on behalf
of the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP,
that a second political mission of the United Nations
be established before 10 July - with a focus on the
political and socioeconomic reintegration of the
FARC-EP and on the implementation of personal and
collective security measures for its members, as well as
for integral security and protection programmes for the
communities and organizations in the territories.

We also consider the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to be timely and are encouraged by
the information that the current Mission in Colombia
would be able to initiate some tasks of the second
mandate, on a provisional basis, in response to the
request of the parties.

That is why we fully support the request of the
Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP to establish
a second political mission of the United Nations in
Colombia, with a mandate that is consistent with the
request, and fully endorse the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.

