Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank the President
for convening this debate on an important matter. I
would also like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Ms. Yoka Brandt and Mr. Forest Whitaker
for their enlightening briefings. I am also grateful for
the touching briefing by Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana,
which deserves our particular appreciation. Let me
also acknowledge the commitment in this regard of
Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn of the Grand Duchy
of Luxembourg.

Brazil reiterates its support for the initiative of
the Office of the Special Representative to launch the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign.

Protecting children from the scourge of war is not
just a legal requirement or a humanitarian obligation. It
is, above all, a universal moral imperative - a powerful
call that should unite humankind in an effort to build a
better and more hopeful tomorrow.

Over the years, the Security Council has enhanced
its institutional framework on children and armed
conflict, including instruments such as the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and the Working Group. That
positive trend continues, as confirmed by the recent
release of a Guidance Note on Attacks against Schools
and Hospitals, as per resolution 1998 (2011). We are
confident that this document will strengthen awareness
and promote dialogue with concerned parties in order to
prevent attacks on educational and health institutions.

When examining the 23 cases currently under the
mandate of the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, we should not lose sight of the
essential distinction between situations of armed
conflict, on the one hand, and those related to domestic
law enforcement, on the other, which are two very
different categories, each posing specific political and
legal challenges.

For situations of armed conflict that fall within
the purview of the Security Council, international
humanitarian law is clear on the responsibility of all
the parties to protect civilians, including children.
Both children of war and child soldiers are particularly
vulnerable groups and, as such, need to be afforded
specific protection. Furthermore, efforts should always
be focused on promoting diplomatic initiatives aimed
at ceasing hostilities and fostering sustainable peace,
so as to minimize the impact of conflicts on civilians
in general. Accountability must also be upheld. The
International Criminal Court has a role to play not
only in the investigation and prosecution of individuals
accused of serious crimes under the Rome Statute, but
also in providing reparation to victims.

In situations of law enforcement where there is
no armed conflict, and where therefore international
humanitarian law does not apply, our priority should
be to afford protection to children and other vulnerable
groups in accordance with the even higher standards
established by international human rights law. That
matter deals directly with domestic laws of States,
and therefore falls outside the mandate of the Security
Council. Our actions should be guided by the various
instruments and mechanisms already created to protect
and promote human rights.

As the annual report of the Secretary-General
highlights (S/2014/339), armed conflicts around the
world still affect children in a disproportionate way.
While some situations have improved, the overall
picture remains dire.

Protracted hostilities in Syria have left countless
numbers of children vulnerable to forced displacement,
military recruitment, illegal detention and other abuses.
Brazil has contributed to the No Lost Generation
strategy launched by the United Nations to support
Syrian children by expanding their access to education
and psycho-social support, strengthening social
cohesion and promoting peacebuilding efforts.

In Iraq, hundreds of minors are killed every year and
innumerable others have had their childhood disrupted
by a spiral of violence whose origin can be traced to
2003. That trend will doubtlessly be exacerbated by
the rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
other extremist groups.

The recent conflict in Gaza, where an estimated 500
Palestinian children lost their lives and another 3,000
were injured due to the disproportionate use of force
by the occupying Power, is yet another grim reminder
of the unacceptable toll paid by innocent civilians in
the State of Palestine. As a member of the Executive
Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Hanan
Ashrawi noted last week at the United Nations that

"All children of Gaza are suffering, are in a state of
trauma. And it is not post-traumatic stress; it is an
ongoing trauma."

The international community should consider how
social and economic circumstances may impact the
safety and welfare of children in armed conflict. While
it would be erroneous to believe in an automatic chain
of causality between poverty and violence, promoting
access to education, social inclusion, food security and
a healthy environment could lessen the risk of abuses
against children in many circumstances.

We are concerned by the contradiction between
the international consensus on the need to promote the
protection and the welfare of children, especially those
affected by armed conflict, and the regrettable fact
that developed countries seem to continuously work
to reduce the United Nations budget for development
activities. Any consistent commitment to save children
from the tragedies of conflict will be undermined if
United Nations programmes and agencies dedicated to
promoting development are the preferential victims of
budgetary cuts.

Brazil believes in the power of sports, arts and
cultural activities in this field. An innovative example is
the "Capoeira for Peace" programme in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, launched last month by Brazil,
the United Nations Children's Fund and civil society
organizations. The initiative will enable 1,200 children
formerly associated with armed groups to practice
capoeira - a dance-like form of martial arts inherited
by Brazil from Africa - as a way to offer them an
activity that fosters discipline and promotes group
interaction and cooperation, thus facilitating their
social reintegration in the province of North Kivu.

Let us again recall that the protection of civilians,
including children, should be carried out in a
non-selective manner. Children in Juba, in Bangui,
in Aleppo, in Goma and in Rafah deserve the same
concern, solidarity and engagement on our part. In
the same vein, children, as a vulnerable segment of
society, are often one of the first victims of economic
sanctions, as those measures negatively impact and
frequently compromise their education, health and
living conditions.

That is why investments in diplomacy, conflict
prevention, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
economic and social development are always the best
choice. They not only bring us closer to sparing children
from war, they also provide those same children with
a telling example of how to resolve disputes through
dialogue, not through coercion.

To conclude, let me emphasize that Brazil will
remain engaged with the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Working Group and the United Nations
system, as well as with our bilateral partners, in order
to shield children from violent conflict worldwide,
while striving to ensure better living conditions for
future generations.

