Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I should like to join previous speakers in
expressing our appreciation to you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting, and also to Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno and to Director-General Costa for
their briefings this morning.

More than a year and a half after the collapse of
the Taliban, Afghanistan still languishes in a strange
limbo between war and peace. Although the ouster of
the Taliban and of Al Qaeda from power and the
establishment of the Interim Authority - as well as its
commendable and important achievements - have
been encouraging and a source of relief for the
Afghans, for the region and for the international
community as a whole, the country has yet to find itself
on an irreversible path towards stability and normalcy.
The authority of the central Government has yet to
spread throughout Afghanistan. A lack of security
across the country - including in the capital - is still
an underlying problem. The recent suicide bomb attack
on German troops in Kabul, which regrettably killed
four soldiers, was only the latest in a series. Continuing
security problems are especially damaging because the
drafting and approval of a new constitution and the
holding of general elections, laid out by the Bonn
Agreement, should be completed by next June. Such
problems have also discouraged domestic and foreign
investment, thus slowing down the country's economic
regeneration.

The effect of persistent insecurity, coupled with a
lack of sufficient funds for reconstruction, has created
a negative trend in Afghanistan. To reverse that trend, a
sharp increase in international assistance is needed,
especially with regard to empowering the new Afghan
army, which still numbers only about 4,000 to 5,000
troops stationed mostly around Kabul - far short of
the 70,000 or more projected. Consequently, the
dependence of the central Government on local
commanders to keep order has thus far come at the
expense of central authority and lies at the root of a
number of problems.

The Afghan people and their neighbours - who
incurred enormous losses for more than two decades as
a result of lawlessness and instability in Afghanistan -
expect the international community not to shrink from
its commitments to the Afghans. To do otherwise
would amount to abandoning Afghanistan to chaos,
leaving the country wide open for the Taliban and
Osama bin Laden to move back in and to turn it once
again into a base for their terrorist operations.

Already, evidence of such a surge of activity in
Afghanistan is abundant: the Taliban, Al Qaeda and
Hekmatyar's group have reorganized. In the past two
weeks, they have carried out 20 operations against the
security forces and people loyal to the Government,
using more lethal and sophisticated devices and
explosives. While they are more concentrated in the
eastern provinces, they are increasingly targeting areas
in central Afghanistan. Their increasingly centralized
and visible leadership - including previous as well as
new, emerging leaders - is more outspoken and active
in talking to the media, inciting the Afghans to oppose
the central Government. And the list goes on.

My country, as one of Afghanistan's neighbours,
is particularly concerned about the continued rise in
opium production in Afghanistan. Despite the
commendable efforts of President Karzai and his
Administration, as well as those of the United Nations
system, Afghanistan continues to be the main centre of
illicit opium production in the world, and, as the
Secretary-General asserted in his latest report
(8/2003/333), poppy cultivation and the production and
trafficking in drugs remain major national and
international concerns.

Undoubtedly, insecurity and drug trafficking in
Afghanistan are mutually reinforcing, and both
contribute in turn to terrorism and other forms of
transnational crime. Across the globe, the lines
between international organized crime and global
terrorism have become impossibly blurred, and the
links between them have grown in the past decade. The
recognition of this reality should compel Governments
to begin revamping their strategy for the war on both
terrorism and drug trafficking.

We support the idea of promoting, under United
Nations auspices, a comprehensive anti-drug strategy
based on close cooperation between the parties
concerned and the Afghan Transitional Administration.
Meanwhile, we believe that such a comprehensive
strategy should be all-encompassing, bringing all
actors and interested parties - including civil society
and Governments - from source, transit and
destination countries together. It should also aim at
addressing all aspects of the problem, including opium
cultivation, drug processing, trafficking and abuse.

The problem resides as much on the supply side
as on the demand side. Insecurity in Afghanistan,
which I referred to earlier, and the collapse of the
economic infrastructure in that country, giving rise to
widespread unemployment and lack of economic
activities, are among the main problems that should be
addressed on the supply side. Thus, Afghan
reconstruction should get effectively under way. Crop
substitution requires a credit system. Afghan drug law
enforcement should be trained, equipped and financed.
These are some of the measures that are required on the
supply side. Obviously, the Afghan Administration, as
a newly constituted entity, simply cannot single-
handedly carry out all these measures and thus requires
wide-ranging assistance.

Combating drug trafficking requires assisting the
transit countries so as to enable them to build the
necessary capacity to intercept narcotic shipments.
They need assistance in a variety of areas, such as
information and intelligence sharing, and new detecting
and communication methods and technologies. And
there should be no doubt that addressing the problem at
the source and in transit countries is much cheaper for
the destination countries.

However, it is obvious that, without successful
efforts on the demand side with a view to considerably
reducing demand, the fight against traffickers cannot
come to fruition. As long as the prospect of huge
windfalls persists, it will continue to be very difficult
to put an end to the deadly business of drug trafficking.
Undoubtedly, the possible decrease in supply as a result
of actions in the source and transit countries leads only
to an increase in the price of drugs, thus creating
stronger motivation for growers and traffickers.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a neighbour of
Afghanistan, is the primary transit route for narcotics
to the West and, at the same time, has itself become a
destination country. Therefore, we have always
attached paramount importance to fighting drug
trafficking and urged the international community to
join hands in this endeavour. As recognized in the
latest report of the Secretary-General, Iran addresses
the problem at the source by providing resources for
labour-intensive public works and infrastructure
projects in Afghanistan. Moreover, we have provided
assistance to the Afghan Government in a variety of
ways, including investing in crop substitution, training
Afghan law enforcement officers in Iran, training and
equipping Afghan law enforcement offices in five
Afghan provinces, and building 25 sentry posts for the
Afghan Government. According to our estimates, the
total value of Iran's contribution to various projects for
the reconstruction of Afghanistan exceeded $68 million
as of March 2003.

My country has paid a very heavy human and
material toll in its fight against drug trafficking. As a
result, Iran has always had by far the largest number of
overall global drug seizures. And as Iran is a
destination country, its agencies are implementing
various initiatives to tackle drug abuse. The
international community can always count on our
readiness to effectively contribute to the global combat
against traffic in narcotics.

