Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2417
(2018), the first to recognize the clear link between
armed conflict and hunger. We thank the Netherlands,
Kuwait, Sweden and Cote d'Ivoire for their work.

Millions of civilians in situations of armed conflict
continue to suffer alarming levels of hunger caused
overwhelmingly by political and military action.
The Council's unanimous adoption of this text today
underlines its belief that starvation is not something
that parties to conflict are powerless to prevent, and
signals our shared determination to take action. Today's
resolution calls on parties to armed conflict to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law and to refrain from using starvation as a method of
warfare. Its relevant obligations relate to humanitarian
access, the protection of infrastructure critical to
providing food to civilians, and the importance of
refraining from attacking, destroying, removing or
rendering useless objects that are essential to the
survival of civilian populations.

We know that conflict is the main contributor
to hunger in South Sudan, for instance. In February
2017, famine was declared in Unity state, where some
100,000 people faced starvation. The declaration led
to an escalated humanitarian response in the affected
areas, and the famine status was lifted in June 2017.
Sadly, that situation has since deteriorated. In January
1 million people were already severely food insecure,
a 40 per cent increase compared with the same time
last year. United Nations agencies say that the food-
security outlook in South Sudan has never been as dire
as it is now. Nearly two thirds of the population - more
than 7 million people - will need food aid to stave
off starvation in the May-to-July lean season, which
corresponds to the hiatus between the depletion of
food stocks and the next harvest. The lesson is clear:
humanitarian aid can only ever be a sticking plaster.
The solutions are political. In today's resolution, the
Security Council calls on the Secretary-General to
provide it with early warning about conflict-related
famine and food-insecurity conditions. In that regard,
we look forward to more regular reporting on conditions
within the context of country-specific situations.

Today the Security Council has been clear in
denouncing the use of hunger as a tool of war and
in calling on all parties to conflicts to recall their
obligations to the most vulnerable. We look forward to
working with the other members of the Council on this
vital issue.

