Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting. We also thank Assistant Secretary-
General Zouev for his briefing.

In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
international community, progress has been made in
international mine action. The harrowing problems of
landmines have been mitigated in some countries and
regions. Last year, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2365 (2017), fully demonstrating the
priority that the international community attaches to
mine action.

China welcomes the Secretary-General's report
to the Security Council on a comprehensive approach
to mine action (S/2018/623). We also commend the
efforts of the United Nations to address the threat of
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), and encourage the United
Nations to continue to play a major role in that regard.
We believe that the Organization's efforts in this area
are of great importance to realizing the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030 and are also in line
with the concept of a community of shared future for
mankind that China has been advocating.

At present, dozens of countries throughout the
world are facing the threat of landmines and other
explosives. In certain countries and regions, local
wars and armed conflicts have led to more suffering
caused by landmines, while IEDs have already become
a tool for terrorists and extremists to spread terror and
Violence in recent years. Strengthening international
assistance and cooperation in mine action will help to
greatly reduce the threat posed by landmines and other
explosives to civilian lives and property, safeguard
peacekeeping missions and realize the SDGs.

China maintains that to strengthen international
assistance and cooperation in mine action and to
effectively mitigate humanitarian concerns related
to landmines and other explosives, the international
community should focus on the following four points.
First, it is important to respect the differences among
countries with regard to security environments and
military strength by addressing the humanitarian
concerns and legitimate national military and security
needs in a balanced fashion. Secondly, it is imperative
to fully take into consideration the national conditions
and needs of landmine-affected countries and to
provide them with assistance and cooperation based on
the realities on the ground. Thirdly, we must build the
capacities of mine-affected countries in order to enable
them to transition from reliance on external assistance
to self-reliance, for the most part. Fourthly, it is crucial
to focus on improving the practical results of demining
assistance and cooperation and to continue to find new
avenues for international cooperation.
China has always paid great attention to the
humanitarian concerns associated with landmines. As a
past victim, we feel very strongly about the hardships of
mine-affected countries. China has actively supported
international legal instruments, including the Geneva
Conventions and the Convention on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively
Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (CCW),
as well as resolution 2365 (2017). China is a high
contracting party to the CCW and its five Additional
Protocols. We faithfully fulfil our obligations under
those instruments.

China has also actively participated as an observer
in the Convention on Cluster Munitions and the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines
and on Their Destruction. China is firmly committed
to the cause of international humanitarian demining
assistance. China has offered demining assistance
to more than 40 countries in Asia, Africa and Latin
America by providing demining equipment and
personnel training.

In September 2015, at the seventieth session of
the General Assembly, Chinese President Xi Jinping
announced at the Leaders' Summit on Peacekeeping
that China would launch 10 demining assistance
programmes within the next five years. All of those
programmes have been implemented ahead of schedule.
As we speak, China is hosting a humanitarian demining
training workshop for Laos in Nanjing, China. In the
second half of the year, we plan to train 80 Cambodian
deminers in China. We will also donate humanitarian
demining supplies to those two countries.

China attaches great importance to humanitarian
concerns arising from the abuse of IEDs by non-State
actors. We support efforts to find a reasonable and
viable solution within the CCW framework. China
strictly administers the production, sales, procurement,
import and export, storage and transport of explosives
through a series of laws and regulations. As an active
participant in the development of the United Nations
IED-disposal standards, China, with the assistance of
the United Nations Mine Action Service, has co-chaired
the Working Group with Belgium and has drafted some
of its important chapters. We hope that the standards
will help United Nations peacekeeping operations to
improve their skills and ability to dispose of IEDs and
that it will be used voluntarily by the international
community as a reference.
As always, China stands ready to fulfil its
international obligations and provide assistance to the
best of its ability as people in mine-affected countries
and regions strive to rebuild their homes. We join the
international community in making our contribution
to addressing the humanitarian concerns arising from
landmines and other explosive devices.

