Mr. Momem (Bangladesh): The Bangladesh
delegation joins others in thanking your presidency,
Madam, for organizing this open debate and for sharing
a concise and informative concept note (S/2016/662, annex). We appreciate the compelling statements
made by the Secretary-General and the other briefers
this morning.

In Bangladesh we often come across the iconic
poster for the first-ever humanitarian concert, organized
by the late George Harrison and Ravi Shankar here
in New York during our liberation war in 1971. The
poster showed a sepia-tinged image of a refugee child
blankly staring at a starvation-like situation. That sole
image spoke volumes about the countless children who
perished during the war due to armed attacks, torture,
displacement, starvation, disease, disappearance and
abandonment. We have yet to reconcile as a nation
with many of these unaccounted chapters of our
independence struggle.

Children continue to be disproportionately affected
by armed conflicts around the world. The recent, belated
news about children faced with a famine-like situation
in areas under the sway of Boko Haram in Central Africa
demonstrates the limits of our global reach. The sight
of children being killed in despicable terrorist attacks
in Peshawar or Nice defies our faith in human sanity.
The abduction, enslavement and maiming of children,
and using them as human shields or suicide bombers
by terrorist and armed groups, are just abhorrent,
to say the least. The images of hapless children on
boats or swimming ashore in the Mediterranean Sea
or the Andaman Sea last year brought home to us the
horrifying realities of protracted armed conflicts and
the systematic purge of communities for how they look
or who they pray to.

Yet, as the Secretary-General's report (S/2016/360)
reveals, there are some grounds for solace. The
Children, Not Soldiers campaign is gaining steady
momentum, including in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as we just heard. United Nations-sponsored
action plans to remove children from combat operations,
often with the support of non-State armed groups, are
mostly going in the right direction. Most important,
the commitment to disarm children is often paving the
way for further inclusive dialogues among parties to
conflict. On all those fronts, we appreciate the diligent
work of the Secretary-General's Special Representative
on Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougi,
and her team.

The growing number of children displaced due
to conflicts poses a real test for our humanitarian
principles. In keeping with our pledge to leave no one
behind, we must commit to the protection and well-
being of these children as a shared responsibility. The
global compacts we envisage for refugee protection
and safe, regular and orderly migration must place the
cause of children, including unaccompanied minors
in mixed migratory movements, at the heart of their
respective agendas.

The lurking shadow of violent extremism and
terrorism that haunts our children's lives everywhere
must not be allowed to be the new normal. The inherent
resilience of families and communities needs to be
bolstered in order to keep our children safe and engaged.
We must harness our resources to raise our children
as truly global citizens, with respect for tolerance,
pluralism and critical thinking embedded in them. An
enlightened and emancipated human being is perhaps
our best bet against the forces of destruction.

We draw hope from the growing awareness
demonstrated by various State and non-State actors
about relieving children of armed training and
operations. We owe much of those gains to the work
of UNICEF and a number of grass-roots organizations
committed to their cause. Civil society actors with
proven expertise must be encouraged to work in
close partnership with national and local authorities
to strengthen and scale up capacity for rehabilitation,
reintegration, counselling, legal aid, physiotherapy and
psychosocial support for children affected by armed
conflict and violent extremism.

We stand in principle behind the call for ending
targeted attacks against schools, hospitals and other
critical infrastructure for children. The growing
sensitization about avoiding school premises for
stationing armed forces, including peacekeepers, is
indeed positive. As a troop- and police-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Bangladesh remains committed to abide by those
broadly applicable norms and ensure protection of
children within the broader mandates for the protection
of civilians. In our regional context, we remain available
to advance dialogues on these issues through sharing of
ideas and good practices.

We recognize the challenge of evidence-based and
credible monitoring, analysis and reporting of child
rights violations, especially during armed conflicts.
The Secretary-General's annual report, along with its
annexes, is indeed a powerful tool for raising global
consciousness about grave violations of child rights
and for triggering remedial responses. It is therefore
crucial that the report aim at putting specific situations
in their right perspectives in order to reach informed
conclusions about the perpetrators and the seriousness
of the alleged violations.

In Bangladesh, our national children policy and
corresponding legal measures prohibit the recruitment
and use of children for armed conflicts. In memory of
the millions of children we lost during our liberation
war, we wish to remain engaged with any concrete
initiative in future to alleviate the situation of children
affected by armed conflict and violent extremism.

