Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his comprehensive briefing. I would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their valuable
statements.

The Arab world has been undergoing unprecedented
transformation during the past two years. The
democratic aspirations of people in several countries are
being addressed through national political processes.
However, it is regrettable that the Palestinian question
and the related Arab-Israeli issues have remained
largely unaddressed and resolved. Also, the Palestinian
application for full membership of the United Nations,
submitted more than a year ago, has not evinced any
positive action from the Security Council despite the
overwhelming support of States Members.

The issue of Palestine is facing the real danger of
getting relegated to the sidelines. The current period
of stalemate in the Middle East peace process is
perhaps one of the longest since the signing of the Oslo
Accords 19 years ago. The efforts of the Quartet can
at best be described as feeble and have failed to break
the stalemate. If the current situation continues, the
international community will risk destabilization in the
region.

We therefore call for serious efforts to arrest the
trend. If there is one decision that can help revive the
peace process, it is an end to settlement activity in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The settlement
activity in the West Bank and East Jerusalem is
creating a new reality on the ground and threatens
the very premise of a two-State solution. Settlements,
roadblocks and the related infrastructure of occupation
have also exacerbated the humanitarian problems of
the Palestinian people and adversely affect the normal
functioning of Palestinian State institutions. We join
others in urging Israel to stop its settlement policy
without further delay.

The blockade of Gaza has entered its sixth year
and is causing severe hardship to the population.
The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate,
and essential services, economic activities and
infrastructure development have been disrupted. Israel
should immediately lift the blockade and allow the
resumption of normal socioeconomic activities in Gaza
so that the Gazans can rebuild their lives and reduce
their dependence on external assistance.

The recent measures taken by Israel - including
the transfer of tax revenue, increase in work permits
issued to the Palestinian populations, allowing visits
of Palestinian families to Palestinian prisoners held in
Israeli detention, and so on - are positive. However,
those measures are inadequate to address the magnitude
of the problems and need to be built upon to promote
mutual trust and confidence between the parties. In
that connection, it is important to avoid violence on all
sides and ensure that the legitimate security interests of
all parties are met.

We note the reconciliation process between the
Palestinian factions, which is crucial. We hope that
efforts taken towards the promotion of reconciliation
will bear fruit soon, leading to the formation ofa unity
Government, the holding of elections, the reunification
of Palestinian State institutions, and measures for the
reconstruction and development of Palestinian society.

The financial crisis that the Palestinian Authority
is currently facing is eroding the significant progress
made by the Authority in building State institutions.
There is an urgent need to support the Palestinian
Authority to meet its budgetary shortfalls. In that
regard, we welcome the commitment shown by the
international community at the recently held meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians on
23 September.

On our part, India has continued to support the
Palestinian State-building efforts. President Abbas
visited India in September. During his visit, three
agreements were signed for the establishment of an
information and communications technology centre
of excellence in Palestine, the provision of technical
and vocational educational training equipment and
services for the Palestinian Ministry of Labour, and the
construction and equipping of two secondary schools.
India will also contribution $10 million to Palestine's
budget for this year, as we have done in the two previous
years.

During the visit of President Abbas, India reaffirmed
its firm support for a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living within secure and recognized borders
side by side and at peace with Israel. We strongly
support all efforts towards the realization of that
objective, including Palestine's enhanced status in the
Organization, as announced by President Abbas during
the general debate of the sixty-seventh session of the
General Assembly last month (see A/67/PV.12).

We remain seriously concerned at the deteriorating
situation in Syria. We strongly condemn all violence
and violations of human rights, irrespective of who
their perpetrators are. We also condemn in the strongest
terms the terrorist acts that have been and continue
to be committed in Syria. We call upon all parties to
dissociate themselves from terrorist groups and ensure
that no space is provided for such groups. We urge all
parties to cooperate with Joint Special Representative
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi to resolve the crisis without any
further bloodshed through an inclusive Syrian-led
political process that can meet the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people.

Before I conclude, let me state that, while the
Palestinian question remains at the centre of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, there are other Arab lands under
occupation. A final and comprehensive settlement
of all Arab-Israeli issues is necessary for enduring
peace in the region. India stands ready to play its part
in our collective endeavours to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

