Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Let me echo the
congratulations and best wishes expressed to you, Sir,
on your presidency, along with the thanks expressed to
Ambassador Pleuger.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum members represented at the
United Nations: Australia, Fiji, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country,
New Zealand.

The Pacific Islands Forum group welcomes the
continued progress towards peace and prosperity on
Bougainville. We especially welcome the high level of
weapons destruction and the number of large and
important reconciliation ceremonies held recently,
which is a very positive sign.

We wish to acknowledge the positive role the
United Nations Observer Mission is playing in relation
to this. I should like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General T'urk for his comments this morning and also
to thank him and the staff of the Department of
Political Affairs here in New York for their continued
input and focus on Bougainville.

At the same time, members of our group remain
conscious that there are still many weapons at large in
the community, and we urge all parties to continue
working to remove them.

This is a significant juncture for Bougainville.
Important progress has been made thanks to the hard
work of the Papua New Guinea Government and
Bougainvillean representatives. We welcome, for
example, the recent announcement by Sir Peter Barter
of a Papua New Guinea Government ministerial
committee to promote a proactive Government
approach to Bougainville. More remains to be done, of
course, particularly in the build-up to Bougainville's
elections.

We encourage the Papua New Guinea
Government and Bougainvillean leaders to move ahead
with those preparations as soon as possible to build on
the good faith shown by all parties in fostering
progress in the peace process. Obviously, the
international community remains willing to assist. We
would support the extension of the United Nations
Observer Mission for a limited time to assist with the
preparations, as envisaged in the Bougainville Peace
Agreement. I should like to thank those Council
members who, in their statements this morning, have
also expressed support for an extension of UNOMB's
mandate. We hope that that will be readily agreed upon
in the Council.

The Pacific Islands Forum group has maintained
for some time that Bougainville is ready to move on
from the formal peace process to a new focus on law
and order and economic development. Recent progress
has vindicated that confidence. Of course, the
autonomy envisaged in the Bougainville Peace
Agreement will be sustainable only with appropriate
and affordable institutions, underpinned by economic
growth.

It is important for Bougainvilleans, and the rest
of Papua New Guinea, to know that the international
community remains engaged in their future - again, a
number of other Council members have made the same
point this morning. Regional partners, including
Australia and New Zealand, have been extensively
involved for some time in economic and social
development projects and in capacity-building. The
joint Australia-New Zealand strategy for law and
justice has included the training of new recruits for the
autonomous Bougainville police force - 50 of whom
are expected to graduate and to be deployed to
Bougainville at the end of June - as well as a range of
coordination and infrastructure projects. From New
Zealand's national perspective, we are especially
pleased that, along with support for village courts,
work has started on the third phase of the New Zealand
community policing project.

