Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia; Cyprus, Malta and Turkey; and Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

In the face of continued violence in the Middle
East, it is essential to redouble efforts to achieve a
peaceful and comprehensive political solution to this
conflict. It is clear that this highly volatile situation
will not be resolved via the current mindset in which
the leaders of both parties are now locked. Violence
only breeds more violence. Peace and security will be
achieved only through negotiations that should start as
soon as possible.

The "quartet" of special envoys is meeting
tomorrow, Friday, in Washington, D.C., and days later
at the highest level at the margins of the G-8 summit in
Canada. As a member of the "quartet", the European
Union is currently working towards the soonest
possible convening of an international peace
conference involving not only the parties, but the
international and regional players, and aimed at
achieving concrete results on the political, security and
economic aspects with a well-defined timetable,
providing a credible political perspective and a
definitive settlement of the conflict. In particular, an
immediate resumption of political negotiations and of
cooperation in security matters will be essential, along
with the reconstruction of the infrastructure of the
Palestinian Authority, restoring its governance.
International support for reconstruction and reform, a
negotiating and international follow-up mechanism and
the establishment of a mechanism to observe and
monitor the situation on the ground are equally
essential.

We reiterate the shared vision and final goal of
the international community of two States in the
region- a democratic, viable and independent
Palestine living side by side with Israel within secure
and internationally recognized borders. The political
roadmap is clear and based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002),
the principles of Madrid and Oslo and subsequent
agreements between the parties, as well as on the Arab
League peace initiative.

We are convinced that a full and immediate
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1402
(2002)and 1403 (2002) - in particular, an immediate
cessation of violence, a meaningful ceasefire and the
definitive withdrawal of Israeli troops from all areas
under the control of the Palestinian Authority - are
essential. We deeply regret that these and other
Security Council resolutions on this issue continue to
be utterly ignored or selectively interpreted and
partially implemented.

As it has done for other criminal acts perpetrated
in the past, the European Union condemns the latest
terror attacks in Israel in the strongest possible terms.
Suicide attacks against and killings of Israeli civilians
have continued. These acts are morally repugnant,
contrary to international law and extremely harmful to
the national aspirations of the Palestinian people. We
welcome the fact that President Arafat and the
Palestinian Authority have repeatedly rejected and
condemned these terror attacks. We urge them both, as
legitimate representatives of the Palestinian people, to
make every possible effort to prevent such acts, disrupt
all terrorist networks and undertake more determined
action against terrorism. We underline the need to bring
the perpetrators of these criminal acts to justice.

Israeli forces are moving freely throughout
Palestinian-controlled territory, attacking towns and
arresting and killing suspected militants. Palestinian
cities are besieged and sealed off by the Israeli military
forces. The West Bank is divided into several separate
and disconnected population centres. There seems to be
no distinction between area A and area B. That is
totally unacceptable and constitutes a flagrant violation
of the Oslo Accords and subsequent agreements
between the parties. Israel has a legitimate right to
fight terrorism, but not at the expense of international
law by imposing collective punishment on 3.5 million
Palestinians, who are imprisoned in their own cities
and towns.

Israel must immediately cease these activities and
allow the Palestinian Authority to fulfil its security
commitments and to halt the rapid deterioration of the
Palestinian economy. We view with great concern the
closures established by the Israeli Authorities - which
create separated zones around the major cities in the
West Bank, cutting them off from one another - as
well as other measures to tighten further existing
restrictions on the movement of people and goods. We
call upon Israel to renounce such measures.
Furthermore, the expansion of settlements proceeds
unabated as does the destruction of Palestinian land
and private property. The Palestinian population living
in the Gaza Strip is facing a similar situation. The
European Union considers that all the settlements are
illegal and an obstacle to peace.

The unbearable military pressure on Palestinian
society only aggravates the feelings of frustration,
hopelessness and hatred while failing to achieve long-
term security for Israel. The current restrictions have
already had a devastating effect on the living
conditions of the Palestinians. Additional measures
will further deteriorate the economy, ruining the
Palestinian private sector and seriously hindering any
implementation of reforms.

Israeli military operations since 29 March have
also severely damaged and seriously disrupted the
work of the Palestinian civil administration. As well,
Palestinian security organs and their infrastructure have
suffered considerable damage, including the death or
detention of personnel. This virtual paralysis of
Palestinian security in the West Bank has created an
unpredictable and even more fragmented political
environment in the West Bank, posing an even greater
security risk for Israel. The European Union is also
concerned by reports of unexploded ordnance and
explosive devices left behind after the military
campaign and by the risks they hold for the civilian
population.

There is broad consensus on the urgent need to
re-organize the Palestinian security services in a more
effective and coherent manner. The European Union
welcomes and encourages the discussions under way
on political, security and financial reforms in the
Palestinian Authority. We welcome the new Palestinian
Government and the announcement of elections by
Chairman Arafat and the Palestinian Legislative
Council. In this regard, we call on Israel to foster an
environment conducive to reform, in particular by
easing restrictions on the movement of people and
goods. Ending the violence and the military occupation
will create a climate better suited to organizing and
holding democratic, fair and transparent elections in
the territories. However, we consider completely
counterproductive and unrealistic any attempt to make
the reform of Palestinian institutions a precondition for
resuming political negotiations.

We reiterate our concern at the tragic
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories
exacerbated by the continuing restrictions imposed by
Israel on the freedom of movement of humanitarian
organizations. International agencies and organizations
continue to be subjected to a series of restrictions on
the movement of their personnel, vehicles and supplies.
We note with concern efforts to impose restrictions on
the freedom of movement of diplomatic and consular
representatives by means of security checks. We
consider such practices to be a violation of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

Any effort to assist the Palestinians with
reconstruction and reform or with elections will require
the full and committed cooperation of Israel, in
particular by providing guarantees that the results of
the reconstruction efforts will not be damaged or
destroyed again. In that regard, the European Union
reserves the right to claim reparations in the
appropriate forums.

The European Union affirms its intention to
preserve, strengthen and assist the Palestinian
Authority through efforts to rebuild its infrastructure
and its security and governance capacity, while
supporting reforms and the creation of democratic
institutions.

