Ms. Barker-Manase (Marshall Islands): At the
outset, I would like to recognize the leaders of the small
island developing States (SIDS) who were with us here
today, the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica and
the Finance Minister of Seychelles, and thank them for
their briefings this morning. I also thank the Secretary-
General and you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to organize today's debate. Further, we align ourselves
with the statements delivered by the representative
of Tonga, who spoke on behalf of the Pacific Small
Island Developing States, and by the representative of
Maldives, who spoke on behalf of the Alliance of Small
Island States.

In 1969, responding to the impacts of the nuclear
testing that took place during the period where we were
a United Nations trust territory, the top diplomat of a
major global Power said, "there are only 90,000 people
out there. Who gives a damn?" Forty-five years later,
with the Second World War and the Cold War now
firmly in the past, we approach the Council today as a
sovereign member of the United Nations, and the world
has dramatically changed. However, our concern is that
some of the shades of deep history may still remain. It
is not only our own security that is at stake; the problem
also serves as a barometer of wider global pressure.

As many speakers before me have said, there is
an intrinsic relationship that characterizes countries
with small populations, limited resources and an
overwhelmingly difficult geography. In the case of
the Marshall Islands, 60,000 people populate nearly
2 million square kilometres, an area larger than Mexico.
While international partnerships, including shiprider
agreements and bilateral security arrangements, have
had a strong impact, we nonetheless have only two
national boats with which to patrol our entire nation.
Some of our neighbours in the Pacific have even greater
challenges.

Our baseline condition is State fragility. Many in
the Pacific and elsewhere are uniquely vulnerable to
external shocks, as well as to outside groups and forces
that may seek to offer easy solutions in desperate
moments. While many small island Governments,
including that of the Marshall Islands, are strongly
committed to good governance, democratic principles
and the safeguarding of human rights, there is high
potential for exceptions. With skyrocketing youth
populations and overwhelming unemployment, the
long-term risks are only growing. The cumulative
impact of domestic instability within fragile nations is
a long-term threat to international security.

Our security, as small island and large ocean
nations, cannot be considered apart from the security
of much larger geostrategic interactions. Some may
see our small island nations as strings of pearls, as
though our political alliances, borders and in some
cases significant marine mineral resources were mere
possessions, readily available to the highest bidder or
strongest military force in the context of the growing
rivalries between major Powers.

Many of these issues, which others have also
addressed today and which are outlined in the concept
note (S/2015/543, annex), intensify our fragility and
increase security threats. As a major fishing port,
we have a limited capacity to monitor and address
transnational organized crime, in particular when it
is associated with illegal fishing, an activity that can
net well into the billions of dollars in foreign markets.
As a major flag State, we remain very concerned about
piracy's impact on global trade, and we also have a
clear understanding of the capacity challenges that
small island nations face in addressing and controlling
such activity.

Finally, while it is possible for us to be warned in
a timely manner of imminent hazards, as a low-lying
nation we have simply nowhere else to go. We are a
nation with no higher ground, so narrow that one can
stand in the lagoon and see the ocean on the other
side. The impacts of climate change not only pose
severe challenges to development, they threaten our
land's habitability and raise increasingly problematic
questions about political boundaries. As recent weather
events have shown, nuclear-waste storage structures
from the era of atomic testing are at risk from the rising
waters, an issue that we have raised previously with the
United Nations.

In the 2011 presidential statement S/PRST/201l/15,
the Council expressed its concern that possible security
implications could arise from the loss of territory in
some States caused by sea-level rise, in particular
small, low-lying States, as well as the worry that
climate impacts could, in the long run, aggravate
certain existing threats to international peace and
security. Those should not be seen as empty words. I
am asking the Council to act directly to address the
situation of small, low-lying atoll States through its
formal agenda - we are not helped by its continued
silence, general sympathy or references to multilateral
negotiations that are ill equipped to directly address
this issue as it pertains to low-lying island States.

The Security Council ultimately acts for the whole
Organization, not solely on behalf of narrow interests,
and it has full power to investigate any situation that
could lead to international friction so as to better
understand the possible danger to international peace
and security. The collective math of all the factors that
have been outlined today makes an overwhelming case
for the Council's direct and formal treatment of them.

