Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to welcome Senator Biden. Like all members of
the Council, I am pleased to see him sitting at the table.
We welcome him to the Security Council. He is sitting
in the midst of an Organization that is doing better. We
have a Secretary-General whose exceptional success is
acknowledged by all. We had a Millennium Summit
that charted a course for the future. Reforms are under
way. Senator Biden mentioned the reforms proposed by
the Brahimi Panel. Those reforms are important if we
want peacekeeping operations to be successful. For
that to be possible we need a little money, which means
an increase in the United Nations budget.

We pay tribute to the commitment and generosity
of the United States. I took note of the figure of $3.5
billion that the Senator put forward for next year. He
should know that other countries are also generous.
The 15 countries of the European Union, which, like
the United States, have approximately 29 per cent of
gross national product worldwide, will give $4.5
billion to the United Nations - about $1 billion more
than the United States. We will talk about this issue
more during the course of the day. All of the countries
of the European Union want an agreement - a good
agreement - on the two United Nations budgets. We
will be tackling these negotiations in a constructive
spirit in the conviction that agreement will be possible
next week if everyone around the table demonstrates
flexibility.

I shall now turn to the briefing given by Mr.
Jacques Klein. I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - as well as the associated countries, Cyprus
and Malta, align themselves with this statement.

I should like first of all to thank Mr. Jacques
Klein for his statement, which, as always, was
remarkably precise, well-structured and replete with
instructive ideas for the future. He very usefully

S/PVAZAS

 

supplemented the comments made by the Secretary-
General in his report.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General clearly demonstrated - if there was any need
to do so - the extent to which the active support ofthe
international community is crucial for the
consolidation of the rule of law, the development of
good governance and the strengthening of stability in
South-Eastern Europe.

It is with this in mind that the European Union
has, for 10 years, been providing massive aid to the
countries of the Balkans. If we add up development
assistance, budget financing and humanitarian aid,
between 1991 and 1999, more than $15 billion have
been allocated to these countries by the European
Union and its member States. This figure represents
more than 65 per cent of the total amount allocated by
the international community to South-Eastern Europe.
By comparison, the contribution of the largest non-
European Union donor accounts for less than 3.5 per
cent of the total. That difference is to be expected; it is
natural that the countries of the European Union should
accept to bear the bulk of this burden, as the situation
is of primary concern to them.

The States members of the European Union have
also taken into their territory hundreds of thousands of
refugees driven from their countries by conflicts in the
Balkans. Very large amounts of money were required
to make that hospitality possible.

With regard to military personnel deployed on the
ground, European Union member States supply 60 per
cent of the troops in the Stabilization Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and 63 per cent of the Kosovo Force
troops. Again by way of comparison, personnel
supplied by the State that makes the largest
contribution - aside from the European Union -
account respectively for 21 per cent and 17 per cent of
the total number ofthose troops.

With regard to the civilian police, the Union has
set itself the objective of being in a position, by 2003,
to deploy up to 5,000 police officers in peace
operations throughout the world. I believe that this is a
very important point, and I am stressing it for the
benefit of Senator Biden. One of the weak points of
peacekeeping operations has often been the lack of
police officers. Over the next three years, therefore, the
European Union will be able to provide up to 5,000
police officers.

At this stage, for Bosnia and Herzegovina alone,
as can be seen from the report of the Secretary-General
under consideration today, 625 of the 1,776 members
of the International Police Task Force of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
European Union nationals. This figure accounts for 35
per cent ofthe members ofthe Task Force.

At the political level, the European Union
restated its commitments regarding South-Eastern
Europe at the Zagreb Summit on 24 November. The
final Declaration of the Summit, which was distributed
as an official Security Council document, reaffirms the
European perspective of the countries in the region
participating in the stabilization and association
process launched by the Union. This is true in
particular for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Bosnia and
Herzegovina will need to make the necessary
adjustments in order to benefit fully from all of the
opportunities offered by that stabilization and
association process.

It is clear that the assistance provided by the
international community in support of peace cannot
alone resolve all the problems. It is in the interests of
extremist nationalists to perpetuate a siege mentality
and keep people locked into ethnic division. The yoke
imposed by these men of the past must therefore be
thrown off. During this year, through the ballot box,
the Balkan peoples have made considerable progress
along this path.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the effects of the
democratic changes in the region will be positive, even
if the multi-ethnic parties did not make the expected
breakthrough in the recent general elections. However,
in that country, much effort and determination on the
part of the international community will be required
before the anticipated outcome can be achieved.

In its field, UNMIBH is making an excellent
contribution to this long-term endeavour. The United
Nations Mission has an appropriate mandate. Under the
leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, it is working effectively, in keeping
with the very clear guidelines laid down in advance. I
commend its work, which is totally satisfactory.

Within UNMIBH, the International Police Task
Force is playing an essential role, and doing it very
well. It is responsible in the first place for advising the
local police, developing cooperation of the Bosnian
police with the judicial system and seeing it through its

S/PV.4245

 

transformation into a structure that fully respects
democratic values. This mission is decisive. It
contributes to the process of stabilizing the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole. The confidence
that Bosnian citizens can have in the institutions of
their country will largely depend on its success. We
must therefore ensure that this task can be continued,
without any interruption, until it is completed.

Another important police issue is the
strengthening of the State Border Service. The report
ofthe Secretary-General clearly describes the worrying
increase in human trafficking and the increase in
criminal activities of all kinds in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We must not give up when faced with
this unacceptable situation. Resolute measures are
expected of the Bosnian authorities to end it. In
particular, the presence of State Border Service units
should not be confined to only four points of entry into
the country. Moreover, operations targeted against
mafia networks and known sources of criminal
activities must be stepped up.

Significant progress has been made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but considerable challenges remain. Day
after day, Mr. Jacques Klein and the entire UNMIBH
staff work tirelessly to fulfil their mandate, so that
these challenges can finally be met. I assure them once
again of the European Union's encouragement and
unanimous support in their continuing mission.

