The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Chambas for his useful briefing on the situation
in West Africa and the Sahel. We welcome the progress
he shared with us, in particular the contribution made
by the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) to elections in Benin, Guinea-Bissau,
Nigeria and Senegal, and improvements in gender
equality in the region. However, we are concerned
about the fact that insecurity and the humanitarian
situation have deteriorated in some countries. The
actions of terrorist groups, transnational organized
crime, clashes over the control of natural resources and
inadequate State presence are ever-present challenges,
in particular in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin
region. In that regard, we would like to highlight the
work of UNOWAS in three main areas.

First, in the area of conflict prevention, the good
offices of and preventive diplomacy demonstrated
by UNOWAS will be vital in the upcoming electoral
processes in the region, in particular through support
for inclusive dialogue and the strengthening of national
capacities in order to allow for transparent, inclusive
elections that foster the political participation of women
and young people. UNOWAS has also proved to be a
central actor in pre- and post-election environments,
helping to ease tensions and prevent the emergence or
deterioration of political crises by developing early-
warning capabilities.

Secondly, with regard to promoting development,
we highlight the fact that UNOWAS has prioritized
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, in line with national and regional
needs and priorities. The Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund also conduct crucial
activities in that regard, all in an effort to help address
governance and justice gaps, poverty, exclusion and
marginalization and combat the root causes of conflict.
We also highlight the attention that UNOWAS pays
to intercommunal conflicts between pastoralists and
farmers as a result of the effects of climate change,
and to the promotion of women's access to high-level
Government positions in West Africa and the Sahel.

Thirdly, with respect to regional cooperation, we
believe that cross-border cooperation and the creation
of subregional synergies are key to improving security
in the region, in particular when addressing the threat
ofterrorism, violent extremism and organized crime, as
well as their respective linkages. We welcome the close
cooperation among UNOWAS and the Office of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
the African Union, which help ensure a complementary
approach to those scourges. We stress UNOWAS
support for security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for ex-
combatants and the promotion of dialogue at the local
level, as well as its collaboration with the Group of Five
for the Sahel.

I would like to end by expressing our strong
support for the role played by UNOWAS and encourage
the international community to continue to cooperate
closely with its efforts to achieve lasting peace in West
Africa and the Sahel.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 4.25 pm.
