Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden. We
fully support the statement by the observer of European
Union but would like to add a few remarks.

We, too, would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2014/163), and the
Special Representative for his briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

The upcoming elections will, if successful, be
the first democratic and peaceful transfer of power
in Afghanistan's history. Their importance for the
consolidation of Afghanistan's democracy cannot
be overstated. We commend the Government for the
progress made in preparing for the elections and for
creating the space for a lively and meaningful debate
about Afghanistan's future. The task now is to ensure
that the elections are credible, inclusive and transparent.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) has an important support function, as it
does for the 2015 parliamentary elections as well.

Afghanistan has made real progress over the
past decade in areas such as education, health and
infrastructure. It is imperative that the momentum of
progress be sustained in order for Afghanistan to emerge
stronger and more self-reliant. The achievements made
so far need to be safeguarded. UNAMA has a vital
role to play in ensuring that the partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community under the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is realized to
its full extent.

Only an inclusive political solution can secure
stability in the country. We fully back the continuation
of UNAMA's good offices to support an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process.
A continuing political role for the United Nations
in Afghanistan, coupling political engagement and
effective donor coordination, will also be important
after 2014, not least for the development efforts
that remain ahead. We underline the importance of
a continued local and regional field presence and
adequate financing for the Mission.

UNAMA has an important role in promoting
Government engagement and donor coordination.
There is also a need for strengthened coordination
across United Nations agencies present in Afghanistan,
thereby promoting the concept of the United Nations
delivering as one. As more donors channel their funding
through United Nations financing mechanisms, that
role becomes increasingly vital.

For several of the Nordic countries, Afghanistan is
already their largest bilateral development cooperation
partner. The foundation for that is the strong domestic
political and popular support in the countries concerned.
Our Governments and national parliaments consider
human rights, in particular women's rights, a core issue
when deciding on future financial and political support
to Afghanistan. It is important that the Afghan political
leadership show firm commitment in promoting
women's rights, tackling corruption and safeguarding
the well-being of its people. Issues such as the full
implementation of the law on the elimination of violence
against women, continued efforts to increase safe and
secure access to quality education for women and girls,
and guarantees for their equal political participation in
decision-making will remain crucial.

Freedom of the media is particularly important
in the context of both the upcoming elections and
the building of a free, open and transparent society.
Progress has been achieved, but threats remain towards
the media. That was recently highlighted by the horrible
assassination of the Swedish journalist Nils Horner in
Kabul and by recent cases of violence against reporters
in Mazar-e-Sharif.
The humanitarian situation remains a cause for
concern, not leastwith regard to health and the increasing
numbers of displaced persons. All efforts must be
made to ensure humanitarian access. Further attacks
against humanitarian personnel are unacceptable. We
welcome efforts to improve humanitarian coordination
and the establishment of a common humanitarian fund.
We would like to encourage more donors to channel
funding through the United Nations pooled funds.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries acknowledge the
Afghan Government's efforts to take its commitments
forward. We encourage the Government to continue
its demanding work and to push forward during the
upcoming elections. Benchmarks are not only factors in
building the confidence ofthe international community;
they are vital above all in building a more democratic,
prosperous and stable Afghanistan for all its citizens.

