Mr. Dacie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): At the outset, I would
like to most strongly condemn the recent terrorist
attacks in Paris and Beirut, the downing of the Russian
passenger plane over the Sinai and last night's murder
in Sarajevo of two soldiers of the army of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I take this opportunity to express my
deepest condolences to the families of the victims
of those heinous crimes, which undermine the very
essence of the values that unite us all. Terrorism and
extremism perpetrated by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and other terrorist organizations are a threat
that requires a global response.

On this occasion, I also express my gratitude for the
continued attention accorded the question of Kosovo
and Metohija. That is evinced by our regular quarterly
meetings, convened in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999), to discuss this topic of primary importance for
the Republic of Serbia. I am sure that the message that
we send from the Chamber to all residents of Kosovo
and Metohija is a very powerful one indeed. The

contribution made by other international organizations
is also of exceptional importance. Missions, such as
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the Kosovo Force (KFOR), and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Mission in Kosovo,
carried out under the auspices of the United Nations,
are part of the international civil and security presence
in the province.

Regardless of the numerous challenges, the role of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in coordinating the activities of the
international missions on the ground and stabilizing
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija is invaluable.
I especially thank its staff for the efforts that they
make daily in the quest for ways to overcome the still
deeply rooted mistrust among ethnic communities and
in creating the basic preconditions for the peaceful
coexistence ofthe communities and for the security and
respect of the human and civil rights of all residents of
the province. I hope that UNMIK will continue to carry
out its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999) in the
coming period. Therefore, on behalf of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia and on my own behalf, I take
this opportunity to wish much success to Mr. Zahir
Tanin, the newly appointed Head of UNMIK, who is
participating in today's meeting of the Security Council
for the first time in that capacity.

UNMIK's presence and activities are of key
importance for the Republic of Serbia, since its United
Nations framework, which is based on resolution 1244
(1999), is a guarantee of the status neutrality of the
international presence in Kosovo and Metohija. In View
of the overall political and security situation and the
continuing dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, we
believe that UNMIK must remain actively engaged in
the province, undiminished in scope and unchanged in
mandate.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has
demonstrated in practice its full commitment to
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union. Let
me recall that Belgrade was motivated to conclude
the Brussels Agreement by the lack of substantial
progress in the realization of the basic human rights
of the members of the Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as by
the desire to help resolve outstanding issues through a
constructive approach in the interest of stability in the
region and its integration into the European Union. We
look on the Agreement as a guarantee that a mechanism
will be established that will make it possible for the
Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija to lead a normal and
dignified life. In the conditions in which they live, the
Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija see the Brussels
Agreement as a commitment by the European Union
to their survival and development. The establishment
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities
would allow for the interests of the Serbian population
to be articulated and would provide an institutional
mechanism for the collective realization and protection
of their basic rights and contribute to a further and
faster normalization of relations.

I cannot but note that, like the previous reports,
the report before us (S/2015/833) recognized and
underscored the need for the establishment of the
association of Serb-majority municipalities as soon as
possible, as being crucial for the implementation of the
Brussels Agreement. The decision of the Constitutional
Court of Kosovo to suspend the agreement on the
establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities is a unique precedent involving the
flouting of an agreement reached in the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union. The complete and
committed implementation of agreements that have
been reached by all actors involved is of paramount
importance for the dialogue to evolve successfully. The
weight of Pristina's decision, the political background
of which is not in doubt, is even greater, considering
that its announcement was made immediately after the
signing of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union.

As it happened, the agreement on the establishment
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities
was sent to the Constitutional Court to assess its
legality one day after the signing of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement, and the Court decided
to suspend the agreement a day after the European
Commission published its progress report on Kosovo.
It is ironic that the Commission contends in its report
that Kosovo delivered on two major commitments by
adopting constitutional amendments meant to pave
the way towards the establishment of the special
chambers and by demonstrating its commitment to
the normalization of relations with Belgrade as it
finalized agreements on energy, telecommunications,
the establishment of the association of Serb-majority
municipalities and the bridge in Kosovska Mitrovica.

In outright contravention of what is said in the
progress report, Pristina sent a clear and unequivocal
message to all, including the Serbian community, the
European Union and the United Nations. The message
was that it does not respect the agreements it has
signed and the obligations it has assumed and does
not intend to make the life of, and the enjoyment of
the basic human rights by, the Serbs in the province
any better at all. The first key issue is the response by
the European Commission and the subsequent response
by the member States of the European Union. Equally
important is the position that the Security Council will
take in order to have Pristina abide by the prevailing
practice recognized in international law with regard
to the implementation of assumed obligations and
uphold accepted values and standards with regard
to the protection of the human and civil rights of all
residents of Kosovo and Metohija, enabling them to live
in dignity and lead a normal life.

It is with regret that I note, notwithstanding the
years-long presence of the international community,
Kosovo and Metohija continues to be devoid of the
basic conditions for an unhindered and sustainable
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Here
too, the report before us regrettably does not accord
the problem of IDPs the attention that it deserves.
I recall that Serbia continues to top the unenviable
list of European countries in terms of the number of
IDPs. During the conflict of 1999 and after the arrival
of KFOR, more than 210,000 people were forced to
leave their homes in Kosovo and Metohija, while an
additional 20,000 were displaced in the March pogrom
of 2004. Currently, more than 18,000 people are
displaced within the territory of Kosovo and Metohija,
while more than 204,000 displaced people are in
central Serbia. According to a study by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
97,000 persons have been identified as still in need,
that is, in an aggravated socioeconomic situation and
in need of help.

With respect to the IDPs, the Republic of Serbia
is strategically committed to rendering full support to
each and every person, either for sustainable return
or local integration in the place of displacement in
accordance with the intention expressed by each
individual. Yet any support that Serbia may render to
potential returnees will be insufficient if not given the
proper attention and commitment by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina. There is
a real risk, for example, that the returnees will not be
accepted or even tolerated by the receiving community,
especially if the international community is not actively
engaged.

To fully understand the obstacles encountered by
the IDPs in their quest to return home to Kosovo and
Metohija, one should know that, on average, 25 per
cent of refugees and IDPs worldwide return home, the
percentage varying between a minimum of 12 per cent
and a maximum of over 50 per cent. In Kosovo and
Metohija, it stands at about a mere 1.5 per cent. That
grim reality is a reminder that the task has not been
completed and merits the attention of all forthcoming
reports of the Secretary-General. The conditions
needed for return include, among others, proper
security guarantees, freedom of movement, an effective
mechanism for the restitution of property and other
appurtenant rights, protection from discrimination,
access to institutions, documents and justice and
support for the economic independence of returnees.
The prevention of efforts to obstruct returns is needed,
along with respect for the principle of accountability on
the part of the international and local actors involved in
the process.

I therefore call on the United Nations and other
representatives of the international administration in
Kosovo and Metohij a to see to it that problems that have
impeded IDP returns and have aggravated their already
difficult situation are overcome. Returnees continue to
face repeated security incidents, including attacks on
their property, which sends a strong negative message
to other Serbs and potential returnees. The situation
is not helped by the climate of impunity for crimes
committed against Serbs, as reflected in the fact that
none of the perpetrators of the murders of more than
1,000 Serbs since 1999 has been given a legally valid
sentence.

It is possible to get the false impression, because of
the practice of according a separate chapter in the report
to Northern Kosovo, that the human rights situation of
the members of the Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities south of the Ibar River is satisfactory. In
order to get a broader perspective on the situation and
because a great deal of time has elapsed since we last
had a review of the human rights situation in that part
of Kosovo and Metohija, I submit that there is a need
for an extensive review of the situation, and that the
status of the Serbs and Goranci and the members of
other non-Albanian communities who live south of the
river be included in the next report.

The property rights of the Serbs continue to be
violated throughout the entire province, especially by
the sale of enterprises in Serbian communities. Such
sales snuff out the potential for communities in which
Serbs live to exist economically, jeopardize conditions
for return and undermine security. After all, in addition
to the lack of security, the absence of an effective
mechanism for the restitution of usurped property is one
of the most important factors that aggravate and limit
IDP returns. It is therefore only appropriate to draw the
attention of the Council to the additional institutional
measures taken by Pristina, such as the draft law on the
Kosovo Property Comparison and Verification Agency.
This runs counter to the 2011 Technical Agreement
on Cadastre, and its adoption would open the door to
the legalization of unlawfully confiscated property in
Kosovo and Metohija and cause irreparable damage to
the Serbian community. Mention should also be made
of the fact that the draft law does not provide for the
majority of minority MPs required to pass a law ofvital
interest to their community.

In addition to making a routine roll call, as it were,
of the attacks carried out during the reporting period
on monuments that form part of the Serbian religious
and cultural heritage, Serbia calls on the international
community to step up its engagement in the process of
their physical and legal protection, especially in view of
current political developments in the province. I would
point out that these attacks have never ceased. This
is incontrovertible proof of the fact that the majority
community has never accepted the Serbian cultural
heritage as part of the common heritage and cultural
values that have been passed on to us to treasure jointly
in Kosovo and Metohija.

Accordingly, the Albanian community does not
have the legal, historical, moral or any other right to
appropriate the monuments of the Serbian cultural and
spiritual heritage that it has targeted for systematic
destruction since 1999. Albanian students in Kosovo
and Metohija learn from their textbooks that Serbian
churches and monasteries from the twelfth, thirteen and
fourteenth centuries are Albanian and that the Serbian
Nemanjic dynasty from that time is in fact the Albanian
Nimani dynasty. This is a falsification of history aimed
at erasing the Serbian identity and presence in Kosovo
and Metohija.

The talks held on the property of the Serbian
Orthodox Church and the status and protection of the
Serbian cultural heritage in Kosovo and Metohija in
the context of the Brussels agreement have yet to be
followed up. I take this opportunity to reiterate my call
on the international community to send a clear and
unequivocal message to the local authorities that it will
closely monitor their efforts to prevent criminal acts
directed at objects of cultural and religious heritage, as
well as their response to the commission of such acts.

In closing, let me underline once again that
Serbia is firmly committed to dialogue with the
representatives of Pristina. Conducted with the
facilitation of the European Union, the dialogue is one
of the rare successful examples of the pacific solution
of conflicts in today's world. Within the framework
of the dialogue, exceptionally important agreements
have been reached on the improvement of the daily
living conditions of the entire population of Kosovo
and Metohija. Our dedication to this process reflects
our firm commitment to making an active contribution
to the furtherance of the political and economic
stability of the Western Balkans and the resolution
of all remaining open questions exclusively through
political and diplomatic means. With this specific goal
in mind, we have demonstrated, in the context of the
dialogue, our constructive approach and readiness to
compromise. Thus we have made a contribution to
ensuring that many complex issues in various areas,
including legislation, energy and telecommunications,
are resolved in a mutually acceptable manner in the
interest, first and foremost, of reconciliation and a
common future.

The political, social and economic conditions in
which the Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija
lives continue to be very complex. I emphasize that the
Republic of Serbia expects the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, to continue to
provide assistance on the path of confidence-building,
which, we firmly believe, is the only solid basis for
ensuring a normal life for all in Kosovo and Metohija.

I would sound a final note of caution: unilateral
attempts such as the request for Kosovo's admission to
UNESCO are steps in the wrong direction and testify to
the flouting of the agreements reached. Another example
of this is the suspension of the agreement to establish
a community of Serbs. There can be no alternative to
dialogue as a means of resolving all outstanding issues.
It is for that reason that Serbia remains fully committed
to dialogue in Brussels as the way to resolve all issues
in dispute.

