Mr. Matjila (South Africa): First, I would like to
thank colleagues for their condolences and solidarity in
connection with the passing of Ambassador Dumisani
Kumalo. Ambassador Kumalo used to sit where I am
sitting and always contributed to finding solutions
aimed at bringing about peace and security and stability,
issues of which the Security Council is always seized.
Likewise, we would also like to convey our condolences
to our brothers and sisters in Chad.

South Africa welcomes this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, focusing on the
question of Palestine. We thank Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov
for his briefing. We also thank the observer of
Palestine and the representative of Israel for their
respective statements.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

We want to begin this debate by congratulating
the State of Palestine on assuming the chairmanship of
the Group of 77 and China. We also welcome Retno
Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia.

This is the first open debate in which South Africa
is participating as a member of the Security Council
during its current term as an elected member. We wish
to use this opportunity to emphasize the importance
of the Council ensuring that it remains committed to
meaningfully contributing to the resolution of one of
its longest-standing agenda items - the question of
Palestine - of which it has been seized for more than
70 years. While the Council's monthly meetings and
quarterly open debates afford an opportunity to have a
significant influence on the Middle East peace process,
this has not yielded the necessary results that it has the
potential to lead to. The adoption of landmark resolution
2334 (2016) in December 2016 is one important
such example of the potential outcome of Council
deliberations on the matter. Unfortunately, there has
been minimal effort to implement that resolution. That
calls into question the credibility of the decisions of
the Council, especially if it is the Council itself that
does not take any action to ensure the implementation
of its own decisions. In resolution 2334 (2016), we
reaffirmed that Israeli settlements, which have steadily
been expanding into Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, have no legal validity and constitute a
violation of international law. Furthermore, resolution
2334 (2016) recognizes that the settlements are a major
obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution
and to a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East.

The recent upsurge in tensions between Israeli
settlers and the Palestinian people in settlements such
as Ofra and the broader cycle of violence resulting from
those heightened antagonisms are indicative of the
obstacles created by the illegal expansion of settlement
activity to the peace process. According to the recent
report of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, about 250 Israeli settlements have been
established in the occupied West Bank since 1967, and
approximately 611,000 Israelis - or 10 per cent of the
Israeli population - have been pushed into Palestine
and forcibly settled in flagrant violation of international
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention, thereby
replacing 12 per cent of the Palestinian population,
which is similar to the apartheid-era forceful removal
of black people from their ancestral productive land
to barren, unproductive wasteland in the middle
of nowhere. South Africa therefore calls for the full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), including
the timely submission to the Council of written reports
of the Secretary-General every three months in order
for progress to be adequately monitored. The Council
receives written reports on other matters with which
it is seized, and the situation in Palestine should be
no different. We must not allow the decisions of the
Security Council to be undermined and blatantly
violated in some areas.
Even more troubling is the deliberate targeting of
children, the continued violation of human rights in the
occupied territories and the continued imprisonment
of Palestinian minors in military detention in Israel.
The impact of such violations on the future of peace
between the two parties cannot be underestimated. The
fomenting of hatred and a culture of violence in the
formative stages of development of those children will
only make peace and reconciliation even more distant
and unachievable. As long as the Council remains
silent on such issues, a just peace becomes more and
more out of reach. We cannot afford inaction and must
instead inject much-needed urgency into resolving the
conflict, including by safeguarding the gains made over
decades of diplomacy and preventing any prejudging
of outcomes on final-status issues, such as Jerusalem,
security and the return of Palestinian refugees.

I wish to reiterate South Africa's support for a
two-State solution. We would also like to reiterate
that the primary responsibility for peace rests with
the Palestinians and Israelis themselves. South Africa,
as part of the international community, has always
sought to encourage peace between the two parties. In
that regard, we convened the Spier Presidential Peace
Retreat in January 2002, to which we invited senior
representatives of both Palestine and Israel with the
aim of strengthening the peace camp in both Israel and
Palestine, while sharing the South African experience
in negotiations, peacemaking and the transition to
democracy. We have also supported international
peace efforts, in particular through the United Nations
system. Those initiatives have demonstrated a spirit
of commitment to dialogue and partnership for peace
between the parties.

In line with the outcomes of the Spier Retreat, we
continue to support and encourage the parties to work
together towards peaceful dialogue and negotiation as
the only way to find a lasting solution. The guidelines
for those negotiations have been based on the
established international legal framework, including
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map, among other things.

We wish to once again recognize the importance of
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
which has provided crucial socioeconomic assistance to
Palestinian refugees for decades. Cuts in the UNRWA
budget threaten the lives of many vulnerable people
and undermine any confidence in a resolution to the
conflict. Punishing civilians by cutting humanitarian
funding cannot in any way be conceived as moving the
peace process forward; rather, it serves only to entrench
animosity and heighten tensions between the parties.

South Africa is deeply concerned about reports of
Israel's plans to shut down UNRWA-run schools in East
Jerusalem. Closing schools affects the most vulnerable
refugee population - children, at their most vulnerable
stage of development and in the formative years of their
education. South Africa welcomes recent pledges made
to support UNRWA. We affirm that such humanitarian
support creates the conditions that contribute to easing
the dire conditions of the Palestinian people.

The Council must do everything it can to remove all
obstacles to peace between Israel and Palestine and no
longer allow continued hatred, human rights violations
and disregard for international law. Generations of
Palestinians and Israelis have known only conflict and
violence. We must do all we can now to create a culture
of peace and foster hope for a future free of conflict for
both communities.

Any time Palestinians want to bring the issue of
Palestine's full membership of the United Nations to
the Security Council, they will find South Africa ready
to support them.

