Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the briefers
for the detailed information provided today.

Preventive diplomacy has become an essential tool
of United Nations action. In that regard, as Member
States, we have committed to establishing a culture of
prevention in taking collective action to prevent and
eliminate threats to peace. We welcome the progress
made with regard to establishing an early warning
system, the good offices of the Secretary-General,
Special Envoys, the deployment of political and peace
missions on the ground and regional offices, among
others. Despite the fact that the United Nations has
actors, tools and instruments to prevent the spread of
conflict and the development of preventive diplomacy,
the task of conflict prevention poses many challenges
that require action to maximize the possibility of
successful diplomacy.

The Security Council is responsible for maintaining
international peace and security and therefore plays
a leading role in the area of preventive diplomacy. It
is precisely the Council that is responsible for finding
solutions that allow for the challenges posed by
situations of crisis to be overcome.

We would also like to stress the importance of
regional bodies in the peaceful settlement ofdisputes set
out in Chapter VIII ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations.
We must continue to strengthen strategic partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations. The local
knowledge of regional organizations is necessary
for the adoption of effective measures in the context
of preventive diplomacy. Collective action can be
strengthened by involving regional and local authorities,
in particular in the areas of prevention, development
and post- conflict.

The Dominican Republic firmly believes in the
participation of young people in efforts to stabilize
societies and the great potential of women to transform
societies and contribute to peace. Their participation is
therefore critical in all aspects of dispute resolution. We
emphasize the importance of the Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative. We therefore welcome the
progress made by the States members of the African
Union (AU) in implementing the AU Master Roadmap
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020.

Efforts must be redoubled to continue supporting
the region in that endeavour, bearing in mind that the
aspirations for peace, security and stability in Africa
and the Sustainable Development Goals are common
priorities of both the African Union's Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
constitute a reinforced alliance for peace and security
in the region.

Lastly, we must identify and combat the social
roots of the violence. As the international community
continues to struggle to cope with destabilizing
conflicts and their repercussions, the need has emerged
to establish guidelines to regulate the escalation of
United Nations involvement in conflicts. Prevention
work requires that the relevant actors make political
commitments to addressing situations that by their very
nature carry the risk of renewed or resurgent conflict.
In that regard, the Dominican Republic reiterates its
commitment to achieving international peace and
security, the goal towards which we must work together
in order to enable the United Nations to carry out its
core tasks in a coherent manner.

