Mr. Doran: It is an honour to appear before the
Council today to discuss the fiftieth anniversary
of the 1967 war and the current state of Arab-
Israeli peacemaking.

Permit me to focus my remarks on the key factors
that prompted Israel to take control of the West Bank in
1967, and to discuss the continued significance of those
factors today.

The 1967 crisis began with a lie. In May of that
year, the Soviet Union falsely accused Israel of massing
troops on the Syrian border. That lie gave Egyptian
president Gamal Abdel Nasser a pretext to overturn
the status quo in Egyptian-Israeli relations. Reacting
to the Soviets' false claim and recognizing that it was
a green light from Moscow to heat up the Arab-Israeli
conflict, Nasser demanded the immediate departure of
the United Nations Emergency Force from the Sinai
Peninsula. He quickly massed the Egyptian military in
the Sinai, closed the straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping
and organized an anti-Israel coalition with Jordan
and Syria.

Nasser knew full well that Israel would regard
these steps as a casus belli. Indeed, his propaganda
machine boasted that Egypt had given Israel no choice
but to attack, and that, moreover, the destruction of the
Jewish State was imminent, a theme that leaders around
the Arab world, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization, loudly echoed. Israel responded to this
threat with a set of lightning attacks against Egypt,
which prompted King Hussein of Jordan to open fire
on Israel, a fateful decision that ended with the West
Bank in Israel's hands. Make no mistake, however:
from beginning to end, this was Nasser's war.

For all that the world has changed, Israel today
still faces adversaries that operate according to the
Nasserist playbook. The greatest of those adversaries
is Iran, which has created an anti-status-quo coalition
made up of itself, Syria, and their proxies, Hizbullah,
Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Hamas, among others.
Like Nasser's Egypt, Iran aspires to be the leading
Power in the Middle East, a goal that it pursues in
multiple theatres simultaneously, including the Arab-
Israeli arena, where it openly advocates the destruction
of Israel.

The Security Council should indeed work to
advance Israeli-Palestinian relations, but, in doing so,
it must avoid policies that work to the advantage of Iran
and its proxies, or that allow the Palestinians to duck
direct negotiations. In recent years, three prevailing
fallacies have prevented the United Nations from
fashioning policies that meet these needs.

The first of is the idea that the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict is the core of the larger Arab-Israeli conflict
and, moreover, a centre of gravity in regional politics.
If Palestinian-Israeli relations were truly so influential,
then we would expect the relations between Israel
and the Arab States to fluctuate in accordance with
changes in Palestinian-Israeli relations. Such a pattern
is not, and never has been, discernable. While Jordan
and Egypt have both found it wise to make peace with
Israel, Syria has refused. N0 knowledgeable observer
would ever suggest that it was the Palestinian factor that
prompted Syria to reject peace. IfIsraeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas
were to sign a peace agreement tomorrow, neither
Syria - nor Iran, for that matter - would honour it.

This point is so self-evident that it hardly seems
worth noting, yet in its discussions of regional peace
and security the United Nations routinely accords
Palestinian-Israeli relations a special status that hardly
seems justified on the basis of objective observation.
At the same time, it has paid comparatively little
attention to, for example, Iran's arming, training and
equipping of Hizbullah in contravention of Security
Council resolutions.

Iran, the Al-Assad regime and Hizbullah have
exploited the fixation of the international community
on Israel to deflect attention from their wider regional
aspirations - aspirations that they are pursuing with
particularly murderous consequences in Syria today.
More people have died in Syria at their hands in the
last six years than have died on both sides in the Arab-
Zionist conflict from its inception in the 19205 until
today. Many more people have been made homeless
in Syria than were ever turned into refugees by the
Arab-Israeli wars. If the United Nations had worked to
deter Iran and its allies in the last five years, how many
Syrian lives would have been saved, and how many
families would have remained safe in their homes?

The second fallacy is the idea that Israeli settlements
on the West Bank are the primary impediment to
peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. The
experience of the George W. Bush Administration, in
which I served, taught us the opposite. It was a relatively
easy matter for a President who is sympathetic to Israel's
security concerns to convince the Israeli Government
to limit territorial expansion of Israeli settlements.
Early reports coming from the Trump Administration
suggest that President Trump may have reached, or is in
the process of reaching, a similar accommodation with
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.

Historically, however, it has proven much harder
to convince the Palestinian Authority to cease its
incitement of its own population, whether through
the naming of squares after terrorists, encouraging
anti-Israeli attacks, glorifying terrorism in children's
textbooks, or paying Government compensation to
terrorists and their families. The extensive resources
that the United Nations and its Members contribute
to the upkeep of the Palestinian Authority give them a
right to insist that those funds be used to foster a culture
of tolerance based on a vision of two States living side
by side in peace.

The third fallacy is the idea that Israeli intransigence
is the key stumbling block in Arab-Israeli relations,
and that, therefore, Israeli concessions are the key
factor that will create the conditions for a settlement.
The Israeli withdrawals from Lebanon in 2000 and
Gaza in 2005 should have dispelled this idea forever.
Rather than having a calming effect, however, those
withdrawals served only to increase the bloodlust of
Hizbullah and Hamas.
The lesson was not lost on the Israelis. Any
withdrawal from territory on the West Bank, therefore,
must come with ironclad guarantees of Israeli security.
Given the unsettled state of the region in general, the
advances of the Iranian alliance in Lebanon, Syria,
Iraq and Yemen, the persistence of Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, and the split
among the Palestinians between Hamas and Fatah, no
Israeli Government could take severe risks with respect
to Israeli security on the West Bank and still hope to
remain in power.

Israelis are already intensely aware that in a very
short period of time they might find themselves peering
across the Golan Heights at Iranian soldiers ensconced
in Syria. How can the world ask them to take steps that
could potentially lead to the Iranian penetration of the
West Bank as well?

Those three fallacies foster a general perspective
that places an exaggerated importance on Israeli
actions. It misinterprets the behaviour of Arab and
Muslim actors as a reaction to the Jewish State rather
than as a product of their own regional strategies
and perceptions. It encourages the Security Council,
unconsciously perhaps, to reward the Palestinian
Authority's efforts to internationalize the conflict - to
look to the United Nations to intercede on its behalf in
negotiations with Israel.

This drift toward internationalization is fraught
with danger. When the United Nations replaces the
Palestinians as the interlocutor with Israel regarding
the final status of the West Bank, it reduces the chances
for peace, because it does nothing to allay the very
real security concerns of Israel. A better path forward
is to urge the Palestinians back to direct negotiations.
While the likelihood that those negotiations will
result in a quick resolution of the final status issues
is small, there is reason to be optimistic about interim
accommodations that are manifestly in the interests of
both sides. The new willingness of Sunni Arab States,
which share Israel's concerns about Iran, to support
constructive solutions is especially heartening.

I would like again to remind the Security Council
of the example of Gamal Abdel Nasser. A revisionist
school of historiography claims that he never wanted
war in 1967. His best military units were bogged
down in Yemen, his economy was a shambles and his
relations with Jordan and Syria, his putative allies,
were abysmal. Why would a leader in such a precarious
position behave so recklessly?
The revisionists have much of the story correct,
but they miss a crucial factor. Nasser was applying
lessons that he had learned a decade earlier, during the
Suez crisis. Then, as in 1967, he had precipitated a war
that he could not possibly win militarily, but which he
believed he could win politically, because, he gambled,
the super-Powers and the United Nations would
intercede on his behalf. In 1956, that proved a very
smart bet. In 1967, however, it utterly failed - with
disastrous consequences for Egypt - to say nothing of
the Palestinians. How much better would it have been
for all parties if, back in 1956, the United Nations had
insisted that, in return for an Israeli withdrawal from
Egyptian territory, Nasser must grant Israel meaningful
security guarantees?

The key lesson of the 1967 war is that peace is best
achieved not by United Nations intercession but by
facilitating direct negotiations between the parties.

I thank the Council again for the honour of
addressing it on this important issue.

