Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Let me thank the delegation of Turkey and
President Giil personally for convening today's meeting
of the Security Council.

In recent years, the United Nations and many
regional and subregional associations have done
tremendous work in the prevention and settlement of
crisis situations and post-conflict rehabilitation.
Having confronted global and transborder challenges
and threats to international stability, such as the
proliferation of mass destruction, terrorism, drug
trafficking and organized crime, we are now working
on new, more effective mechanisms to ensure
international and regional stability. In accordance with
the United Nations Charter, the Security Council is
taking the lead in these efforts. It is important that the
Council further improve existing mechanisms to ensure
its more effective and prompt response.

The experience of settling a number of crisis
situations points to a number of basic conclusions. The
first and the most important conclusion is that modern
conflicts cannot be resolved by force. They should be
resolved first and foremost at the political and
diplomatic levels through the involvement of all parties
in dialogue and negotiations, with none being isolated.
We all witnessed in August 2008 the result of unilateral
disruption of agreed peacekeeping formats and reliance
on force.

Secondly, we should spare no effort, material or
intellectual, for the early prevention of conflicts and
the strengthening of United Nations potential in the
area of preventive diplomacy and mediation. It is well
known that the prevention of conflict situations is
considerably less expensive than solving them
subsequently. To this end, active support should be
extended to the United Nations Regional Centres for
Preventive Diplomacy, relevant regional organizations
and associations that provide assistance in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the prevention of
transborder threats to security.

Thirdly, the success of our peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts in the Middle East, Afghanistan,
Africa, Haiti, East Timor and elsewhere hinges on our
ability to take the interests and priorities of the host
party into account. No assistance of the international
community should be imposed.

Fourthly, modern conflicts require complex
strategies and comprehensive solutions based on the
unity of objectives; the predictability of material,
technical and financial support; the effective
combination of military and civil stabilization efforts;
and close coordination, taking into account regional
contexts and the optimal involvement of the potential
of regional organizations pursuant to Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. It is important to avoid
duplication of efforts and, even worse, rivalry. Based
on this understanding, we promote cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization.

We welcome and fully support regular dialogue
between the Security Council and countries
contributing troops to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Such dialogue helps us to develop more
realistic mandates, adequately assess existing resources
and ensure appropriate control.

In that respect, we consider the practice of
inviting to Council meetings the commanders of
military contingents of peacekeeping operations, which

we introduced last month during the Russian
presidency in the Security Council, to be of particular
use. The Russian proposal to further intensify the
activities of the Military Staff Committee remains
relevant and has enjoyed a positive response from a
growing number of States. It provides for the further
development of practical cooperation between the
Military Staff Committee and the Security Council, the
Secretariat and all interested Member States, in full
compliance with the United Nations Charter and its
Article 47. This would ensure a systemic and
professional military expert assessment of
peacekeeping activities.

In the light of the upcoming drawdown of
operations in Chad and East Timor and the downsizing
of operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, it is especially important to
develop effective exit strategies. Such strategies should
help to optimize costs and to focus efforts and existing
resources on creating conditions favourable to
strengthening political settlements, preventing the
recurrence of conflicts and ensuring effective post-
conflict peacebuilding.

Additional attention should be given to the
question of how peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates can be rationally combined and how and
when to engage the Peacebuilding Commission, the
United Nations specialized agencies and regional
organizations.

Russian peacekeepers participate in the
operations in the Middle East, various regions of
Africa, Kosovo, East Timor and Haiti. Our helicopter
units have been deployed as part of the United Nations
missions in Sudan, Chad and the Central African
Republic. Russia provides tangible material, technical
and transport support to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and conducts training of civil police officers
from various regions of the world, including from
African countries. This policy is supported by our
annual contribution to the Peacekeeping Fund in the
amount $2 million. Russia will continue to increase its
practical contribution to the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities of the United Nations.

