The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Min
for his briefing.
On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I should like to thank our briefers for their
useful and informative reports.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain.

It is an honour for me to preside over this high-level
open debate on halting the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors. Furthermore, this
topic holds particular value for me because reminds
me of my time as Permanent Representative of Spain
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and Chairman of the Executive Council and
the Conference of the States Parties.

With the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016),
Spain has concluded the work entrusted to it by
the Security Council as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) during
2015 and 2016. We undertook the task with a sense of
responsibility and transparency, in the context of the
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004). The
work was intensive. We consulted with Member States,
international organizations and civil society. We had
the support of members of the Committee, the Group of
Experts and the Secretariat. The broad support for the
resolution, for which I thank all of its sponsors, is the
result of that collective work.

I extend my gratitude to the briefers at this meeting:
the Vice-President of DHL and the President of the
Stimson Center. Their briefings show the irreplacable
role that businesses and the academic world play in
fighting proliferation.

The United Nations was born with the purpose of
banishing the suffering caused by the scourge of war.
Unfortunately, we are still far from achieving that
goal. The Organization cannot relent in that endeavour.
We must prevent conflict and, failing that, ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law. We
are alarmed by the proved use of weapons of mass
destruction in the twenty-first century. We are disturbed
that non-State actors and terrorist organizations are able
to access those types of weapons. If they have those
weapons, they will use them - as we have witnessed
in Syria and Iraq. Their barbarism knows no bounds.

That certain risk led to the adoption of resolution
1540 (2004), 12 years ago, which was a great service
provided by the Security Council to the whole of the
international community. The two threats addressed
in resolution 1540 (2004) are continually evolving and
on the rise. Terrorist groups adapt their procedures in
order to acquire technology and sensitive materials.
Traffickers develop new techniques to avoid national
and international inspections, thereby exacerbating the
risk of proliferation. We could not remain impassive.
The resolution that we have just adopted is a substantive
and timely reaction. We are taking a great step towards
establishing a comprehensive agenda that can help to
prevent a catastrophe of global proportions.

Spain promoted the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004) in order to bolster the
effectiveness of the prevention of proliferation
by non-State actors. The report presented by the
Committee puts forward a series of recommendations
to strengthen the 1540 system and lays the foundations
for a comprehensive agenda to achieve the effective and
full implementation of the objectives set out in 2004.
Resolution 2325 (2016) is the culmination of that work.
It substantially improves the effectiveness of resolution
1540 (2004) without modifying its preventive and
cooperative approach.

The resolution compels us to better coordinate
and strengthen the tools to deal with the threat we are
considering. It calls upon States and the Committee
to focus their efforts on the sectors that require the
most attention and to bear in mind new proliferation
risks. It highlights the value of national plans and the
visits of the Committee. It also addresses the need to
bear in mind the particular circumstances of States in
implementing measures against proliferation. Other
innovative aspects of the resolution include a firm
commitment to transparency in the work of the 1540
Committee through meetings open to all Member States
and the use of the communications media. It highlights
the recognition of the role of parliamentarians and civil
society in fighting proliferation.

The resolution will leave a significant legacy with
regard to support. It seeks to avoid duplication and
facilitates the channelling of offers of, and requests for,
assistance 4 for example, through regional conferences.
It strengthens the capacity of the 1540 Committee to
provide direct assistance. Furthermore, the resolution
calls for voluntary contributions, as without adequate
funding many of the new measures would not be viable.

With regard to coordination, the resolution requests
the 1540 Committee to report annually to the Council
on its work and to evaluate how the effectiveness of the
special political mission that supports the Committee
can be improved. That evaluation will allow the United
Nations to acquire a number of tools that are more in
line with current challenges. It also urges the relevant
committees ofthe Council to reinforce their cooperation
in order to face the threat of terrorism, and to report in
that regard.

Experience has taught us that it is not enough to
simply adopt good texts, which today's resolution
undoubtedly is. As political agreement is important, so
is compliance with what has been agreed upon. This
resolution will remain a dead letter without firm and
active commitment from all of us. We cannot allow
inaction. We owe it to our citizens and to the coming
generations, which cannot be exposed to the plans of
organizations that seek only destruction. It is essential
that we maximize our vigilance so that we do not have
to relive the indescribable horrors that are caused by
the use of weapons of mass destruction.

Spain will spare no effort. Firm support for the
work of the 1540 Committee will continue to be a
constant element in the foreign policy of my country.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

