Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica thanks Indonesia for convening this important
debate. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Peter Mauer and Mr. Federico Borello for their
valuable contributions to this discussion.

Although it has been 20 years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1265 (1999), leading to the
inclusion of the issue of the protection of civilians on
its agenda and to its being considered a core issue, little
has changed in those two decades. To date, according
to the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/373),
there have been tens of thousands of cases of civilians
killed, maimed or injured in conflicts. It is a frustrating
situation, which has been expressedtoday in the Council.

The conflict also has indirect effects, such as forced
displacement, the destruction of civilian infrastructure
and, consequently, the deprivation of populations
of the satisfaction of their most basic needs, such as
access to health care and education. Those effects
grow exponentially when the conflict spreads to urban
areas, which, unfortunately, happens with increasing
frequency. The Secretary-General reports that there
are more than 50 million people affected by conflict in
urban areas.

Costa Rica reiterates its call on the parties to conflicts
to eliminate the use of explosive weapons, particularly
those of long range, in cities and densely populated
areas. Attacks with such weapons not only result in
a high number of victims but also in the large-scale
destruction of homes, essential infrastructure and
much basic services; forced displacement; refugees;
difficulty in gaining humanitarian access; hunger and
environmental impact, which all further aggravate the
humanitarian situation. That is why Costa Rica joined
22 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean
in condemning acts that contravene international
humanitarian law by adopting the Santiago communique
in Chile.

Costa Rica also recognizes the crucial role of
humanitarian aid in the protection and relief of civilian
populations. We condemn the arbitrary denial of relief
operations and advocate for the transit of humanitarian
aid operations to be guaranteed, both by States and by
non-State armed groups.

Attacks on civilians are a flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, as are deliberate
attacks on medical personnel, medical facilities, places
of refuge for the sick and wounded and schools. The
perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable,
and States must take greater action to eliminate
impunity in such cases. In that regard, Costa Rica
recognizes the Security Council's efforts to establish
ad hoc tribunals and investigative mechanisms, such as
that created in the case of the chemical weapons attacks
in Syria, and we urge that they be re-established and
updated so that, we hope, they will never have to be
used again. Early and effective action by the Council,
especially preventive actions, is also indispensable. We
therefore urge its members to implement the code of
conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group and urge those with the right of
the veto to refrain from using it in situations involving,
inter alia, war crimes.

Costa Rica believes that, until greater control has
been established over the international arms trade, the
situation will continue to deteriorate. Legislation on
arms exports must be in accordance with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and must translate into regulations that prevent the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons from continuing to
fuel conflicts. We therefore join the Secretary-General
in calling on States that have not yet done so to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty as a means of protecting civilians in
times of conflict.

We also recognize the importance of accountability,
and we therefore attach great importance to the periodic
submission ofreports on the protection ofcivilians to the
Security Council. In line with the Secretary-General's
disarmament agenda, we agree that the recording of
data in that regard should be systematic. We therefore
recommend the implementation of a common United
Nations system for registering civilian casualties.
We agree with the Secretary-General that, in order
to guarantee the protection of civilians, the priority must
always be to prevent conflict and lay the foundations
for building sustainable peace. We believe that
national policy frameworks that establish institutional
responsibilities in this area must be formulated and that
those normative actions should be extended to local and
community authorities, so that empowered members
of communities have the necessary tools to face the
challenges posed by conflicts and young people and
women can build local resilience, thereby facilitating
reconstruction and peacekeeping processes.

Costa Rica supports the recommendations outlined
by the Secretary-General in his report and reiterates
the importance of continuing to use the tools provided
by the Charter of the United Nations, while remaining
vigilant, reporting regularly to the Council and making
direct recommendations with regard to protection,
but above all preventing attacks and violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

