Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries, Bulgaria, Romania and
Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and the potential candidates,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro
align themselves with this statement.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
you have given us to debate the important issue of
children in armed conflict. I also wish to pay tribute to
Mr. Olara Otunnu, Under-Secretary-General and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as to Ms. Rima Salah, Deputy Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), for
their briefings and their commendable work. I would
like also to thank other key players who have
contributed to progress on this important subject.

It is absolutely fitting that the Security Council
has once again taken up the issue of children in armed
conflict. Despite the welcome news that the estimated
number of child soldiers has declined from 380,000 to
300,000 in the last 18 months, a disturbing gap remains
between the standards and the initiatives developed for
the protection of children, on the one hand, and the
atrocities that continue to be perpetrated against
children by parties to armed conflicts, on the other.
Those atrocities must end.

While the European Union welcomes the
adoption of resolution 1539 (2004), in April 2004, it
also notes that the goals set by the United Nations have
not yet been adequately met. In that context, the
European Union welcomes the report (S/2005/72) of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
of 9 February 2005, which identifies persisting
shortcomings and proposes remedies.

The European Union agrees that it is important
and urgent to establish a systematic and comprehensive
monitoring, reporting and compliance mechanism to
provide systematic, reliable and accurate information
on child rights violations in situations of armed
conflict using the experience of United Nations
peacekeeping missions and country teams. In that
context, the European Union encourages all relevant
United Nations actors, and in particular UNICEF, as
well as non-governmental organizations (NGOs), to
continue their coordinated efforts to ensure both
systematic monitoring and reporting of violations and
preventive and rehabilitating action to assist child
victims of armed conflict. Furthermore, with regard to
monitoring and reporting processes, the European
Union would like to stress the need for particular
emphasis on the situation of girls, on gender-based
violence and on humanitarian access to children.

As contemplated in the Secretary-General's
report, the European Union supports the mainstreaming
of child-specific best practices in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes at every
stage of the work of the United Nations. It also calls
for more effective rehabilitation and reintegration of
children associated with armed groups back into their
communities. The Union is concerned by the negative
side-effects of illicit cross-border activities on children
in armed conflict. The abduction and recruitment of
children, trafficking in small arms and light weapons
and the illicit exploitation of natural resources often go
together and reinforce each other.

In accordance with resolutions 1379 (2001), 1460
(2003) and 1539 (2004) and in View of the widespread
and unacceptable pattern of violations recorded in the
Secretary-General's report of 2005, the European
Union believes that the Security Council should take
appropriate measures against the parties listed in the
annexes to the report, who are guilty of persistent
violations and have not taken steps to end those
violations. In addition to the information concerning
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict,
the European Union welcomes the inclusion this year
of other violations and abuses committed against
children in the lists annexed to the report. The
European Union urges States and other parties to
armed conflict listed in annexes I and II of the
Secretary-General's latest report to immediately stop
the recruitment and use of girls and boys in situations
of armed conflict and to end the violation of their
obligations flowing from international humanitarian
and human rights law.

In addition to violations perpetrated against
children in situations of armed conflict, the European
Union is also gravely concerned about allegations of
abhorrent sexual misconduct by United Nations
peacekeeping personnel. Although the European Union
welcomes the ongoing investigation, it urges a prompt
review of this very serious problem and requests the
Secretary-General and troop-contributing countries to
strictly enforce the standards contained in the Secretary
General's bulletin on special measures to prevent
sexual Violence and the exploitation of children, as
well as to ensure that perpetrators of such abuses are
properly brought to justice.

The European Union fully subscribes to the views
and recommendations of the Secretary-General with
respect to the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), because of its deterrent effect and the
possibilities it offers for the prosecution of war crimes,
including crimes against children. The European Union
stresses the importance of putting an immediate end to
impunity. In that context, we urge States to accelerate
the process of ratification or accession to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which
contains an important provision classifying the
conscription or enlistment of children under the age of
15 as a war crime. The European Union also urges
States that have not done so to accede to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child as a matter of
priority, and to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.

For its part, the European Union is determined to
continue its work to raise awareness about the plight of
children affected by armed conflict and to intensify its
efforts to address the issue in an effective and
comprehensive manner. In December 2003, the Union
adopted guidelines on children in armed conflict,
following consultations with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, UNICEF and
NGOs active in this area. Armed with a clear plan of
action, the European Union carried out a range of
political, diplomatic and financial initiatives during the
past year.

First, we have instituted a system of reporting by
European Union heads of mission in affected countries,
drawing on the list of countries where parties to armed
conflict have been censured by the Security Council
for their recruitment and use of children. The reports
pay particular attention to the need to have a clear
picture not only of the recruitment of child soldiers,
but also of attacks against schools and hospitals, the
blockage of humanitarian access, sexual and gender-
based violence against children, and abduction.

Secondly, reporting and analysis have been
accompanied by recommendations for action, such as
enhanced funding of relevant programmes and
demarches. European Union special representatives,
including in the Great Lakes region of Africa, have
been tasked with paying full attention to the issue when
executing their mandates.

Thirdly, in cooperation with UNICEF, the
European Union has launched a children's rights
training programme for Union officials and the issue
has also been introduced in training activities related to
the European Security and Defence Policy and crisis
management.

Finally, as children are a particularly vulnerable
group in humanitarian crises, they have been a priority
of the European Union's humanitarian aid policy for
several years. The Humanitarian Aid Department has
financed projects on child-related activities, such as
therapeutic feeding, vaccination, primary education
and the reintegration of child soldiers, for a total of €37
million in 2004.

The Plan of Action recently adopted by the
European Union is meant to further reinforce the
implementation of its Guidelines on Children and
Armed Conflict through political and practical Union
involvement on the ground and a better use of the wide
range of tools at our disposal. The Plan of Action
intends to match technical assistance with political
action by identifying gaps and possibilities for
increased cooperation on those issues. As a first step,
three focus countries have been identified for pilot
projects: Uganda, Sierra Leone and Sri Lanka.

The European Union agrees that the main
challenges identified in the Secretary-General's
report - such as the establishment of an effective
monitoring, reporting and compliance mechanism; the
need to impose appropriate measures where
insufficient or no progress has been made; and the
necessity for collective action at the national, regional
and international levels - need to be addressed
urgently. The Security Council has begun negotiations
on a new draft resolution, which we hope will
adequately deal with those issues.

Let me conclude by underlining that the
European Union stands ready to continue to work
closely with the United Nations system, including the
Office of the Special Representative, UNICEF, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as with
national and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society, to ensure coherence and
effectiveness in our efforts to relieve the suffering of
children in armed conflicts and that those responsible
for atrocities against children are held accountable for
their crimes. The European Union will continue to play
its part in trying to make the implementation phase a
reality on the ground as a way to bridge the existing
gap between norms and action.

