Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to start by warmly welcoming Mr. Gambari here to
New York as the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for Myanmar. We thank him for his positive
statement, which always offers optimism. I would also
like to thank him for the wisdom and foresight with
which he considers the situation in Myanmar in that
report.

It is very encouraging to see that the Special
Adviser has been able to meet with high-level political
officials in Myanmar and with the political parties, and
that that Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights has been able to visit Myanmar for the first time
in more than four years. It is also encouraging that the
head of the opposition has been able to meet with
members of her own party.
Although the situation in Myanmar is worrisome
and bleak, those positive changes do give us hope, and
we are confident that very soon important and
inclusive dialogue will take place in a time-bound way
between all of the various parties.

A few days ago, the Security Council had an
important high-level meeting on the role of regional
and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. There is no doubt that
the crisis in Myanmar is a real example to be followed
in giving flesh to our political statements and
implementing them. We need to reinforce the part
being played by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations countries in settling the crisis.

The work of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General in re-establishing constructive dialogue in
Myanmar in order to bring together the political parties
and the Government authorities is of primary
importance. We need to establish a favourable climate
that will encourage dialogue between all parties, and
we reaffirm our support for the Special Adviser in his
efforts to help Myanmar through the crisis. We also
support the good offices of the Secretary-General.

We reiterate that the situation in Myanmar
requires time and consistency by all parties, including
the Government, which must redouble its efforts and
set up a road map towards national reconciliation and
release political prisoners. The members of the
Security Council must do everything possible to avoid
taking overly hasty decisions that would hinder the
work of Mr. Gambari and the specialized and regional
agencies in their efforts to continue their work.

