Mr. Fulci (Italy): First of all, let me voice the full
support of Italy, as a member of the European Union, for
the statement that the representative of Ireland made this
morning on behalf of the European Union.
We appreciate the fact that the request by the
Permanent Representative of Burundi, Ambassador
Nsanze, to hold today's debate was promptly granted by
the Council. As the Council knows, my delegation lent its
convinced support to this request, considering it an
important question of principle. We strongly believe that
every Member State of the United Nations - every one,
seated or not seated on the Security Council - has the
right to express in full and make known its country's
position on questions which it deems of vital interest to
it.

The international community is following the
developments in Burundi with growing apprehension.
Diplomatic activity is intense, involving the direct
commitment of special envoys and prominent figures
from the African countries - in the first place, former
President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, from the
Organization of African Unity, from the United States
and, of course, from the European Union. Now, more
than ever, we need the close cooperation of everybody
who is directly or indirectly concerned in this question. It
is encouraging that the main facilitators of this process
are united in their assessments and objectives. Even as I
speak, President Julius Nyerere is in Rome, where he will
receive an award for his relentless quest for peace.

Yesterday we learned in the news that before leaving
for Rome, former President Nyerere met with Major
Buyoya in Dar es Salaam. We feel that the very fact that
the meeting took place, and that it took place in Dar es
Salaam, is a step in the right direction: the direction of an
immediate national dialogue open to all the components
of Burundi society, including all civil organizations, and
aimed at ending the violence and at fully re-establishing
parliamentary democracy in the country.

Recent indications on the situation in Burundi,
particularly the Secretary-General's report, stress the
extreme fragility of the internal situation in Burundi.
Intense fighting and attacks on the civilian population
throughout the country have made the humanitarian
situation highly precarious. For the moment, we cannot
even discard the hypothesis that the worst will happen
and that a new genocide - because one has already been
committed, as we understood from our friend Ambassador
Somavia - might break out in Burundi. This is why the

 

Secretary-General has asked Member States to prepare
contingency plans for a peace-keeping operation to save the
civilian population from fatal massacre.
It is an absolute priority, therefore, that an immediate
cease-fire be reached to fend off the threat of more death,
more violence and more destruction. A climate of greater
mutual confidence must be established. Suspicions and
distrust create, in and of themselves, fractures and greater
tensions. If political dialogue can begin, a serious political
dialogue of course, then Burundi can lay the basis for fully
reconstructing its democratic institutions and re-entering the
road towards economic development, without which, in the
end, there can be no lasting peace.

Italy is aware of the close ties between the various
political, economic and humanitarian problems that
characterize the region and of the continued risks of
destabilization. In the search for a lasting solution to the
crisis, we again underline the need for an approach that is
global and has a regional dimension. The presence of more
than 1.5 million refugees in the region represents a highly
destabilizing factor. Their return to their countries of origin
in conditions of security and dignity is essential to the
restoration of peace.

Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali, President Nyerere,
the Special Envoy of the European Union for the Great
Lakes region, Mr. Ajello, and the American Envoy, Mr.
Wolpe, are united in affirming that the international
community's support is essential to relaunching the
democratic process in Burundi. If the Security Council
wishes to activate a credible process of national
reconciliation, it must express itself clearly on the
objectives to be pursued.

That is why we are grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Chile, Ambassador Somavr'a, for having
presented during informal consultations a draft resolution
that is meant to send a precise political signal and a
concrete response to the great difficulties that Burundi is
experiencing. It is extremely important, in our view, that a
resolution on such a delicate and complex matter be the
fruit of a full consensus within the Security Council. Two
principles should guide the action of the Council. First, it
should move in such a way as to encourage the parties to
proceed in good faith and with good will to the negotiating
table, avoiding confrontation. This must not be a question
of the imposition of the will of one over the will of the
other. The most important thing is that dialogue and close
cooperation prevail. And, secondly, it should alleviate the

 

great suffering of the innocent civilian population,
beginning with the refugees.

In the past two years Italy has reserved for Burundi
an important share of its bilateral and multilateral aid to
the region. It is the Italian Government's intention to
relaunch to the greatest extent possible its humanitarian
activities there and to consider new initiatives aimed at
revamping our action towards African countries, with
which we have long been so closely linked by historical,
economic, cultural and, above all, human ties.

