Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
you very much, Minister Kaag, for using the occasion
of International Women's Day to highlight the critical
importance of including women in Afghanistan's
political process. In addition, it is truly a pleasure to see
you, Madam, presiding over the Security Council today
on behalf of the Netherlands. I am inspired as I look
around the Council table at the women leaders you have
assembled for this discussion, and I hope this will serve
as a reminder that we all need to do more to ensure that
women are fully represented and empowered in efforts
to promote peace and security in the field.

I thank Special Representative Yamamoto for his
briefing and continued leadership, as well as all the
efforts of his team in support of peace and economic
development in Afghanistan in a very challenging
environment. We again express appreciation for the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/696) on the strategic
review of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) last year. We welcome the
adoption today of resolution 2405 (2018), renewing
UNAMA's mandate and endorsing the strategic
review's findings and recommendations. We are
confident that this will enable UNAMA to pursue its
work as effectively and efficiently as possible, and we
look forward to the Secretary-General implementing
the strategic review recommendations as quickly
as possible.

I would also like to thank Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi
for sharing their perspectives on the important work
they do in engaging women in Afghanistan's political
process and society in general. I will comment more on
that later.

The United States commends Afghanistan's
leaders for taking a courageous stance at the Kabul
Process conference last week. They reaffirmed their
clear commitment to peace and their willingness to
engage. The onus is now on the Taliban to return that
commitment and to demonstrate that it is ready to talk.
The message in Kabul was clear. The door to peace is
open; the Taliban must choose to walk through that
door. The United States position, as outlined in our
South Asia strategy, is unambiguous - the only way
to end the conflict is through a negotiated settlement.
We reaffirm our commitment to supporting direct
negotiations between the Afghan Government and
the Taliban.

The Afghan people today are ready for peace.
They understand that a peace agreement will require
compromise on both sides, but they will not sacrifice
their safety, legal protections or human rights to achieve
peace. They will not return to the oppression and
isolation ofthe late 1990s. The Taliban has an obligation
to explain how it fits into the rapidly advancing Afghan
society, where Afghan men and women are free to
speak their minds, choose their leaders and help
shape Government reforms. Groups and countries that
provide the Taliban and another armed insurgents with
weapons, money or political support are only fuelling
the conflict and the environment that allows terrorism
to persist and grow. We cannot be successful if the
status quo is allowed to continue. We renew our call on
Afghanistan's neighbours to join our efforts to bring a
resolution to the conflict.

In addition to the contribution of the Kabul
Process to achieving peace at the national level, it is
also critically important that we continue to support
the role of civil society in building and strengthening
consensus for the peace process across all elements of
Afghan society. International Women's Day provides
us with a welcome occasion to emphasize those efforts.
Ms. Sarabi's initiative with Afghanistan's re-energized
High Peace Council, which established a network of
women in provincial capitals to foster reconciliation,
has the potential to build broad-based support for peace.

During the Security Council visit to Afghanistan
in January, Ambassador Haley was encouraged by the
discussions with Afghan officials on the status of women
in Afghanistan. We urge the Government to continue
to promote the growing role of women in Afghan
society and Afghanistan's peace and political process,
including as active participants in Afghanistan's
upcoming elections, both as voters and candidates.
The United States fully supports timely, credible and
transparent elections for Afghanistan's Parliament in
2018 and President in 2019. Only the Afghan people can
choose the leaders that will represent them and work
together to create and sustain the conditions for peace.
Those elections will be vital in the pursuit of political
stability in Afghanistan.

To conclude, we are encouraged by the signs of
progress we see in Afghanistan and by the brave efforts
of the Afghan Government. We remain committed to
supporting that progress, including through the work
of the Council.

