Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian): The ongoing armed conflict in Afghanistan, the
danger of its further escalation and the attempts by the
Taliban movement to settle the question of who shall rule
the country to its own advantage by exclusively military
means are the cause of growing concern to Tajikistan and
the rest of the international community. We are
particularly concerned that the civilian population is
suffering as a result of hostilities. There is a growing
number of refugees and internally displaced persons,
including citizens of Tajikistan who by chance found
themselves in the Islamic State of Afghanistan at that
time.

Available information suggests that in the territory
controlled by the Taliban there are gross violations of
basic human rights, particularly those of women. There is
also abundant evidence that people are being persecuted
on political and ethnic grounds and that religious
fanaticism is being propagated. There have been gross
violations of the norms of international law, and actions
that prevent the normal performance of United Nations
activities in Afghanistan. We believe that all this calls for
the firmest possible reaction by the international
community.

We cannot fail to be alarmed by information that the
warring parties are continuing to build up their forces and
are preparing for active hostilities which may very soon
take on even more devastating proportions, seriously
complicating and exacerbating the already critical
humanitarian situation in the country. At the same time,
it appears to us that there is a concomitant growing threat
to regional peace and security.

Assurances that the conflict in Afghanistan is a
purely internal matter seem to us to be extremely dubious.
Tajikistan is giving ever-closer consideration to the
possible consequences of a continuation of hostilities in
fraternal Afghanistan, which is our neighbour. We have
already encountered some real problems, foremost among
them the growing illegal trafficking in drugs, weapons
and munitions.

In this connection, we have been making concerted
efforts - together with the Russian Federation,
Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, and both in the
framework of the Almaty meeting and on a bilateral
basis - to neutralize the negative impact of the ongoing
intra-Afghan conflict and to secure the common interests
shared by our countries in the region. This was one of the
topics discussed at the consultative meeting of the

 

Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Central Asia and the
Russian Federation, held on 5 April 1997 in Dushanbe. In
their joint declaration, the participants in that meeting
reaffirmed the readiness of their countries to continue to
cooperate closely to ensure the security of the southern
borders of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
particularly in the Tajik-Afghan sector of the common
border. They also called upon concerned countries to
promote actively a political settlement of the Afghan
problem.

Tajikistan, which strictly pursues a policy of non-
interference in the internal affairs of the neighbouring
Islamic State of Afghanistan, and which acknowledges the
right of the Afghan people to choose whatever political
system they see fit, believes that the warring parties should
put an immediate end to hostilities and should start to
explore ways and means of achieving agreement in order to
restore peace in the country. At the same time, the
legitimate interests of all ethnic and religious groups and
regions must be taken into account. In this connection, we
cannot fail to be alarmed by the fact that the Taliban
movement, under various pretexts, is frustrating all attempts
to begin an intra-Afghan dialogue at a responsible level and
has also rejected every invitation to sit down at the
negotiating table, whether from individual States or from
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan.

Tajikistan wholeheartedly supports the efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, headed by
Mr. H011, and is prepared to give it every assistance. We
believe that the United Nations and its Member States must
intensify their efforts to resolve the Afghan problem before
the situation gets even worse. We share the Secretary-
General's view that we must all ensure that our actions are
coordinated in order to step up international pressure on the
Afghan sides and to induce them to resolve the conflict
through peaceful means. It is quite clear that no single
Afghan military-political faction should impose its will on
the others.
We also believe that United Nations resolutions and
decisions on Afghanistan provide an excellent basis for
exploring ways and means to resolve the conflict. What we
need now is for all these resolutions to be implemented
strictly. This means, first and foremost, that there should be
no outside interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan
and that an end should be put to the supply of weapons and
the provision of any military or logistical assistance to the
warring factions. We also expect that the forthcoming
second meeting of concerned countries on Afghanistan will
help achieve consensus on how to approach an Afghan
settlement and will suggest additional ways and means to
strengthen the peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations.

