Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and all of today's briefers.

We congratulate the people of Afghanistan on their
courage and determination during the parliamentary
elections on 20 October. Despite violence, intimidation
and disappointing administrative failures, the Afghan
people turned out to vote in impressive numbers and
make their voices heard. Australia urges the Government
of Afghanistan to quickly address the deficiencies that
are evident in the electoral processes and ensure that the
2019 presidential election is credible and transparent
and fully reflects the will of the Afghan people.

Just as the October elections demonstrated
the desire of Afghans to participate directly in the
governance of their country, their call for an end to
the conflict and ongoing suffering is loud and should
be heard. President Ghani's determination to take the
lead on peace through the Kabul process and his offer
to the Taliban of negotiations without preconditions
demonstrate a strong desire for a new chapter dedicated
to peace. Australia understands and shares that desire
and welcomes those initiatives. Australia believes that
the Kabul process should form the framework for the
pursuit of peace in Afghanistan and the basis for an
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process.

We were pleased that the international community
reaffirmed its support for Afghanistan and for an Afghan-
owned and Afghan-led peace process on 28 November,
at the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
and on 6 December, with General Assembly resolution
73/88, on Afghanistan. Australia particularly welcomes
the efforts of the United States to build on the Afghan
Government's initiatives in 2018 and bring the parties
together in meaningful negotiations.

We are deeply disappointed that, to date, the Taliban
has refused to engage with the Afghan Government
and has continued its bloody campaign against the
Afghan people. We call on the Taliban to end its
violence, enter genuine negotiations with the Afghan
Government and bring relief to the Afghan people. In
the meantime, Australia will continue to stand with its
allies and partners in the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission and work with the Afghanistan security
forces to overcome the challenges they face. Australia
also recognizes that Afghanistan has made important
progress, especially on economic and institutional
reform. We encourage continued progress, especially
against corruption, to ensure that more resources reach
their intended destinations.

The Afghan people face natural, as well as man-
made, challenges. We have seen this year how drought
has affected many Afghans. In March, we pledged
$39 million over three years to support vulnerable
groups affected by conflict and displacement, bringing
Australia's humanitarian response to Afghanistan to
$89 million since 2014. During the Geneva Conference,
we also announced an additional $5 million contribution
to provide emergency assistance to almost 1.4 million
Afghans on the verge of acute famine.

Finally, we wish to again record our appreciation
for UNAMA's work in Afghanistan. At a difficult
time of record levels of violence, we nevertheless look
forward to a point when UNAMA can help Afghanistan
enter a new era of peace and reconstruction.

