The President: The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf ofthe Council:

"The Security Council has given further
consideration to the question of strengthening
cooperation between the Council, the troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. In this
connection, the Council stresses the importance
of full implementation of provisions of resolution
1327 (2000) of 13 November 2000 and in the
statements of its President of 28 March 1996
(S/PRST/l996/l3) and 3 May 1994
(S/PRST/l994/22). The Council takes note of the
views expressed at its debate on the subject
cStrengthening cooperation with troop-
contributing countries' at its 4257th meeting on
16 January 2001. The Council recognizes the
scope for further improvement in its relations
with troop-contributing countries and the need to
work together with a common purpose towards
shared goals.

"The Security Council recognizes that, in
View of the increasing complexity of
peacekeeping operations, there is a need for a
transparent three-way relationship between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries that will foster a new spirit
of partnership, cooperation and confidence.

"Recognizing that the experience and
expertise of troop-contributing countries in
theatres of operation can greatly assist the

planning process, the Security Council reiterates
its agreement to hold consultations with troop-
contributing countries in a timely manner at
different stages of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, in particular when the Secretary-
General has identified potential troop-
contributing countries for a new or ongoing
peacekeeping operation, during the
implementation phase of an operation, when
considering a change to, or renewal of, or
completion ofa peacekeeping mandate, or when a
rapid deterioration in the situation on the ground
threatens the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers.

"The Security Council will seek to ensure
that all private meetings as provided for in
resolution 1327 (2000) between members of the
Council, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat are substantive, representative,
meaningful and provide for a full exchange of
views. The Council stresses the importance of full
participation by all those involved and
encourages troop-contributing countries to take
the initiative to call for meaningful exchanges of
information. The President of the Council will
provide, where appropriate, a detailed report of
consultations with the troop-contributing
countries to the Council.

"The Security Council stresses the
usefulness of full and comprehensive briefings by
the Secretariat at private meetings with the troop-
contributing countries, including, where
appropriate, military factors.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to
improve coordination and cooperation on
peacekeeping issues within the United Nations
system and the Secretariat.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to raise public awareness
globally of the positive contribution of
peacekeeping operations and the role played by
peacekeepers from various troop-contributing
countries.

"The Security Council acknowledges that
the Secretariat must be able to rely on sufficient
human and financial resources to respond to the
demands placed on it. It underlines the

importance of follow-up to the report of the Panel
on Peace Operations (S/2000/809) with a View to
strengthening the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and other relevant departments of the
Secretariat involved in peacekeeping.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
problem of the commitment gap with regard to
personnel and equipment for peacekeeping
operations requires the assumption by all Member
States of the shared responsibility to support
United Nations peacekeeping.

"The Security Council acknowledges that
the delay in reimbursement causes severe
budgetary constraints to troop-contributing
countries. It urges all Member States to pay their
assessed contributions in full and on time, so that
peacekeeping operations can stand on a solid
financial basis.

"The Security Council decides to establish a
Working Group of the whole on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The Working Group
will not replace the private meetings with the
troop-contributing countries. The Working Group
will address both generic peacekeeping issues
relevant to the responsibilities ofthe Council, and
technical aspects of individual peacekeeping
operations without prejudice to the competence of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. Where appropriate, the Working
Group will seek the views of the troop-
contributing countries, including through
meetings between the Working Group and the
troop-contributing countries, with a view to their
views being taken into account by the Council.

"As a first step, the Working Group is
tasked to undertake an in-depth consideration of,
inter alia, all the proposals made in the course of
the Council's public meeting on 16 January 2001,
including ways to improve the three-way
relationship between the Council, the troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat, and to
report to the Council by 30 April 2001. An
indicative list of all the ideas and proposals
arising from the meeting on 16 January 2001 will
be forwarded to the Working Group for its
consideration."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2001/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.50 pm.
