Mr. Al-Dobhany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like, at the outset, to congratulate Sweden for
presiding over the Security Council for this month.
We wish you, Mr. President, success as you manage
the work of the Council, and thank you for holding
this open debate on children and armed conflict on
the theme "Protecting children today prevents conflict
tomorrow". The presence of His Excellency the Prime
Minister of Sweden shows the special attention Sweden
accords to the protection of children in particular, and
the protection of human rights in general. I also thank
Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and her Office for their efforts to protect children in
armed conflict.

The topic is a priority for the Government of
my country, as we suffer from a conflict caused by
the Houthi militias that carried out a coup. We are
shouldering the responsibility ofprotecting our children
to spare them the impact of that armed conflict.

The delegation of my country associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of countries that have joined the
Safe Schools Declaration.

The Houthi rebel militias drove over 2 million
children to look for work as a result of waging a barbaric
war. They recruit children and lure them with money
by exploiting the deteriorating situation of Yemeni
families, paying them for fighting in their ranks. They
are even recruiting children from orphanages and youth
shelters, including over 23,000 children of whom 2,500
children were recruited since the beginning of 2018, in
contravention of international agreements and the law
on protecting children.

Those militias have denied over 4 million children
their right to education, including 1.8 million who
were denied the right to enrol in schools for the past
two years. They have bombed and destroyed 2,372
schools, either completely or partially. They have used
over 1,500 schools as prisons and military barracks.
The children of Yemen are being subjected to the worst
forms of killing, suffering and recruitment. They are
denied the right to education and health as well as their
social rights. The Houthi militias are responsible for
all of that, which shows how heinous they are, while
disregarding the rights of children and international
laws that stipulate their protection.

The Government of the Republic of Yemen is fully
committed to the protection of children and ensuring
that they are not recruited into armed conflicts. We have
shown that in deeds, and not only in words, whereby the
Government took the following measures.

In November 2012, His Excellency President Abd
Rabbo Mansour Hadi issued a presidential decree that
prevented recruiting children under the age of 18 into the
army or security forces, and stated that the recruitment
of children is illegal. In May 2014, an action plan was
signed between the Yemeni Government and UNICEF
to put an end to the recruitment of children into armed
forces. We have reached an agreement with the Office
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict to create a system to register newborns and
deaths in order to be able to determine the age of those
who are joining military service. We are considering
establishing a unit in the Yemeni army that deals with
protecting children and trains forces of the army to
protect them.

The Republic of Yemen is committed to protecting
children and making sure they are spared the hell
of war. Consequently, last year we joined the Safe
Schools Declaration, which aims to protect children
and their schools in times of conflict. We also issued a
military order on 18 March 2018, signed by the Deputy
Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, stressing
the commitment of the Yemeni armed forces to their
rules and regulations, which are in conformity with
international law criminalizing child recruitment.
Furthermore, the order stressed the importance of
committing to the protocol on surrendering children
detained during armed operations to civil child
protection authorities. No photos or video footages
should be taken of recruited children who have been
arrested, and all media content of this sort should
be deleted.

Last week, the Minister for Foreign Affairs sent a
letter to Ms. Gamba to initiate the discussion between
representatives of the Yemeni Government and United
Nations officials with a view to updating the 2014
action plan to prohibit the recruitment of children.
The Government repeatedly called on competent
United Nations organizations to assist the Government
in implementing the plan, including in areas under
the control of Houthi militias. Those militias have
immensely exploited and recruited children, as is
shown in the figures contained in the reports of the
Secretary-General of 2015, 2016 and 2017

With regard to the report of the Secretary-
General for 2017 (S/2018/465), allow me to make the
following observations.
The Yemeni Government agrees with the Secretary-
General that it is critical to prevent violations against
children affected by armed conflict. That should be a
primary concern of the international community. We
must do more to address that challenge by ensuring
that the protection of children is an integral part of
any comprehensive strategy to prevent and resolve
conflicts in order to achieve lasting peace. The Yemeni
Government stresses its legal and moral obligation
to protect the lives and future of all Yemenis without
exception. We are dedicated to protecting the present
and the future of Yemeni children. After all, they are
our future and the pillar of sustainable peace.

We appreciate the praise of the Secretary-General
for the efforts undertaken by the Government of Yemen
to improve the protection of children over the past year.
The Government of Yemen has been removed from the
list ofparties that have not put in place measures during
the reporting period to that end. However, we are very
surprised to see that the legitimate Government of
Yemen and its agencies are compared to the armed
militias. The legitimate Government is seeking to
protect its people and is not recruiting children. It
cooperates with the United Nations. It complies with
international law. It is implementing Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015), as
demonstrated in the progress highlighted in the report.

The United Nations continues to rely on civil
organizations and individuals who are affiliated with
the Houthi militias as sources. Those sources are
misleading and seek by all ways and means to change
the current political crisis into a humanitarian one and
to falsify the figures and the reality on the ground in
order to place the blame on the Arab coalition and the
Yemeni Government for everything that is happening
in Yemen. The United Nations is relying on records
from the Ministry of Health and Hospitals, controlled
by Houthi militias, as sources. The Houthi militias
are falsifying those records and providing the United
Nations with false figures in order to achieve their
political goals. We have already rejected the monitoring
mechanism and called for greater transparency, and we
have stated that we are prepared to work with the Office
of Ms. Gamba to uncover the truth.

International organizations are underrepresented
in liberated areas. They do not have enough offices
there so they rely on unreliable sources and the United
Nations continues to ignore the requests of the legitimate
Government in that regard. We underscore that there
are no children in the Yemeni armed forces and that we
are fully prepared to receive a commission of inquiry
from the Office of Ms. Gamba on the allegations
contained in the report concerning the national army of
the Republic of Yemen.

We are working to update and implement the action
plan signed in 2014. We look forward to Ms. Gamba's
visit to Yemen, especially to the governorates of Aden
and Ma'rib, in order to assess the situation there and the
efforts undertaken by the centre for the rehabilitation
of child soldiers in Ma'rib. We also call on the Office
of Ms. Gamba to provide assistance so that we can
enhance the birth and death registration system in order
to provide better protection for children in the future.

In conclusion, we hope that the progress made and
the commitment of the Yemeni Government to protect
children will lead to the delisting of the Yemeni armed
forces from the report's annex and also the delisting of
the Arab coalition. We welcome the cooperation with
the Office of Ms. Gamba. We fully agree with her that
we need preventive working methods to protect children
and that we must stay clear of any propaganda that does
not promote cooperation, but rather widens the gap
between the United Nations and its Member States.

