Mr. Vural (Turkey): Before commenting on
Afghanistan, allow me, Sir, to express our deep gratitude to
you personally and to all the members of the Council for
the sympathy that has been expressed for the victims of the
devastating earthquake in Turkey. The solidarity shown and
the assistance provided by the international community in
response to this human tragedy are deeply appreciated by
the Turkish people and our Government. The continuation
of the solidarity is of utmost importance and will help us to
recover from this tragedy.

Turkey and Afghanistan enjoy a solid friendship,
which is based on deep-rooted historical ties. This enables
us to maintain contacts and to take initiatives with respect
to all the Afghan groups.
There seems to be no end to the tragic suffering of the
Afghan people, and the recent developments have
compounded this painful situation. The continued fighting
in Afghanistan is a source of serious concern for us. The
crisis in Afghanistan impairs the overall stability in the
region.

The launching of a large-scale military offensive by
the Taliban just after the Tashkent summit, and reports of
massive forced displacements of civilians from the areas
where fighting has been raging, are alarming. We believe
that all countries must refrain from complicating the already
fragile internal balance in Afghanistan and prolonging the
conflict.

My country is also deeply concerned about the human
rights violations, the separation of women and children
from their menfolk and the acts of religious extremism.
Engagement with international terrorism and cultivation of
and trafficking in narcotics, mainly emanating from the
territories controlled by the Taliban, are also cause for
concern.

Turkey appointed a coordinator for Afghanistan, at the
level of ambassador, in September last year, with the
objective of establishing contacts with the parties in
Afghanistan and the interested States and contributing to
finding a solution to the Afghan problem through peaceful
means. Since then, our coordinator has visited Kabul,
Mazar-e Sharif, Shibirgan, Kandahar, Taloqan and
Badakshan, where he has held extensive talks with several
representatives of the Afghan people. He also visited the
neighbouring countries.

Our firsthand observations confirm the obvious. A
ceasefire must be established without delay. We continue
to believe that there is no military solution to the Afghan
crisis. The preservation of the territorial integrity and
independence of Afghanistan is of utmost importance. A
lasting peace can be brought about only by the formation
of a broad-based Government with the consensus and
representation of all segments of Afghan society.

The ongoing crisis and the civil war in Afghanistan
over two decades have caused extensive damage. The
infrastructure, land cultivation, the industrial basis and
medical services are totally destroyed. The country is in
urgent need of rehabilitation.

Despite the continuing fighting, we must all, with
the United Nations in a central role, encourage the
Afghan parties to a dialogue and a solution. Turkey has
always supported and will continue to support the United
Nations in its efforts to find a durable solution to the
Afghan problem.

Enhanced bilateral diplomatic activity among the
interested countries will also contribute to the process
aimed at finding a solution to this question. Current
setbacks must not discourage us. We also believe that the
Organization of the Islamic Conference should maintain
its useful cooperation with the United Nations regarding
Afghanistan.

In spite of our relatively modest resources, and
despite the recent earthquake, Turkey is currently working
on launching a humanitarian aid programme which will
directly target the Afghan people as a whole. We are
giving priority to the most needy, among them the
disabled, infants and the widows. We believe that the
humanitarian aid schemes for Afghanistan should be
broadbased, covering all segments of Afghan society.
Turkey's contribution to the United Nations humanitarian
aid programme to Afghanistan is also under consideration.

Finally, may I express through you, Sir, our wishes
for a speedy recovery to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, who has
done an excellent job in bringing the parties together for
a peaceful solution.

