Mr. Morjane (spoke in French): The very kind
comments concerning what has been said and
concerning what I have modestly done in the Congo
must certainly have been exaggerated because of the
friendship that links me to some of those present.
However, I wish to thank members very warmly for
everything that has been said. I will take from here a
very moving memory.

With regard to everything that has been said,
particularly about my colleagues, I wish once again to
stress to the Council that, even if it they are far from us
now, they continue to do their work. I wish to express
once again all my feelings of faithfulness and warmth
towards them. I thank the members of the Council for
the kind words addressed to me and, above all, to them.
Once again, thank you.

I will, at your request, Mr. President, respond to
three questions asked - two by Ambassador
Valdivieso of Colombia and one by Ambassador
Durrant of Jamaica. The first of Ambassador
Valdivieso's two questions touches on the question of
the development of the joint Congo River Basin
Commission initiative, as envisaged in Security
Council resolution 1355 (2001).

I wish to simply say that in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) we are working on freedom of
navigation at three levels. The first level is the freedom
of movement of all MONUC vehicles, be they land,
river or air vehicles, and we do not have any
arrangement to make with the parties apart from
keeping them informed. In that context, the first barge
went from Kinshasa to Kisangani about a month ago,
as is known.

The second level is the humanitarian level. Here,
above all, we stress the need for all the parties to grant
free access to United Nations humanitarian personnel
and humanitarian personnel of non-governmental
organizations. I hope that that will crystallize on 31
July with what is called the "peace boat", which should
leave Kinshasa for Equateur Province. This also
responds to a point concerning the Ubangui, since we
are also thinking about the Ubangui when we consider
freedom of navigation on the Congo.

I hope that the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratic (RCD), with which I had a discussion two
weeks ago, will allow the second boat to leave
Kinshasa for Kisangani. But this brings us to the third
level, that of the Joint Military Commission. We have
proposed a draft agreement to the various parties,
Governments and rebel movements to regulate river
navigation. We expect to get their comments and
observations very soon, and I hope to meet with all the
parties to finalize this agreement among all the parties
so that freedom of navigation on the Congo and the
Ubangui will be a reality, which will be important for
peace, but above all for future relations among the
Congolese, wherever they are.

I also wish to thank and to pay a strong tribute to
Uruguay, which has, as members know, already
deployed its river unit at Mbandaka. We hope to be
able to have a second unit, be it from Uruguay or
another country, at Kisangani, because clearly the task
is enormous and one unit alone is not enough to ensure
the safety of navigation.

I am sorry ifI have spoken too long on this topic,
but the Council is aware, of course, of the importance
we attach to this question. As I said earlier, I hope that
we will soon have the agreement of all parties
concerning the proposed draft convention. We will
certainly be extending it to the other countries of the
region, the other countries of the Congo Basin, in order
to be able effectively to guarantee navigation on the
Ubangi as well and fully involve both the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The second question came from Ambassador
Valdivieso, and it concerned the extent of the
cooperation that we are receiving from the parties

concerning the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement. Let me say here - and I believe that

Ambassador Cunningham also raised this question -
that MONUC has prepared what is known as a concept
paper, which is a basic paper we will be discussing at
the departmental level and with all of the United
Nations agencies that should be involved.

We are already in touch with all of those who
could contribute to this important peace operation. It is
especially important also because, as we all know, it is
linked with the departure of Rwandese troops in
particular. We are working on this question with the
Joint Military Commission and with a number of
agencies. Let me note here that, for example, the World
Bank has already agreed to make available to MONUC
a World Bank executive to ensure coordination with
MONUC and to serve, in a way, as our liaison in the
area of rehabilitation, where the Bank could play a
major role.

The same thing is true of the International
Organization for Migration, which could certainly also
provide assistance in the framework of transportation,
repatriation and rehabilitation. We are working on this.
We hope for greater cooperation from the parties,
particularly with respect to information. We are greatly
lacking in information, especially as concerns armed
groups, and also definitely in terms of subsequent
cooperation, with a view to providing answers for all of
the questions that are still pending and that have not
yet been resolved at the level of the Joint Military
Commission. The Commission, as the Council is
aware, must finalize the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement plan.

General Diallo spoke today to President Kabila
about the two camps that he mentioned. He confirmed
that MONUC will be visiting the first two camps in the
next few days. This is very important for us, because,
of course, it will serve as an encouragement for the
operation, even though we are talking about fairly
limited numbers with respect to the two camps that
President Kabila spoke of to the Secretary-General and
to President Kagame.

The third question was put by Ambassador
Durrant and relates to resolution 1341 (2001) and
whether it has been respected, especially as concerns
child soldiers. Unfortunately I must inform the
Ambassador of Jamaica that it has not been sufficient.
Much remains to be done regarding resolution 1341
(2001) and the situation of child soldiers. Just
yesterday, as the Council is aware, I was speaking to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
the measures that need to be taken. I think he has
already briefed the Council on the mission, which, I
would note, was sent to the Congo at the request of the
Ambassador of Jamaica. I think that the parties need to
be encouraged and pressed further to respect those
provisions. All parties must make an effort in this
direction.

As to the violations of the ceasefire - because
Miss Durrant referred to this as well, and because
assistance to armed groups is considered a ceasefire
violation - MONUC has a list of complaints and
allegations from all sides, but especially from the RCD.
That list includes some forty or so complaints. About
10 days ago, it was submitted to the Joint Military
Commission. Unfortunately, we were not able to verify
all of the allegations, simply because, in most cases,
they took place in areas of the Congolese territory
where there are no signatory parties that could ensure
the safety of our observers. So even if a party makes an
allegation, if that party cannot ensure our safety or
accompany us, because verification must be made with
the participation of both parties - the complainant
party and the defendant party, if you will - then, as
happened in many cases, verification cannot proceed.
In other cases we were able to do this, and we sent
about 40 cases to the Joint Military Commission, as
provided for by our cooperation arrangements with that
Commission.

This, then, is what I had to say, in addition to
thanking you, Mr. President. And simply to give a
clearer picture of the regrettably fragile nature of the
ceasefire and of the process, let me recall what you
already certainly know: the state of tension that has
prevailed since yesterday in Nienze, near Bunia, and
once again between the Hema and Lendu communities.
We have to take very serious measures and precautions
there, because it seems that the situation is not at all
good in that region of the Congo. This illustrates to
what extent we are at the mercy of the many actions or
provocations that may arise in one area or another.

I should like once again to thank you, Mr.
President, and all of the members of the Council. I
remain at the Council's disposal. As the Council is
aware, I will return to Kinshasa and will be there until
at least 7 or 8 September.

