Mr. Sahovie (Serbia and Montenegro): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate Bulgaria on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to take this
opportunity to say that we highly appreciate the fact
that you, Sir, are personally presiding over the
Council's deliberations today, which is a sign of the
great importance that Bulgaria attaches to regional
issues. In addition, I thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his detailed briefing.

The current stage of making the "standards before
status" policy operational signifies a new and
exceptionally important step in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), which is the
basic framework for addressing the issue of Kosovo
and Metohija. Once again, I should like to emphasize
my Government's principled support for the "standards
before status" concept, including the sequence of
events that it clearly defines. Democratic standards
leading to a multi-ethnic society based on the rule of
law and respect for human rights must be achieved
before a political discussion aimed at determining the
final status of the province is considered.

However, the "Standards for Kosovo" document,
submitted a week ago by Special Representative Harri
Holkeri as the first stage of the implementation of the
"standards before status" policy, raises serious
concerns. Primarily, the document failed to define the
standards in a way that would open up prospects for the
creation of a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo and
Metohija. As the Government of Serbia stated on
8 December, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) rejected,
inter alia, the proposals to make the unconditional and
progressive return of refugees and displaced persons a
key standard for Kosovo and Metohija, to require full
protection of cultural heritage and to list measures to
reform the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). Our
Government considers the last-minute deletion, under
pressure from the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, of the introductory paragraph of the
"Standards for Kosovo" document to be an equal cause
for serious concern. How can one justify the removal
of the reference to resolution 1244 (1999), the
Constitutional Framework and other applicable law and
the original standards/benchmarks as the basis for that
important document?

In a related development, we have yet again
witnessed an attempt by the Kosovo Assembly to
overstep its authority and to encroach on the Special
Representative's reserved responsibilities by
challenging the UNMIK definition of applicable law in
Kosovo and Metohija. We welcome the fact that the
Special Representative promptly declared the
Assembly's decision to be invalid, and we look forward
to further information on steps taken to avoid that kind
of action in future.

Dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina is one of
the standards envisaged in the original UNMIK
standards/benchmarks as well as in the new "Standards
for Kosovo" document. The launching of the dialogue
on 14 October in Vienna foresaw the speedy
commencement of expert-level talks in four working
groups. However, that has not yet happened, and the
reason has nothing to do with the elections in Serbia,
but solely with the refusal of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to take part in the
process. We therefore look forward to the results of the
calls by the Security Council, the Contact Group and
the European Union for the start of working group
meetings.

Once again, we reaffirm that Serbia and
Montenegro is fully prepared - as has been the case
from the very beginning - to engage in discussions on
practical issues of mutual interest that would improve
the daily lives of all inhabitants of Kosovo and
Metohija. I should also like to reiterate that the
composition of the Pristina working groups must be
multi-ethnic.

I now turn to the issue of the KPC. It seems
necessary to recall that the original standards/
benchmarks require the KPC to thoroughly comply
with its mandate as a civilian emergency organization.
However, according to the extensive UNMIK/Kosovo
Force investigation, 12 KPC officers are suspected of
involvement in the terrorist bombing of the railway
bridge in Loziste in April 2003. Given that fact and the
general security context in the province, it is difficult
to believe that those officers were essentially offered a
six-month paid leave pending the results of a police
investigation. We are not aware of any similar
examples of tolerance for that kind of activity
anywhere else. Furthermore, we do not consider it to be
an auspicious beginning for the establishment of
security for all and the rule of law in the province.

With regard to the issue of privatization, we
continue to request full respect for the rights of owners
and users and for the rights of the Republic of Serbia in
the privatization process and in defining the status of
public and commercial debts. Serbia is a major creditor
to companies in Kosovo and Metohija; it provided
guarantees for foreign loans granted to them. It should
be quite obvious that those companies cannot be put up
for sale without the consent of major creditors. We
expect that issue to be properly addressed in the near
future.
UNMIK's cooperation with Serbia and
Montenegro in the preparation of the "Standards for
Kosovo" document was insufficient and lacked
substance. That should not be the case in the future,
especially with regard to the standards implementation
plan called for by the Security Council. Such a plan
should devise a set of measurable criteria for assessing
implementation of the standards. It should also
preclude the possibility of lowering the level of the
standards themselves or of allowing for different
interpretations of the criteria for their implementation.
Serbia and Montenegro emphasizes its willingness to
engage constructively in the preparation of the plan.
My Government expects to consult regularly and
substantively with the Special Representative on this
matter, and we seek the Security Council's support in
that regard. I am grateful for the comments of the
representative of the United Kingdom on this issue.

The need for continued and constructive
cooperation between our Government and UNMIK was
recognized more than two years ago in the Common
Document of 5 November 2001. The implementation of
the "standards before status" policy is a real
opportunity to translate that principle of cooperation
into practice for the benefit of all concerned. The
implementation plan should also establish a continuous
mechanism for transparently reviewing progress in
implementing the standards. Such a mechanism must
provide for regular and active involvement by Serbia
and Montenegro, whose sovereignty over Kosovo and
its territorial integrity are basic elements of resolution
1244 (1999).

No one should doubt that a stable and democratic
Kosovo and Metohija, where human rights are fully
respected, is in the best interests of Serbia and
Montenegro. To that end, we stand ready to work with
the international community. Without involvement by
all concerned, including Belgrade, durable and
sustainable solutions cannot be found. If such solutions
are imposed, it can only further complicate the
situation. On the other hand, only a balanced approach
and mutually acceptable solutions can lead to much-
needed stability in Kosovo and Metohija and in the
region as a whole.

