Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me join others
in welcoming Special Representative Yamamoto back
to the Security Council. At the outset, I would like to
reiterate the full support of the United Kingdom for him
and for the vital work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Sadly, as he and the Afghan Ambassador have
made clear, these are trying times for Afghanistan. The
horrific truck-bomb three weeks ago in Kabul was a
stark reminder of the threat that ordinary Afghans face
as they go about their daily peaceful lives. It is a threat
that we read about, that we watch on the news or hear
about in the Chamber, and yet the proximity of the attack
to the British Embassy and other diplomatic missions in
Kabul really brought home to us the barbarity of those
who seek to terrorize Afghanistan. Sadly, it was once
again innocent Afghan men, women and children who
bore the terrible toll of that attack.

In response to this horrific tide of violence, the
United Kingdom stands in solidarity with the people,
the Government and the armed forces of Afghanistan.
We stand in solidarity, knowing what it means to endure
terror in our streets, knowing what it means to stand up
to those who seek to divide us. Whether in the streets
of Kabul, Manchester or London, our message must be
clear and unwavering: enough is enough.

Those attacks must come to an end. All support to
those who commit such terrible acts must come to an
end. For Afghanistan, that means the region working
together to create the conditions for a more stable future
for Afghanistan. It means continuing to prioritize an
Afghan-led and -owned peace process - one that leads
to a political settlement that ends the violence. It means
acknowledging the successes the Afghan Government
has achieved in such challenging circumstances. It
means Afghans coming together to protect those gains
in the face of such huge challenges.

Afghanistan needs to be united now more than
ever. It needs to be looking to the future in hope,
not in fear. The people of Afghanistan need to feel
that they have a stake in that future. We believe that
holding parliamentary elections based on a credible and
realistic timeline would be an important step towards
creating that stake, towards creating broader political
inclusion. The setting of a date would be good news
and should serve as a catalyst for the necessary reforms
to be undertaken and processes to be put in place
with due speed to ensure that elections are free, fair
and transparent.

We welcome President Ghani's work to reshape
and re-energize his Government's efforts in pursuit of
peace. As the tragic events in Kabul remind us, now
is the time for action and for the implementation of
the structures and the processes that will bring about
progress on this daunting but essential issue. Afghans
from across the country, its ethnic groups and its
socioeconomic divides have a stake in this process
and need to be embraced and included in pursuit of a
national consensus on peace. We encourage meaningful
dialogue with all sectors of society, including women
and girls.

In all of this, the United Kingdom believes that the
United Nations has a crucial role to play - whether
by helping to ensure that the rights of Afghan people
are protected and upheld or by supporting the Kabul
process and its vital work, on building a regional
consensus on peace.
I want to thank Special Representative Yamamoto
for his role in facilitating the launch ofthe Kabul process
earlier this month. That was the first step in a long
journey that will need to emphasize both the security
and the political tracks, and which will require energy
and commitment from all of us to sustain, including
from the United Nations. As such, we look forward
to the outcome of the strategic review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. UNAMA
is at the heart of the international community's work
on Afghanistan. It is more important now than ever that
the Mission be properly configured and empowered to
deliver the maximum effect on the issues that are so
crucial for Afghanistan's future - whether it is efforts
to support the Government's pursuit of peace or its
work to uphold the human rights of the Afghan people.

