Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I will
present this statement on behalf of the co-penholders
on the Syria humanitarian file: Kuwait, Germany
and Belgium.

I would like to start by thanking Reena Ghelani,
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her
valuable briefing. I would also like to thank, through
her, all the humanitarian and medical personnel
throughout Syria for their courage and the tireless
efforts to alleviate human suffering in Syria. They have
been there for eight years, since the start of the conflict,
and continue to provide life-saving assistance, including
most recently through the humanitarian convoy to more
than 40,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) at the
Rukban camp.

The situation for IDPs at the Rukban camp has
further deteriorated over the winter months. That
has put particular strain on the camp's vulnerable
population, the vast majority of whom are women and
children. After months of inexcusable delays, in early
February the United Nations finally got the green
light to deploy, together with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, a joint inter-agency convoy consisting of 133
trucks. Humanitarian workers handed out much-needed
food, sanitation and hygiene supplies, and provided
winterization materials. They also conducted the
vaccination campaign for some 7,000 children. Finally,
they undertook an intentions survey of the inhabitants
of the camp in order to explore a lasting solution to the
dire humanitarian situation in Rukban.

According to the results of the survey, an
overwhelming majority of the inhabitants wish to leave
the camp and many of them want to return to their
area of origin, although they expressed security and
safety concerns, as well as concerns about the lack of
civil documentation and about access to their property
or housing. Indeed, while the convoy was a much-
needed step, and regular, sustained United Nations
humanitarian access to Rukban remains a necessity
in the short term, a more lasting solution is needed
through collective efforts and arrangements, in full
coordination with the United Nations.

Those relocation efforts, however, must uphold key
principles. All returns or relocations must be voluntary,
safe, dignified, well-informed and in accordance with
international humanitarian and human rights law
and key protection standards. People must be able to
relocate to a place of their choosing. United Nations
humanitarian staff must be granted access to the
population prior to any departure, during movement and
after relocation in order to provide protection support,
assess needs and deliver assistance. Family unity needs
to be safeguarded and children, women, the elderly
and people with special needs must be afforded special
protection during all phases of the relocation. Regular,
free and unfettered access of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to returnees
is key to finding and successfully implementing durable
solutions for IDPs and voluntary returnees.

We continue to urge all parties to grant regular,
safe, sustained and unconditional humanitarian access
across Syria. Parties to the conflict must allow the
humanitarian community to provide protection and
assistance based on needs, including gender-specific
needs, and in an impartial and non-discriminatory
manner. Far too often, constraints of a bureaucratic or
security nature, imposed by all parties, remain. Far too
often, the United Nations is not able to reach people in
need. That considerably affects United Nations access
to areas with high needs, particularly during the current
winter months.

We are closely following the situation in the north
of Syria, specifically in Idlib governorate, where
3 million civilians are located - half of them IDPs.
After a period of relative calm, the recent surge of
violent incidents has resulted in numerous civilian
casualties. The Russian-Turkish ceasefire memorandum
of understanding has been instrumental in preventing
the catastrophic consequences that would be caused by
any military offensive.

We reiterate our call on all parties to continue to
engage in the full implementation of the agreement, as
the situation in Idlib remains particularly fragile. We
also call for a nation-wide cessation of hostilities, as
stipulated in resolution 2401 (2018). Furthermore, we
call on all parties to ensure the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure, as laid out by international
humanitarian and international human rights law, as
a matter of priority. We strongly condemn all attacks
against civilian infrastructure, particularly schools and
hospitals, as well as indiscriminate attacks on densely
populated areas.

Following weeks of intense fighting in the area
of Deir ez-Zor, fighting is subsiding. Over the past
weeks, some 25,000 people, especially the most
vulnerable - women, children and the elderly - fled
the area of Hajin to relocate to the Al-Hol camp. Along
the 300-kilometre route, they further encountered
harsh conditions - cold temperatures and a lack of
food, water, shelter and health services - and serious
protection concerns. We deplore the loss of lives amongst
those making this journey northwards, in particular the
many newborns and young children. The situation at
the Al-Hol camp is dire; the camp is overcrowded and
its capacity has been overstretched by the numerous
new arrivals, pushing the number of people at the camp
to almost 47,000. We welcome the installation of a
transit centre, halfway between Haijn and Al-Hol, to
provide urgently needed assistance to IDPs. We support
all efforts to allow United Nations humanitarian access
in order to alleviate human suffering.

Thousands of Syrian men, women and children
continue to be arbitrarily arrested and detained. We
take note of the recent release of a number of detainees
and prisoners. However, more needs to be done, and we
call on all actors to continue work on that important
issue, towards concrete, tangible progress. We condemn
the reported use of torture and sexual violence against
those men, women and children. Perpetrators are to be
held accountable.

The conflict in Syria will soon enter its eighth
year. The humanitarian needs, both inside the country
and in the region, remain particularly high. Inside
Syria, nearly 12 million people - of whom almost
half are children - are still in need of humanitarian
assistance, ranging from food provisions and medical
treatment to water, sanitation and hygiene, protection
and psychosocial support services, child protection,
protection from gender-based violence and mine
action. United Nations humanitarian agencies and
partners continue to reach more than 3 million people
per month, both from inside Syria and through the
cross-border mechanism, as mandated by the Security
Council. Among them, 700,000 people - most of
them displaced - are in acute need and receive
lifesaving assistance.

The third Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, which will take place
in Brussels in mid-March, will allow us to renew our
focus on the plight of the population affected by the
Syrian conflict, as well as Syrian refugees in the region,
and renew our commitment to and concrete support
for their humanitarian needs. It will offer a forum to
discuss the most critical humanitarian issues, such as
ensuring access and the provision of life-saving aid and
protection, as well as approaches to ensuring livelihoods
and resilience. It will also seek new financial pledges to
address the needs in Syria and the region. We call on all
potential donors to contribute to meeting those needs.

The people of Syria deserve to live in peace.
Only peace, grounded in strong inclusive foundations,
can break the cycle of violence. Therefore, we need
to advance the political process through a genuine
and inclusive political settlement in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions.

We also continue to advocate for the accountability
of all those responsible for breaches of international
law, in particular international humanitarian law and
human rights law. To that end, the co-penholders
will continue to support the important role of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. Without an inclusive political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and without
accountability, no sustainable peace is possible.

I should like to conclude by expressing our full
support for Special Envoy Pedersen in his engagement
to implement resolution 2254 (2015). We look forward
to his first briefing before the Council this Thursday.

