Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation expresses its
profound thanks and appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this important and timely open meeting of the
Council on this subject. We acknowledge the presence of
Ms. Carol Bellamy and Mr. Benon Sevan. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraphs 28
and 30 of resolution 1284 (1999) and paragraph 5 of
resolution 1281 (1999). We also endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendations for a total allocation
of $600 million to finance the procurement of oil spare
parts and equipment for phases VI and VII to offset
permanent damage to the oil-bearing structures in Iraq.

Poor oilfield husbandry - the direct result of the
many holds on oil spare parts and equipment - has
resulted in irreversible damage to individual oil reservoirs.
Oil revenue derived from these fields is critical to the
success of the oil-for-food programme, but should not be
treated merely as an infinite source of funding for the
programme. This depletable natural resource does not
belong solely to the current generation; it also belongs to
future generations of Iraqis. Hence, there is a need to
ensure its sustainability, which is currently severely
impaired by the numerous holds on oil spare parts.

These extra allocations should also be used to ensure
the safety of personnel working in extremely dangerous
and hazardous conditions. There is also a need to provide
for the purchase of the requisite equipment for the
protection of the environment. In this regard, we would
like to draw attention to the potential environmental
crisis - a crisis that is waiting to happen - as a result
of the deteriorating facilities in the Mina-al-Bakr offshore
loading terminal. Again, the major contributing factor is
the holds. The Secretary-General has, on numerous
occasions, belaboured this point and alerted us to the
environmental catastrophe that would result from oil
spillage. The transboundary nature of such pollution
means that its impact would not be restricted to Iraqi
shores, but would also be felt by Kuwait and
neighbouring countries.
We sincerely hope that the enhancement of the
observation and monitoring capabilities in the oil sector
will result in a significant lifting of the holds. This
approach should be extended to the humanitarian sectors
as well, where significant holds remain in critical
infrastructure projects that provide for safe drinking water
and electricity generation.

For almost a decade, the most comprehensive and
punitive sanctions ever imposed on a people have
destroyed Iraq as a modern State, decimated its people
and ruined its agriculture, educational and health-care
systems, as well as its infrastructure. The devastating
effects of the sanctions testify to the failure of
comprehensive sanctions as a policy tool. Such sanctions
violate basic human rights - the right to live with
dignity and, indeed, the right to life itself. The sanctions
regime has brought about a humanitarian crisis of
enormous proportions. This is beyond dispute. The
tragedy is that, while much of the devastation can be
prevented, it has been allowed to continue. The situation
is so deplorable that, to their great credit, a group of
concerned legislators in the United States Congress have
felt compelled to pronounce themselves on the subject.
They have characterized the sanctions regime as

 

"infanticide masquerading as policy". Clearly, the sanctions
do more than hurt; they kill, especially those who are most
vulnerable.

We are all too familiar with the estimate by the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) in its recent report that
over 5,000 children under the age of five years die each
month due to the effects of the sanctions. That would make
the total over a period of nine years a staggering half a
million. How ironic it is that the same policy that is
supposed to disarm Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction
has itself become a weapon of mass destruction, resulting
in the deaths of innocent children. In the name of the
international community, United Nations economic
sanctions are incapacitating an entire society. To add insult
to injury, the entire programme of deprivation being
imposed on the Iraqi people and the mechanism instituted
for that purpose are being paid for with proceeds from the
sale of their own oil.

My delegation fully appreciates the legitimate security
concerns that have been expressed in respect of Iraq in the
wake of its invasion of Kuwait a decade ago. Likewise, we
sympathize and empathize with the families of the more
than 600 Kuwaiti missing persons and other third-country
nationals, who need to be accounted for and more
aggressively sought. We support the efforts of Ambassador
Yuli Vorontsov, the recently appointed coordinator tasked
with resolving this issue as well as with facilitating the
return of the country's national archives and other property
that were taken out of Kuwait. These are important
humanitarian issues on which there is complete consensus
in the Council. We therefore call on Iraq to fulfil its
obligation in this regard, along with all of its other
international obligations, to continue its participation in the
Tripartite Commission and the Technical Subcommittee and
to cooperate in resolving these issues once and for all, in
the interest of humanitarianism and for the sake of restoring
normalcy to the region.

The economic sanctions imposed upon Iraq since 1991
have inflicted suffering primarily on civilians, especially the
most vulnerable members of the Iraqi population, namely,
the elderly, the sick and children. We believe their
continued suffering for an indefinite period in the future is
incompatible with the spirit and letter of the United Nations
Charter. The deprivation caused by the embargo is equally
incompatible with the provisions of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. It has been said that the
sanctions regime imposed on Iraq is not a form of
development aid. Indeed, it is not: it is a form of
punishment. But for how long should this collective
punishment continue? For the unfortunate victims, who
are desperately poor after a decade of sanctions, poverty
is a life sentence that daily crushes their human spirit and
dignity as a people. Unless this is the intended objective
of the sanctions - and I do not believe it is - their
prolongation is, in Malaysia's View, inhumane and
unconscionable.

We believe that the loss of lives and the untold
suffering of the civilian population are excessive in
relation to the concrete and direct benefits accruing from
efforts to disarm Iraq. UNICEF is not the only United
Nations agency to report on the negative impact of the
sanctions regime. The World Health Organization, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
support similar conclusions. A number of concerned and
courageous individuals, notably Mr. Denis Halliday,
Mr. Hans Von Sponeck and Ms. Jutta Burghardt, who are
intimately acquainted with the realities on the ground,
have all confirmed what we already know, or do not wish
to know: that the continuing economic sanctions on the
Iraqi people are indefensible and must be terminated as
soon as possible. We believe that more and more people
of conscience and courage will speak out in the weeks
and months ahead, as the deplorable humanitarian
situation in Iraq can no longer be defended with a clear
conscience by men and women of good will.

It is time for the international community to craft a
new policy on Iraq that addresses the legitimate security
concerns of the international community but does not
inflict indiscriminate suffering on the Iraqi people. If we
are serious in our intention and efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the innocent Iraqi people, there should be no
linkage between progress in disarming Iraq and the
humanitarian efforts being undertaken by the Council. The
economic sanctions should be drastically overhauled,
eased and delinked from military sanctions. The oil-for-
food programme, a humanitarian measure that was meant
to be temporary, is no panacea to mitigate the effects of
the sanctions.

The humanitarian panel established by this Council
and headed by Ambassador Celso Amorim of Brazil, a
former member of the Council, made an important
observation which I wish to quote because of its
pertinence to the subject under discussion. It observed that

"even if all the humanitarian supplies were provided
in a timely manner, the humanitarian programme

 

implemented pursuant to resolution 986 (1995) can
admittedly only meet but a small fraction of the
priority needs of the Iraqi people. Regardless of the
improvements that might be brought about in the
implementation of the current humanitarian
programme - in terms of approval procedures, better
performance by the Iraqi Government or funding
levels - the magnitude of the humanitarian needs is
such that they cannot be met within the context of the
parameters set forth in resolution 986 (1995)".

Let us pause and ponder this very pertinent observation.

Resolution 1284 (1999) seeks, inter alia, to streamline
the approval process in the sanctions Committee, secure
improvement in performance on the part of Iraq and
remove the oil export ceiling. However, the prohibitions on
the dual-use items - critical inputs in many civilian
projects - remain very much in place. This resolution does
not even begin to address the essence of the humanitarian
problem. How can such incremental increases hope to
succeed when the cause of the problem is structural in
nature?

Much of the civilian infrastructure in Iraq was
destroyed during the war and in subsequent bombings of
the country, which continue even now in the illegal so-
called no-fly zones, which violate Iraq's sovereignty and
further complicate the situation. Iraq cannot rebuild or
repair the damage to its pre-war status because the
disbursement of money for the oil-for-food programme is
controlled by the Security Council. Many of the needed
spares and equipment are prohibited by the sanctions
regime. Holds on contracts, worth hundreds of millions of
dollars, hamper overall efforts in some critical sectors to
alleviate the humanitarian situation. What good are food
and medicines if clean water is not available? Extensive
holds in the electricity and oil sectors have serious
consequences for the people of Iraq.

In 1990, prior to the adoption of resolution 661
(1990), no study was done to advise the Council on the
probable humanitarian impact of the proposed sanctions.
That was a regrettable omission, but that mistake should not
be compounded by a failure to carry out an impact
assessment. The sanctions should be subjected to
monitoring and regular reviews during the operation of the
sanctions regime, as is provided for.

The social costs of the sanctions have been enormous.
Children have been compelled to work, beg or engage in
crime in order to survive. Young women have been
compelled into prostitution out of dire economic
circumstances. Fathers have abandoned their families,
unable to cope with the economic and psychological
pressures.

Iraq's education system has collapsed, with
thousands of teachers leaving their posts because of the
unbearable working conditions. The drop-out rate for
primary and secondary levels is estimated at 30 per cent.
Less than 4 per cent of funds available were allocated to
the education sector. The difficulty of getting educational
materials essentially means that an intellectual embargo is
also in effect.

The health services have not been able to handle
preventable diseases - such as diarrhoea, gastroenteritis,
respiratory tract infection and polio - from spreading to
epidemic proportions. Hospitals attempt to function with
collapsed water and sewerage systems and without even
basic supplies for hygiene and minimal care. UNICEF
estimates that 30 per cent of Iraqi children are chronically
and acutely malnourished. These children will be
physically and mentally stunted for the rest of their lives.

Iraq's younger generation is growing up resentful of
the sanctions, bitter, angry and alienated from the world.
An entire people have been stripped of their pride and
dignity and may find it difficult to collaborate with the
international community. There will assuredly be long-
term social and political impacts of the sanctions.

These are but some of the more apparent examples
of the pervasive impact of the sanctions. The true and
complete picture will be known only after a
comprehensive impact assessment of the sanctions regime
has been made.

Even if sanctions were to be lifted today, the
problems afflicting Iraq today would persist well into the
future. We believe that the real impact is more pervasive
than we really know. On the economic front, economic
reconstruction efforts, by one conservative estimate, will
need between $50 billion and $100 billion just for
essential infrastructure utilities. External debts will also be
another burden that Iraq will have to bear even as it
attempts to rehabilitate the economy.

There have been disturbing reports about the effects
of depleted uranium arising from shells used against Iraq
during the Gulf War. The highly toxic particles have been
known to cause cancer and to result in irreversible
damage to the kidneys and deformation of the foetus.

 

There have been reports of a disproportionately high
incidence of cancer among Iraqis in the south, where these
munitions were largely used. The matter should be
investigated and assistance rendered to Iraq to overcome the
problems posed by these toxic wastes.

The defenders of continued, relentless sanctions have
argued that they are necessary to prevent Iraq from
threatening its neighbours and rebuilding its arsenal. The
goal of these sanctions, however, seems to have changed.
The original United Nations resolutions imposed sanctions
to pressure Iraq to eliminate its programmes of weapons of
mass destruction. Policy statements emanating from some
capitals, however, suggest that sanctions will remain in
place until certain political objectives have been achieved.
This policy clearly undermines the original objective of the
sanctions, around which the international consensus against
Iraq was originally based, and makes children and families
in Iraq virtual hostages to the political deadlock between
Governments. The continuing demonizing of Iraq must stop
if we are serious in our professed concern for the plight of
the Iraqi people.

After more than nine years of the most comprehensive
economic embargo on a State Member of this Organization,
it is clear that the continuation of the sanctions regime in its
present form is morally indefensible. Its continuation will
only prolong the agony of the long-suffering Iraqi people
and damage the credibility of the United Nations - this
Council in particular. By sustaining economic sanctions
against Iraq in the full knowledge of their deplorable
consequences, the Security Council will continue to
undermine the Charter of the United Nations. It is time for
us to view the matter not, for the most part, through the
narrow prism of security - which is important, but which
has substantially been addressed - but also and equally
frequently through the broader prism of humanity.

Accordingly my delegation strongly urges the Council
to commission an immediate and comprehensive impact
assessment of the sanctions on Iraq. The periodic United
Nations reports, while they are useful and serve their
purpose, simply do not tell the whole story; only a
comprehensive study can do so. Such a study is not only
necessary, it is long overdue. In appealing to the Council to
act on this call, let me remind Council members of the sad
and unnecessary deaths of the innocent children of Iraq by
quoting the noted Lebanese philosopher and writer who
wrote,

"They died in silence, for humanity had closed its ears

to their cries".

In this regard I would like to recommend that
Council members View an important documentary film
made by Mr. John Pilger, entitled Paying the Price:
Killing the Children of Iraq, which was produced by
Carlton Television of London and first aired in the United
Kingdom on ITV. Viewing it might perhaps open our ears
to the cries of those Iraqi children who are still living.

I have spoken at length on this subject. For
Malaysia, the issue of sanctions on Iraq is a matter of
great importance and concern to our people, as it is to
other peoples elsewhere. It is a matter of humanitarian
concern and of morality, not of polemics. For us, it is a
matter of conscience, especially in view of our
membership. I believe it is the same for many other
members of the Council, as well as for those outside of
it.

