Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this important meeting. At the outset, I
would also like to thank Lord Ashdown and Judge
Meron, not only for their very interesting and
comprehensive reports, but also for what they are doing
in the field.

The representative of Italy will later present the
views of the European Union (EU), which we fully
endorse, and my statement will therefore be limited to
some general observations and some issues of criminal
justice.

To focus on these issues is a particular challenge
in a meeting that is honoured by the presence of our
two speakers, Lord Ashdown and Judge Meron, the
President of the ad hoc International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia - two persons representing,
each in his own way, the prospect of Bosnia and
Herzegovina being rebuilt on a basis of justice and the
rule of law.

I wish both of them the best of luck in their
respective endeavours to advance the difficult and
delicate, yet immensely important, process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We share Lord Ashdown's overall assessment of
the present situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There
have indeed been marked improvements in key areas
such as security, the economy, monetary stability, the
return of refugees and constitutional guarantees for the
equality of the three ethnic groups.

But, on the other hand, there are remaining
problems. These problem areas comprise particular,
partly dysfunctional State structures and the notorious
ethnical divide. Seven years after Dayton, the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still more complex than
in other countries in transition.

We commend Lord Ashdown for focusing the
reform process on the rule of law, economic
rehabilitation and on the consolidation of State
structures. These are important steps into the right
direction. We support the High Representative's
approach to reforms in these areas. The Reform
Commissions will have to play an important role,
particularly in the fields of defence, taxes and
intelligence services, as well as with regard to Mostar,
as mentioned by Lord Ashdown.

Further progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina
depends now to a large extent on the sense of
ownership that the authorities develop. The future of
the country cannot be that of an externally
administered territory. Bosnia and Herzegovina must
instead grow into its role as a fully sovereign State,
with a view to participating in the European and trans-
Atlantic structures.

We reassure Judge Meron of our continuous
support, both political and material, to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The Tribunal is a remarkable precedent for delivering
impartial criminal justice. It is a milestone in
international criminal justice and Germany will do its
utmost to ensure that the Tribunal can fulfil its mission.
Therefore, together with our partners of the European
Union (EU), we will continue to urge all States
concerned, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
improve and intensify their cooperation with the ICTY,
as this is an indispensable prerequisite for the timely
and cost-effective delivery of justice.

Allow me to turn to two specific points of
criminal justice:

First, in the Council's ministerial meeting of 24
September 2003 devoted to the question of justice and
the rule of law, Germany insisted on the
complementarity between national and international
justice, a principle that we feel needs to be translated
into specific arrangements, wherever feasible.

Clearly, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a case in
point. Bosnia and Herzegovina should now be able,
with international assistance, to bring war criminals to
justice in national courts. Bosnia and Herzegovina's
acceptance of this responsibility is an important
indicator of its political will to gain ownership of its
domestic matters.

Like all members of the Council, Germany
therefore fully supports the establishment of a War
Crimes Chamber at the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We would like to reiterate the call that
the Council made to the international community, by
means of Council resolution 1503 (2003), to support
the establishment of that special Chamber. Germany
has already pledged support in the shape of an
important financial contribution and the secondment of
an expert.

My second point pertains to the Council's second
meeting on justice and the rule of law, on 30 September
2003. In this meeting, Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno said "By and large, though, the international
tribunals have so far not always proved to be efficient
or effective instruments for prosecuting and trying
those suspected of the most serious crimes, and they
have been too slow and too costly" (S/PV.4835).

I have no doubt that these remarks were made not
as a criticism, but as an invitation to constantly
evaluate our action and the performance of the bodies
we have created and to draw lessons from this
evaluation, so that we will be better equipped to
address future challenges. Obviously, questions about a
court's ability to deliver justice in a timely and cost-
effective manner are very relevant.

The cases of Sierra Leone and of Bosnia and
Herzegovina indicate that hybrid tribunals, or
internationally assisted national courts, can be, under
certain circumstances, interesting and cost-effective
alternatives. As far as international mechanisms of
criminal justice are concerned, the Council should
henceforth take into account the fact that, since the
establishment of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), there is an instrument of international justice
that is permanently available, not just ad hoc, and that
holds the promise to match, or even to exceed, the two
ad hoc tribunals, in terms of judicial standards, public
acceptance and effectiveness.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Germany
would be very pleased to see ongoing cooperation and
cross-fertilization between the various actors who
operate in the sphere of international justice. We
strongly suggest that in the future, the Council give
increased consideration to the possibility of referring
situations to the ICC whenever there is a need for
international criminal justice.

