Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation is
pleased to acknowledge the participation at this
meeting of His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.

Indonesia voted in favour of resolution 1859
(2008), adopted earlier, which extends, inter alia, the
arrangements regarding the Development Fund for Iraq
(DFI) and the monitoring of the DFI by the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB).
As underlined in the 7 December 2008 letter of Prime
Minister Nuri al-Maliki to the President of the Security
Council, the DFI and the IAMB have played an
important role in assisting Iraq to ensure the use of the
proceeds from Iraq's natural resources for the benefit
of the Iraqi people.

We welcome notable developments in various
sectors, including improvements in security across Iraq
in the past few months.

Despite those developments, we recognize that
Iraq continues to face multifaceted challenges. We
therefore believe that the continued support of the
international community will remain pertinent to the
ongoing efforts by the Government and the people of
Iraq in overcoming those challenges.

Of prime importance to achieving peace, stability
and sustainable socio-economic progress in Iraq is
inclusive political dialogue and reconciliation.
Meaningful and inclusive political dialogue and
reconciliation across political, ethnic and sectarian
lines, as well as significant support from all segments
of the Iraqi population, are critical to the achievement
of long-term stability in the country.

We commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq for its support and assistance to the
Government of Iraq in achieving progress in various
sectors, including the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation. My delegation also Wishes to reaffirm
once again our support for the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of the country.

Before I conclude - and with your kind
permission, Sir, as this may be the last occasion for my
delegation to participate in a meeting of the Security
Council before terminating its current membership - I
would like to share a few thoughts.

Foremost among those is our profound
appreciation to the Member States of the Organization
for entrusting Indonesia with the responsibilities that
come with membership in the Council. We have been
humbled by their trust and have worked diligently at all
times, imbued with the awareness of the weight of that
trust. In particular, my delegation has consistently
worked hard to ensure that the concerns of the wider
membership are properly channelled in the Council's
deliberations.

My delegation also deeply appreciates the
cooperation and collegiality that mark the working
environment within the Council. Above all, Indonesia
has consistently believed that an effective Council is a
united Council, one that is able to speak with one voice
and act as one. Building bridges has been our perennial
concern and will continue to guide our efforts beyond
the Council.

Not least, we owe a deep debt of gratitude to the
Secretariat for their professionalism and dedication. I
cannot find appropriate words to express our thanks for
the support rendered. With those words, I wish the
Council members all the best in their future
endeavours.

