Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Like others, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno for the briefing he gave us, and I also
want to add, Mr. President, that we are very happy with
this format you have instituted of having an interactive
session to discuss issues like this. I think this allows
us, hopefully, to be a bit more reflective, a bit more
thoughtful in responding to the issues that we deal
with.

In that spirit, I would like to put forward one
suggestion, which I think is both procedural as well as
substantive, on this issue. I think it is useful for us

when we discuss Kosovo - and we seem to be
discussing Kosovo once a month every month
nowadays - to listen to the 15 national perspectives

that we have. But in the eyes of the international
community I think what is of interest to them is
whether the Council is moving forward in a common
direction towards resolving this major issue. Here,
frankly, I am building on a remark, the last point that
was made by my colleague on my left, the Ambassador
of Tunisia, when he said that when we discuss Kosovo,
we should look at the global exit strategy on this issue.
This is where, after attending Council discussions on
Kosovo several months now, I am really not sure
whether, in terms of our end goal of getting Kosovo off
the Security Council agenda, we are moving forward or
backwards. Sometimes I think we move forward.
Sometimes we move backwards.

In so doing, we should also bear in mind that of
all the peacekeeping operations that the United Nations
is handling, Kosovo is one of the three most expensive.
According to the figures given to me for the
expenditure in 2000, the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) will cost us $510 million,
the United Nations Transitional Administration
Mission in East Timor (UNTAET) will cost us $540
million and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) will cost us $500 million.
But I think if you add the other costs of the residents of
the international community, Kosovo is by far the most
difficult operation that we have.

Given that it may be useful for us at these
meetings to ask whether we are going in the right
direction over the long term, I am aware that the
eventual goal is spelled out in Annex 1 of resolution
1244 (1999), which says that our goal should be a
political process towards the establishment of an
interim political framework agreement providing for
substantial self-government for Kosovo, taking full
account of the Rambouillet accords and the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the other countries of the
region, and the demilitarization of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA). These goals have been spelled
out. The question is whether we are moving forward in
that direction.

Here I noticed that we discussed elections quite
frequently today, and the general assumption will be
that the elections will be a positive step forward. I
think Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno confirmed this in his
answer when he said that elections are a better choice
than the use of the gun. But the question in my mind is:
Is it possible that the elections could have a
destabilizing effect if, in the process of the elections,
we have political parties that will say that their end
goal is to ensure that Kosovo becomes independent, as
opposed to other parties that will say that their end goal
is to see the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
Which of these political parties are likely to be more
successful in the coming elections. I am aware that
these are municipal elections, but in the course of
municipal elections larger issues may be raised.

Against this backdrop, I want to use two
metaphors to illustrate some of the difficulties we face
as we meet every month to discuss Kosovo. The first
metaphor I will use is the one of the play Hamlet and
the ghost. You cannot stage the play of Hamlet without
having the scene of the ghost. In the same way, every
time we meet to discuss Kosovo, there seems to be a
ghost hanging around this room, asking us, what is the
ultimate destination and how are we going to get there.

The second metaphor is that of going where we
want to go, and I like to use the metaphor moving a big
boulder up a mountain. Judging from all the comments
we have heard and the discussions on Kosovo, it is
quite clear that while we all agree on the formal
outlines of the goals we want to reach, we are all aware
that we have an unusually difficult mission ahead of us.
Indeed, in trying to rebuild the fabric of a nation that
has been torn apart and in putting it together as one
nation, the task is akin to that of, as I said earlier,
moving a big boulder up a mountain. So, perhaps, as
we meet month after month on Kosovo, we want to ask
ourselves, are we moving the boulder up or is the
boulder rolling backwards when we discuss Kosovo. I
hope that we will bear this in mind as we have future
discussions on Kosovo.

Finally, since several delegations have spoken in
support of the Security Council mission to Kosovo and
Belgrade, I want to say that we are very happy to
support this mission and we will also be happy to
participate in it if it is helpful to do so.

