In accordance with paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February 2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council on the work of the Committee established by the same resolution. The report covers the period from 20 May to 2 September 2020, during which time the Committee conducted its work using the silence procedure. The members of the Committee also met, on 28 July, in the "informal informals" format via closed video-teleconference, with 18 invited Member States, including Libya, and three regional organizations. The purpose of that event, which was a follow-up to the third formal meeting of the Committee, held on 30 August 2019, was to continue to strengthen the dialogue on the effective implementation of the sanctions measures imposed by the Security Council in relation to Libya, with a focus on the implementation of the arms embargo, and to seek information regarding actions taken thereto. I will now report on the activities of the Committee and developments as they relate to the individual sanctions measures. With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee received two written updates from the Panel of Experts focusing on aspects of implementation. This was followed by information on three entities and one individual whom the Panel considered to have met a sanctions designation criterion. The Committee received a letter from Turkey that addressed, inter alia, the application of the authorizations contained in resolution 2292 (2016), as most recently extended by resolution 2526 (2020), for the implementation of the arms embargo on the high seas off the coast of Libya. The Committee also received a letter from Tunisia concerning one of the Panel's updates. The Committee approved an exemption request, invoking paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Malta and is currently considering a request for guidance related to the applicability of the arms embargo from Tunisia. Concerning the measures aimed at preventing illicit exports of petroleum, including crude oil and refined petroleum products, the Committee received notifications from its Libyan focal point pursuant to resolution 2146 (2014), as well as from the Panel of Experts, regarding the activities of a Gabon-flagged tanker, the M/V Jal Laxmi, which had been adrift outside Libyan territorial waters with the alleged aim of loading heavy fuel oil and maritime gas oil outside the umbrella of the Libyan National Oil Company. The Committee dispatched a letter to the flag State. Ultimately, the vessel did not berth at Tobruk port and left the international waters off the coast of Libya. In connection with the assets freeze, the Committee received two letters from the Libyan Investment Authority (LIA), a listed entity, pertaining to different aspects of its functioning. It exchanged additional correspondence with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on a matter related to the LIA and, in that connection, received a letter from the Panel of Experts. No negative decision was taken by the Committee in relation to three exemption notifications, invoking paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Bahrain, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. The Committee also received a letter from the Panel of Experts on the subject of one of the aforementioned paragraph 19 (a) exemption notifications. In connection with the travel ban, the Committee received an exemption notification, invoking paragraph 16 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by the Russian Federation regarding the imminent travel of Mr. Abu Zayed Umar Dorda, a listed individual. The Committee was subsequently informed that the travel would not be taking place. The Committee also approved an exemption request, invoking paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted by Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi. On 15 June, the Committee dispatched a note verbale to all Member States, in follow-up to paragraph 8 of resolution 2509 (2020), which called upon them to report to the Committee on the steps they had taken to effectively implement the travel ban and assets-freeze measures in relation to all individuals on the Libya sanctions list. The Committee has received six implementation reports since that date. During the reporting period, the Committee also received information from the Panel of Experts on a second individual whom the Panel believes meets additional designation criteria. I would also like to note that the Committee received the interim report of the Panel of Experts on Libya on 20 August. Members of the Committee intend to discuss it in the coming days. In conclusion, I would like to highlight the importance of the full implementation by Member States of all sanctions measures and encourage them to continue supporting the work of the Panel of Experts. With regard to the work of the Panel, I would like to recall the privileges and immunities enjoyed by experts on mission under the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations. I would also like to reiterate the Committee's commitment to contribute to promoting peace and stability in Libya.
