Ms. Bird (Australia): Let me start byjoining others
in welcoming Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto and thanking
him for his first briefing as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.

The security situation across Afghanistan
remains challenging. Recent violent attacks in Kabul,
deliberately targeting Afghanistan's civilian population,
are particularly concerning. We condemn the brutal
tactics used by insurgent groups. In the face of these
attacks, the Afghan people and security forces continue
to demonstrate courage and resilience. Australia
reaffirms its commitment to assisting Afghanistan in
defending its people against the insurgency. We support
the efforts of President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah to maintain the National Unity Government.
Constructive working relationships and a shared vision
across all levels of Government are key to managing
Afghanistan's security and economic interests.

Australia supports United Nations efforts to assist
returning refugees and internally displaced persons in
a safe, orderly and dignified manner. We encourage
Afghanistan's neighbours to support a manageable flow
of returnees, enabling the Government of Afghanistan
to respond effectively, particularly in the lead-up
to winter.

This year, the international community continues
to rally its support for Afghanistan with two major
summits. The Warsaw Summit in July demonstrated
ongoing international support for Afghanistan's security
needs. Australia, alongside international partners,
reaffirmed our commitment to Afghanistan. Together,
we agreed to continue our support for Afghanistan's
security forces, formalizing our commitment to NATO's
Resolute Support Mission beyond 2016 and to providing
sustainment funding at current levels through to 2020.
The international community also welcomed President
Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah's commitment
to reforming at Warsaw. We look forward to the
presentation of the Government's national development
strategy at the Brussels Conference next month, and
to working with Afghanistan to implement these plans
following the Conference.

At Brussels, the international community will
focus on future support for Afghanistan's development.
Australia recognizes Afghanistan's efforts in pushing
forward key national reforms in difficult circumstances,
and in particular we support its emphasis on
economic growth, revenue mobilization, employment
and countering corruption. We also welcome the
Government of Afghanistan's support for gender
equality, including steps towards implementing the
national action plan on women and peace and security
and the elimination of violence against women.

But huge challenges remain to ensuring that reforms
made by the Government are felt by ordinary Afghans.
We look forward to discussing the Government of
Afghanistan's plans for development and addressing
the needs of the Afghan population, including poverty
reduction, basic service delivery, job creation and
inclusive development.

In conclusion, international efforts in Afghanistan
are supported by a strong United Nations presence,
and Australia values the role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan plays in guiding
and coordinating international support.

