Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by joining others in thanking Ambassador De La
Sabliere for his superb leadership of the Council's
mission. The delegation of the Netherlands has already
delivered a statement on behalf of the European Union,
and I associate my delegation with that statement.

I want to begin where my German colleague left
off. Our efforts are about peace for ordinary people.
We met impressive representatives of civil society in
both the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi.

I should like to make a few remarks about the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, underlining some
of the recommendations from the mission's report
(S/2004/934). Civil society in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo clearly wants elections, and peace
through elections, in 2005. That makes essential
rigorous pursuit of the road map by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That in turn
requires the espace pre'sidentiel to work together and
with Parliament. It also requires their collaboration
with the international community, especially the
International Committee in Support of the Transition
(CIAT). My Government considers it extremely
important that all three joint commissions of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and CIAT - that is, the commissions on security-
sector reform, elections and legislation - should get
under way. We welcomed President Kabila's assurance
to the mission, when we met him, that all three would
be up and running before the end of the year.

I should now like to make three points about the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and its
functioning. The first relates to our concern that the
issue of sexual exploitation should be gripped hard
immediately. Urgent investigation and rapid action by
the United Nations and troop-contributing countries is
essential. The second point is that it is also essential
that MONUC should use its enhanced resources
effectively. We think that that means focusing on
security-sector reform, on disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR)
and on elections. The third point is that this is going to
be extremely demanding for MONUC in 2005. Among
other things, we would like MONUC to help catalyse
the international community's work on security sector
reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
give early attention to the support for the election
process that MONUC and the international community
must deliver. We would welcome early
recommendations from MONUC and the Secretary-
General on that point, concerning election support.

I shall now make some points about the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As our mission
report underlines, instability in that part of the country
has an impact on the whole Great Lakes region. To
address that problem, leaders in the region must
collaborate and must use their many agreed
mechanisms, not threats and inflammatory language.
The threats from Rwanda, even while the Council's
mission was under way, were unacceptable.

As the mission's report also observes, as long as
the problem of members of the former Rwandan
Armed Forces (ex-FAR)/Interahamwe persists in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it will be a source
of instability in the region. Our presidential statement
(S/PRST/2004/45) yesterday recognized that. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUC have a plan for ensuring the disarmament
and repatriation of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, and it
needs to be accelerated as much as possible. Progress
in the Kivus, but also in Ituri, therefore depends
crucially on the construction of a Congolese national
army and on DDRRR.

Turning briefly to Burundi, I wish to underline
just two points. The first is that, while Burundi faces a
demanding election schedule, the Council mission
came away confident that that schedule could now be
achieved and deserved our support, but that elections
are not an end in themselves and that attention to the
post-election political environment is essential.
Secondly, I want to underline the importance of the
issue of impunity. We look forward to an early report
from the Secretary-General in that regard.

Finally, I welcome the fact that the Council was
able to discuss with President Museveni of Uganda
ways and means to find a solution to the conflict in
northern Uganda, which has caused a grievous
humanitarian crisis. There have been some encouraging
steps in the peace process, but we are convinced that
that is a situation that the Council needs to continue to
monitor.

