Mr. Kim Sam-Hoon (Republic of Korea): I
would like to express my delegation's appreciation to
you for convening this open meeting of the Security
Council on such an important issue. From the
increasing wave of civil conflicts in the 19905 to the
critical surge of terrorism today, we are living in an age
in which the protection of civilians has moved to the
top of the security agenda. It is therefore most
appropriate that the Security Council periodically takes
up this item.

The delegation of the Republic of Korea cannot
but begin by paying tribute to the United Nations staff
and international humanitarian personnel who have
worked tirelessly to alleviate the sufferings of civilian
populations in armed conflict. This year has proved to
be a particularly tragic one. In Afghanistan and Iraq,
many of them paid the ultimate sacrifice with their
lives. The brutal attack perpetrated on United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad on 19 August 2003 shocked
the international community. And just last week, four
Korean workers were senselessly attacked in Northern
Iraq - two of them died - during their mission to
repair electric transmission towers. We strongly
condemn these horrendous acts of terror against
civilians.

The civilian or non-combatant casualties in armed
conflict have dramatically increased in recent decades,
particularly due to the changing nature of conflicts
from inter-State to intrastate wars fought more often by
militias and armed groups than by national armies. The
statistics depict a grim picture. In the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, over 3 million deaths have been
recorded. Over the past year alone, the displacement of
persons in Uganda has increased from 600,000 to 1.3
million, and in Angola, more than a third of its
population has been displaced in two decades of
conflict. In the case of Afghanistan, a quarter of a
century of strife has left millions in abject poverty.

Given its primary responsibility in maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
has a leading role to play in protecting civilians in
conflicts. Alarmed by the deepening plight of civilians
in armed conflicts, the Republic of Korea brought the
matter to the Council's attention by conducting an open
debate on "the protection of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and others in conflict situations" during its
presidency of the Security Council in May 1997. Since
then we have been closely following the developments
on this subject.

In our View, the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) reaffirmed its
commitment to protecting the civilian population in
their greatest hour of need. While the Council has, inter
alia, emphasized the need to protect civilians on a case-
by-case basis, taking into account the particular
circumstances, its aide-memoire of March 2002 has
served as a practical guide to transforming what the
Secretary-General has termed the "culture of
protection", into a reality. We believe that the aide-
memoire should be updated regularly to keep abreast
with current developments.

The protection of civilians is a highly complex
and intractable question, but is a matter of priority to
the international community. We must ensure that
humanitarian tragedies, such as in Rwanda and
Srebrenica, never take place again. Given the lessons
painfully learned, the United Nations has succeeded in
its interventions in the Balkans, East Timor and Sierra
Leone. But there is no time for complacency. We
believe that the international community must play an
important part in situations where sovereign States are
unable or unwilling to protect their own people. In
today's world of interdependence, catastrophic
humanitarian conditions in failed States can spread far
beyond their borders. We are of the View that the
Security Council bears significant responsibility and
authority in dealing with massive humanitarian
atrocities. As the sole international institution to
authorize ultimate use of force by States, the Security
Council must not be discouraged from using all
persuasive and coercive instruments at its disposal.

We are encouraged by the visits of the Security
Council missions to areas of conflict where the civilian
sectors have suffered enormously in the cycle of
conflict. The firsthand information gained by the
missions can significantly contribute to developing a
more effective framework for civilian protection. In
this regard, the Security Council missions to Central
Africa, West Africa and Afghanistan were welcome
developments.

We also view ending the culture of impunity to be
Vital to assuring the safety of civilians. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court, as
well as the ad hoc international criminal tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone, has
constituted a crucial step forward in affirming the
principle of accountability. In this regard, we also note
that the breakdown of law and order contributes to an
atmosphere of despair and desperation that easily
becomes a breeding ground for terrorists.

We fully support the concerted endeavours of the
United Nations and its partners to sustain international
attention on this subject. We commend their initiatives,
such as the holding of workshops to address the
challenges from a regional perspective. Such forums
have proved to be most useful in disseminating the
aide-memoire framework and mainstreaming its
provisions into national, regional and international
decision-making processes.

Civilians in conflict and post-conflict areas must
also be protected from exploitation and abuse by
international workers and peacekeeping forces. The six
core principles in the Plan of Action on Protection
from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian
Crises, adopted by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee in July 2002, have now been incorporated
into the codes of conduct and staff rules applicable to
United Nations civilian personnel. We are encouraged
to note that peacekeeping missions such as the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are also adopting them as their
rules.

In deliberating on various aspects of this
important subject, my delegation would like to
underscore that the primary responsibility for the safety
of civilians rests with the parties to a conflict, whether
State or non-State actors. While international
engagement can be instrumental, a peaceful outcome
can only be realized if all concerned parties fully
understand and uphold their obligations and commit
themselves to renouncing violence against innocent
people.

Finally, in light of the related issues also on the
Council's agenda, including child soldiers and gender
issues in conflict situations, we believe that the
successful implementation of protection strategies
hinges on the development of a comprehensive and
integrated approach. As reflected in our deliberations,
there has been much progress in recent years. Yet, more
needs to be done. We can best measure the degree of
our success by the lives of innocent people saved
through judicious and decisive action. At the same
time, in the longer term, we should continue our
endeavours to promote a culture of protection by
generating respect, tolerance and understanding among
peoples.

