Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish first to thank the presidency of Benin and you,
Sir, for convening this important meeting. Argentina
welcomes and is gratified by your presence at this
meeting of the Security Council. We also welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General and extend our
thanks to his Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Office for West Africa, Mr. Ould-
Abdallah, for his introduction of the report. We also
thank the Special Adviser on Child Protection to the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Ibrahima Diouf.

Argentina welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations formulated for
the West African subregion in the prior report of the
Secretary-General and the 25 March statement by the
President of the Security Council, and by the Security
Council mission to West Africa of June 2004.

In that regard, we wish to highlight the regular
contacts maintained between the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and other United Nations entities, as well as the
regular meetings held by the heads of the five political
and peacekeeping missions in the subregion, with a
view to developing integrated strategies in vulnerable
border areas.

Cooperation among United Nations entities in
West Africa, designed to harmonize subregional
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, will help to consolidate peace processes
throughout the region. In that respect, we find
interesting the recommendation of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change that a standing
fund for peacebuilding be established that could be
used to fund rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes, for example in West Africa.

However, cooperation should not be confined to
military or political issues, but should be extended to
relieving the precarious humanitarian situation of
refugees and displaced persons in the subregion. The
initiative taken by ECOWAS and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with
a View to carrying out joint activities on such issues as
security in refugee camps or harmonizing refugee
policies in West Africa should be seen as a step
forward.

Argentina feels that the joint cooperation
initiative of ECOWAS, the European Union and the
United Nations Office for West Africa, designed to
promote the effective implementation of the 1979
ECOWAS protocol on the free movement of people
and goods and also to address the problems of
roadblocks and the extortion associated with them, is a
vital element in promoting the economic development
of the region and generating employment allowing
former combatants to be reintegrated.

As we all know, if there is to be trade and the free
movement of people, there must first be peace and
political stability in the region. In that regard, my
country welcomes the new Small Arms Control
Programme adopted by ECOWAS with a view to
converting its moratorium on the importation,
exportation and manufacture of small arms and light
weapons into a legally binding instrument. The
establishment by ECOWAS of the Small Arms Unit,
responsible for monitoring the implementation of the
moratorium and its ultimate conversion into a
convention, should be supported by contributions that
will allow it to operate efficiently. Security sector
reform, with the support of the international
community, ECOWAS and the future regionally
integrated programme of the United Nations Office for
West Africa, is another essential instrument for
preventing future conflicts.

Although international assistance is vital to
promote peace in the region, it should be underscored
that, as the Secretary-General notes in his report, the
primary responsibility rests with the leaders and
communities of West Africa. The Governments of the
region should therefore not allow individuals who
violate human rights or take part in such unlawful
activities as weapons and natural resources smuggling
or money-laundering to enjoy impunity.

I would like to conclude by urging greater
cooperation among civil society, ECOWAS and
international organizations in order to prepare and
implement plans of action on the cross-border issues
we have discussed. The establishment in the ECOWAS
secretariat of the post of coordinator for civil society
issues to strengthen Africa's regional capacity in the
area of peacebuilding points to the road ahead.
Finally, I would like to say that my delegation
supports the draft presidential statement that may be
adopted at the end of this meeting.

