Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Mr. Jean
Arnault, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his encouraging briefing and his good
work on the ground

We will soon witness the successful completion
of the first United Nations Mission in Colombia and
the laying down of arms process. We congratulate the
Colombian people for taking this historic step. Japan is
very pleased by the mutual confidence and good faith
demonstrated between the Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) during
this process. We commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Arnault and his team, international
observers and civilian staff for their excellent work
in close coordination with the parties. The Council's
decision to respond to the Colombian-initiated request
by establishing the United Nations Mission was the
right one.

We take note of the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the United Nations Verification
Mission, based on consultations with the stakeholders.
Japan is ready to constructively discuss a draft
resolution. We note the importance of continued close
coordination between the Mission and the United
Nations country team and the seamless transition of the
Missions. The whole-of-United Nations approach will
remain critical. Ultimately, long-term success depends
on the determination and commitment demonstrated by
the parties. We look forward to their continued efforts
during the second Mission's deployment.

The social and economic reintegration process is
a delicate and challenging part of the peace process.
To guarantee genuine peace, FARC members who
have laid down arms must be able to fully participate
in economic and social life in Colombia as soon as
possible. Sufficient resources and security guarantees
are essential. FARC must also observe the Peace
Agreement and make efforts to fully reintegrate
into society.

We take note of the establishment of several legal
mechanisms at the national level for reintegration,
as well as for security. It is vital that they function
effectively and coherently on the ground, including
after the elections. Strong coordination efforts by the
Government are important to achieve maximum results.

Another piece of positive news is the temporary
ceasefire announcement between the Government and
the National Liberation Army on 4 September. We
welcome the ceasefire and strongly hope that it will lead
to productive peace negotiations between the parties as
well as bolster the current peace process, in general.
We appreciate the efforts made by the guarantors,
Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, Norway and Venezuela,
as well as the Catholic Church. We look forward to their
continued support for the peace negotiations.

In conclusion, Japan reiterates its support for the
parties in implementing the Peace Agreement, and
once again commends the United Nations Mission in
Colombia for its vital work. Japan will continue to
support the people of Colombia through the efforts of
the second mission.

