Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): Ijoin others in thanking
Assistant-Secretary-General Zerihoun and United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director
Fedotov for their useful briefings today. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for his important contribution to
today's discussion.

Since we last met in this Chamber to discuss
Guinea-Bissau, there have been a number of positive
developments. We welcome the appointment of Aristides
Gomes as Prime Minister on 16 April as well as the
formation of an inclusive Government on 25 April.
These are both important steps in the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement and preconditions for holding
free, fair and democratic elections. We are optimistic
that these new developments can help pave the way for
a lasting resolution to the political crisis in the country.

We commend the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
regional mediation in Guinea-Bissau, which has once
again shown how regional efforts can resolve political
deadlock and disputes and prevent conflict.

In this context, let me pay particular tribute to
the President of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of
State and Government, President Faure Gnassingbe' of
Togo, and the ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau,
President Alpha Conde' of the Republic of Guinea, for
their role.

All stakeholders must now work towards conducting
timely and credible elections on 18 November and the
further implementation of the Conakry Agreement.
Regarding elections, it is essential that the funding
gap for voter registration and the organization of the
elections be addressed. The ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau will also have an important role in the
run-up to the forthcoming elections.

We welcome the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the appointment of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Jose
Viegas Filho. We congratulate him on his appointment
and look forward to working closely with him.

Despite the recent progress made, real challenges
remain that will need to be addressed, and the good-
offices function of the Special Representative will
be crucial going forward. In addition, we welcome
strategic and results-oriented reporting from
UNIOGBIS, so that the Security Council can fully play
its role by making decisions based on a comprehensive
understanding of the situation on the ground and how
it can best support the country. This is all the more
important as the situation within the country remains
fragile. The current fragility could be exacerbated by
the economic situation. We note that this year's cashew
harvest seems to be lower than last year's. For that
reason, we believe it would be important that a risk
assessment and/or conflict analysis be carried out. The
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play in convening actors and contributing to an analysis
of threats and challenges. We welcome the Chair's
upcoming visit in July and look forward to him briefing
the Council again at the appropriate time. The six-point
road map and the Conakry Agreement remain relevant
and represent the only legitimate way forward. They
must be implemented in full.

Looking forward, in order to target the root causes
of the conflict in Guinea-Bissau, it would be important
to focus on reconciliation and political dialogue and
on strengthening the rule of law through strong and
inclusive institutions, which are important drivers of
peace. We encourage greater support for the active
participation of women in the peace and political
processes, especially in the context of the elections.
Ensuring women's full involvement in building Guinea-
Bissau's future will be an important prerequisite for
lasting peace and stability in the country.

Recent months have seen important progress
in Guinea-Bissau. The momentum must be seized,
and all parties must work together towards the full
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
preparation of inclusive elections. We stand ready to
support them and their efforts.

