Mr. Sullivan (United States of America): It is a
pleasure to be here today. Before I continue, I would
like to take this opportunity to express my condolences
to the Governments of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan and
to the families of the victims of the tragic bus accident
in Kazakhstan that claimed the lives of more than 50
Uzbek citizens yesterday.

On behalf of the United States, President Trump
and Secretary Tillerson, I would like to thank Foreign
Minister Abdrakhmanov for convening today's
ministerial meeting on the exceedingly important topic
of Afghanistan's security and development. I thank the
Government of Kazakhstan for its leadership and for
promoting stronger ties between Afghanistan and its
neighbours in Central Asia. I would also like to express
our appreciation to the Governments of the Kyrgyz
Republic, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan for their joint and individual efforts to draw
the region closer together through our partnership with
the five Central Asian countries, as well as for their
deliberations on how the region might more closely
engage Afghanistan, thereby contributing to the
region's shared stability.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and his United Nations team, especially the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, for
their dedication and exceptional work. The Secretary-
General's visit to the country in June, as well as the
Council's trip to Kabul last week, highlighted the
international community's commitment to Afghanistan.
I know that Ambassador Haley was impressed during
her trip by the resilience of the Afghan people in the
face of insurgent and extremist violence, as well as
by Afghanistan's willingness to take ownership of
its challenges. The United States is heartened by the
progress that we are already seeing following the
announcement of President Trump's South Asia strategy.

Before we turn to its challenges, we must not forget
that Afghanistan is a fundamentally different country
today from what it was 20 years ago. That should give
the Taliban pause if it expects to roll back the progress
that has been made. In Afghanistan today, millions
of girls and boys attend school. The population has
access to basic health services and 90 per cent of the
population has cell-phone access. Citizens have dozens
of independent radio and television stations to turn to
for information and entertainment, as well as hundreds
of print media outlets. Such advances instil confidence
in the country's commitment to continuing progress in
increasing development. Yet despite that progress, the
ongoing conflict continues to roil the country, causing
severe political, security, humanitarian and human
rights challenges.

This year the stakes are clear. The Government
of Afghanistan must continue to reform in order to
foster better lives for Afghans of all ethnicities and
to promote the country's long-term security and
stability. It is critical to ensure that the preparations
for parliamentary elections in 2018 and the presidential
election in 2019 move forward on schedule, peacefully
and democratically, and that the Government continues
to work on its commitments to fighting corruption and
supporting inclusive governance.

Since announcing our strategy for South Asia
last August, President Trump has underscored that
the United States will continue to support the Afghan
Government and its security forces in their fight
against the Taliban, as well as in their efforts to combat
Al-Qaida, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
and other terrorist groups. The United States and our
allies have suffered grave losses in this fight alongside
our Afghan brothers and sisters. We will not allow
Afghanistan to serve as a safe haven for terrorists, as
it did before 11 September 2001. The President has also
made it abundantly clear that solving Afghanistan's
security and development challenges will depend on
the commitment of Afghans themselves, together with
the steadfast support of Afghanistan's regional and
international partners. As we move ahead we must
continue to support the principle that an enduring peace
for Afghanistan is one that is built, led and ultimately
maintained by the Afghan Government and its people.
This Afghan-led and -owned approach, paired with
firm international support for the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, will make it clear to the
Taliban that victory cannot be won on the battlefield.
Any solution must be political.

We have emphasized that our support is conditions-
based and not driven by timelines. Continued violence
will only serve to perpetuate war and thereby hurt all
Afghan people, including the Taliban. With a united
international community standing firm, the Taliban
will come to understand that the only way forward is
to engage in a reconciliation process that culminates in
all parties working towards a tolerant, accountable and
united Government of Afghanistan set in a peaceful
and successful nation. A necessary outcome of any
peace agreement must include an absolute commitment
from the Taliban that it will cut ties to terrorism,
cease violence and accept the Afghan Constitution,
which includes protection for the rights of women
and minorities.

We must recognize the reality that while the Afghan
Government has been adamant about its interest in
initiating peace talks with the Taliban, there has
been no reciprocal interest on the part of the Taliban.
That must change. To achieve that, we must all work
together to isolate the Taliban, eliminate its sources of
revenue and equipment and demonstrate with united
and unwavering commitment that the only place it can
achieve its objectives will be at the negotiating table,
not on the battlefield. Unfortunately, the international
community has so far fallen short in providing that
kind of unified support to the Afghan Government. We
have seen certain countries pursue counterproductive
strategies that provide support to the Taliban in the
name of countering ISIS. That approach is misguided
or, worse, pernicious. The United States believes that
the two are not linked. We can and must fight ISIS in
Afghanistan while ensuring that the Taliban is forced to
the negotiating table.
Working closely with our Afghan partners, we
have made significant progress against ISIS in eastern
Afghanistan. Together we have maintained persistent
pressure on ISIS, significantly reducing its territory
and eliminating one third ofits fighters. Supporting the
Taliban serves only to prolong the conflict and foster an
unstable and insecure environment that ISIS exploits in
order to threaten Afghanistan and the broader region.

Ultimately, if we are to defeat ISIS in Afghanistan
and prevent the group's spread across the region, every
country in this Chamber must be aligned in its strategy
and commitment to following through. Ineffective
strategies that enable insurgent groups must cease.
Instead we need to join together and provide unwavering
support for the Afghan Government.

We know that an important part of this unified
approach is Pakistan, which has suffered grievously
from the effects of terrorism. That country therefore
can, and should be, an integral partner in our shared
efforts to achieve peace and stability within the region.
We seek to work cohesively and effectively with
Pakistan, but cannot be successful if the status quo of
terrorist organizations being given sanctuary inside
the country's borders is allowed to continue. Stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan would benefit Pakistan
as well, since it would enable the return of refugees
and remove the ability of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and other terrorist groups to operate against
Pakistan from outside the country.

That is why Pakistan should join our efforts to
bring about a resolution to the conflict, as spelled
out in our South Asia strategy. The strategy, as I
have outlined it today, will prove successful with
commitment and patience. As Afghans take ownership,
as the international community isolates the Taliban,
then peace, stability and security will follow, as well
development. As Afghanistan stands taller through
peace, it will naturally contribute to the larger regional,
economic and security environment underpinning the
long-term success of Central Asia. The United States
shares with the countries of Central Asia a commitment
to peace, stability and prosperity. The only way we can
achieve those goals is through a mutual understanding
of the threats we confront and the opportunities we can
cultivate together.

In conclusion, the United States welcomes the
Council and the Secretary-General's recognition that
peace, progress and development is ultimately attained
through regional and international cooperation. We
all have a stake in Afghanistan's success. Increased
stability, economic progress and regional integration
will benefit every country represented in this Chamber,
and none more so than the countries in Afghanistan's
immediate neighbourhood. But it must start with the
Taliban deciding to take their first steps towards peace.
If we hold firm and present a united front, we will
come ever closer to the day when the promise of peace
becomes a reality.

