Mr. Yamamoto (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving my delegation the
opportunity to participate in today's discussion on this
important issue. I would also like to thank the Panel of
Experts for producing a well-balanced addendum to the
report on the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and other forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The illicit exploitation of natural resources, not
only in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also
in other parts of the world, is a cause of recurring open
hostilities and a major obstacle to the settlement of
conflicts. As Japan stressed in its statement before this
body last May, it must be stopped.

Towards this end, Japan has been participating in
the discussions of the Kimberley process, which
addresses the problem of conflict diamonds. Through
this process, the international community has learned
valuable lessons regarding the curtailment of illicit
exploitation of natural resources for conflict
prevention, while at the same time protecting the
legitimate exploitation of natural resources for the
promotion of development.

With respect specifically to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Japan hopes that the following
two points will be taken well into account when the
Security Council considers the recommendations
contained in the addendum report.

First, producing countries and importing
countries must acknowledge their responsibility and
commit themselves to breaking the circle of conflict
and the illicit exploitation of natural resources. This
consciousness of responsibility will provide an
environment in which the international community will
be encouraged to take voluntary initiatives to stop the
illicit trade.

Secondly, with the end of the conflict in sight, the
process of demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration and efforts for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have begun. In support of those efforts, it is crucial that
legitimate trade in primary commodities be protected.
As the addendum to the report points out, those items
which are illicitly exploited and traded in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are not
confined to coltan and diamonds, but also include gold,
copper, cobalt and timber. But because these primary
commodities are important sources of income for the
nation-building efforts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, if the international community agrees that
illicit trade in these items needs to be regulated, it
should be done in such a way as not to be detrimental
to revitalizing economic activities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In this connection, the
international community should pay due attention to
protecting the legitimate exploitation and trade in
primary commodities in the country.

As we emphasized in our statement last May, the
relationship between the illicit exploitation of natural
resources and the protraction of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be considered
in the wider context of consolidating peace throughout
the region. This will require a comprehensive and
integrated approach. I would thus like to underline the
importance of convening an international conference
on peace and development in the Great Lakes region,
as recommended in the addendum to the report, as well
as the acceleration of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. This will help create a conducive
environment in which the countries concerned can
discuss ways of securing their borders.

Finally, the ministerial meeting in preparation for
the Third Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD III) was held in Tokyo on 3 and
4 December. The chair's statement issued at that
meeting welcomed the adoption of the New Partnership
for Africa's Development (NEPAD) as a manifestation
of the commitment of African leaders to effective
leadership and accountability. NEPAD reflects the
principles of global partnership and ownership. I would
like to emphasize the importance of these principles in
the context of addressing the illicit exploitation of
natural resources and the ongoing conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

