Mr. Li Kexin (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of
all, I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his statement. I also wish to thank the
Secretariat for its strong support for the day-to-day
work of the Security Council. We would also like to
thank Costa Rica and the other members of the group
of five small nations for their initiative in convening
this meeting.

In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the members of the Security Council act on
behalf of all Member States in shouldering the noble
mission of maintaining international peace and
security. Successfully carrying out that task depends
upon the political will of Member States and, to a
certain extent, on whether the Council has in place a
set of working methods that are scientific, reasonable
and effective. An ancient Chinese saying illustrates that
same idea: in order to do a good job, a craftsman must
first sharpen his tools. With regard to the Security
Council, working methods that are reasonable and
applicable constitute an indispensable tool in
accomplishing our mission.

Profound changes are taking place in the
international situation. The agenda and practices of the
Security Council have also been adjusted from time to
time. The Council's workload has increased drastically.
The Security Council faces many new situations and
problems. In order to better carry out its duties and
increase its ability to confront various challenges to
international peace and security, the Council must learn
from its experience, keep up with the times and adopt
more scientific and advanced working methods. This is
not only a concern for the members of the Council, but
also for the overall membership.
With regard to improving the working methods of
the Security Council, in recent years the Council has
undertaken many useful efforts. The note by the
President contained in document S/2006/507 reflected
the positive will and determination of the Council to
increase its effectiveness and transparency. There has
also been an increase in recent years in the number of
public meetings. Coordination with troop-contributing
countries has also been strengthened. In the course of
taking decisions, the members of the Council are trying
their best to consider and adopt the reasonable opinions
of various parties.

Generally speaking, the Security Council has
made progress in enhancing its transparency,
increasing its interaction with non-members of the
Council and strengthening its effectiveness. However,
this is no time for complacency. We must recognize
that both the general membership of the United Nations
and civil society have greater expectations as regards
the Council and its working methods. Improving
working methods is a long-term endeavour that should
always be part of the Council's agenda and should be
given priority consideration. Improving working
methods is also an incremental undertaking. We must
safeguard what we have achieved, maintain the
momentum and continue to make progress. Improving
working methods should also be a results-oriented
undertaking that closely integrates debate on related
issues and includes concrete measures.

China supports the Security Council's
improvement of its working methods. We would like to
thank the delegation of Belgium for the concept paper
(S/2008/528) it has prepared for this open debate, with
whose relevant analysis we agree. I should now like to
make a few comments.

First, with regard to enhancing transparency,
China supports the Security Council's holding of more
open meetings. However, we believe that it is
necessary for us to improve how public meetings are
conducted. We should avoid reducing such meetings to
lengthy and pro forma exercises. The interactive nature
of public meetings should also be strengthened. The
President of the Security Council or his or her
designate should, in a timely, comprehensive and
accurate manner, brief non-members of the Security
Council about its work.

Secondly, with regard to increasing
communication with non-members of the Security
Council, China has always believed that the Council
should do its best to listen to the opinions of all parties
in addressing concrete issues, especially the parties to
the issue and the countries of the region concerned.
During meetings with troop-contributing countries,
those countries should be encouraged to provide input.
We also encourage the members of the Security
Council to strengthen informal communications with
non-members of the Council. The format used by the
Council to carry out informal dialogues with
organizations such as the African Union should also be
further exploited. At the same time, the Council should
also step up its exchanges and sharing of information
with other United Nations bodies, especially the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.

Thirdly, with regard to increasing its
effectiveness given the drastic growth in the number of
items on the Security Council's agenda, the Council
should concentrate on priorities and focus its attention
on the most urgent issues. When placing new items on
its agenda, the Council should adopt a responsible and
cautious attitude. We agree on the need for a review of
the current items on the agenda, in order to save
resources and enhance efficiency. We are also
concerned about the excessive attention given to
theoretical issues. In addition, during consultations,
full consideration should be given to the technical
difficulties faced by Member States. Draft texts should
also be circulated to all members as soon as possible,
in order that countries may have enough time to
consult their capitals.

Improving the Council's working methods is
going to pose a daunting challenge for its work.
Fortunately, the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions is
playing a positive role by continuously considering and
debating this issue. China encourages the Working
Group to maintain enthusiasm for its work and to put
forward useful suggestions on enhancing transparency
and efficiency, as well as to carry out its work in a
dynamic way in order to achieve tangible results. It is
our hope that, with the common efforts of all members,
positive changes can take place continuously in the
work of the Council.

