Mr. Von der Schulenburg: First of all, I would
like to thank all delegations for their support for our
team and the work we are doing there. That is great
encouragement for us.

I would like to respond to two issues that were
brought up by a number of delegations, in particular by
the delegation of the United Kingdom. One is the level
of recruitment at the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). That
issue is also of great concern to me. The number of
vacancies, if we look at the substantive staff, is much
higher than the percentage of vacancies that was
mentioned.

There are reasons for that. One reason is that the
budget was approved only in December, after three
months of operation, and that delayed any recruitment
process. The second is that we have tried to take a
different approach to peacebuilding than that used in
peacekeeping. That meant that I wanted our posts to be
more substantive. I replaced many general civil affairs
officers with actual experts who could advise on
matters such as anti-corruption, rule of law,
constitutional issues, illicit drug trafficking, et cetera.
Those people are unfortunately more difficult to find.
Also contributing is the change in remuneration in the
United Nations system and the very fact that there is no
long-term view for UNIPSIL. Potential qualified
candidates, therefore, even when we select them, are
not interested in or have rejected taking posts in Sierra
Leone. I think that is a structural issue that we have.

The second issue concerns the links of
cooperation with the United Nations system. I think the
basic idea of peacebuilding is that it is essentially what
I call development with a political agenda. So it was
very important for me, from the very beginning, to
fully integrate the mandate, which is a political
mandate, from the Council, with the mandates that the
various development agencies have. It is actually one
thing, and that is why we developed the Joint Vision.

I must say that, based on my 30 years of
experience, I think that the cooperative spirit we have
among the United Nations agencies is the best I have
seen so far in those 30 years. I hope it will continue. I
think that the challenge to our cooperation actually
comes more from the outside. One of the challenges
relates to donors. If donors go beyond the Joint Vision
and want to finance their own projects, they will
always find takers in the United Nations family. But
that, of course, would break the solidarity we have.
Therefore in my opinion, one of the most important

roles of the Peacebuilding Commission is to keep the
international community organized and disciplined
behind certain plans we have made, because money
speaks for itself and that is something we will not
have.

The other thing that I think is very important in
keeping the mission together and working according to
plan is that there must be more clarity on the future of
UNIPSIL itself and the role of the Under-Secretary-
General; these are short-term things and agencies think
in the long term. I think that if we have a clear time
frame - and I am not suggesting that the Council
should take any decisions - that could help. But
everybody knows that these are the areas we will work
on for the next year, two years, three years or four
years. Such clarity would thus help to keep us all
together.

Personally, I am very encouraged by the work in
Sierra Leone and the exceptional cooperation that we
get from the Government and the good cooperation we
get from the opposition party. I think we are very well
received there. There is a friendly and constructive
atmosphere among all of us, including the development
partners. I think that is the kind of atmosphere that we
should all maintain. In the framework of the
Peacebuilding Commission, where we all meet together
and look more at the development side of the issues, I
think it is important to maintain that atmosphere. I am
pleased with the new emphasis that the special session
will place on taking more care to support what we do
in the field, rather than having parallel tracks.

