Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for organizing this
open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. Egypt
hopes it will further enhance the interaction and
integration of the roles played by the principal organs
of the United Nations in order to achieve the stability
and development that the States emerging from conflict
aspire to, and that it will accomplish the desire of the
international community to help prevent those States
from relapsing into conflict.

I wish to express my full support for the
statement on this issue made by the ambassador of
Jamaica on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The principal objective for the adoption of two
parallel resolutions by the Security Council and the
General Assembly establishing this pivotal organ was
to ensure ongoing involvement of the international
community in conflict situations without interruption.
Accordingly, the Security Council would deal with
these considerations when they constitute threats to
international peace and security until peace and
stability are re-established. Then a larger role for both
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council and their relevant subsidiary bodies would
evolve more vigorously and effectively, in order to deal
with the requirements of the reconstruction and
rehabilitation phase and move towards economic and
social development in coordination with the other
United Nations bodies and the international finance
institutions and donor States.

The resolutions establishing the Peacebuilding
Commission do not delineate clear-cut definitions of
the roles of each of the principal organs in this regard.
Hence, and in light of the lack of provisions on this
issue in the Commission's rules of procedures, the
complementarity of the roles of the three principal
organs becomes essential to achieve the objectives
behind establishing the Commission, without any of
them attempting to encroach on the prerogatives of the
other organs, which were delineated and maintained by
the Charter since the foundation of the United Nations.

As it is too early to assess the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, whether in the Security
Council or the General Assembly, our meeting today
would only be useful in considering the lessons learned
from the Commission's activities in the past six
months, not in order to criticize or commend them, but
rather to prepare a joint foundation with the General
Assembly for a real take-off on solid grounds. Such an
exercise would surely support the assessment now
being conducted by the working group established
specifically for this purpose within the Commission,
under the chairmanship of the Permanent
Representative of El Salvador.

The past few months have shown that the
consensus rule is a double-edged weapon. They have
proven that there is a dire need for detailed rules of
procedure governing the Commission's activities in the
absence of any precedents. They have also confirmed
that enhancing the functioning of the Commission
needs institutional improvement, through the
establishment of the desired balance between the role
of the Organizational Committee, the country-specific
configurations and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
and to guarantee that all members of the Commission
are able to perform the roles for which they were
elected or appointed, without discrimination between
donor and non-donor countries. There should be no
special relationship between the donor countries, the
State whose case is under consideration and the
Peacebuilding Support Office in charting the plans and
in their implementation.

Our position vis-a-vis peacebuilding is
unchanged, and it will remain unchanged. It rests on
the principle of national ownership of post-conflict
strategies, in terms of planning and implementation
equally. It rejects changing the Peacebuilding
Commission into a trusteeship council that controls the
future of the States emerging form conflicts. It rejects
the transformation of the Commission into a mere
broker or mediator that brings together the donor and
recipient countries under the supervision of the
Secretary-General.

Our approach to peacebuilding is based on
transparency and accountability, on the common
responsibility of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
without allowing any of them to prevail over the other.
It is based on the responsibility of every State joining
the Peacebuilding Commission to perform its role with
objectivity and integrity, to rally all possible support
for the States emerging from conflicts, enabling them
to cement the peace and stability they have achieved. It
is based on the need to make the role of the
Commission visible on the ground in these States, in
order to reaffirm the international community's
continued attention and support.

The cases of Burundi and Sierra Leone are
examples of what can be achieved in terms of progress.
Egypt hopes that we can benefit from their
experiences, and that we assess our performance
towards them in a correct and sound manner that would
allow us to support the peace in these two sisterly
countries and to realize their aspirations to peace and
development, and would allow us at the same time to
perform better in dealing with other cases in the future.

