Mr. Graf Zu Rantzau (Germany): Allow me at the
outset to assure you, Mr. President, of my delegations's
full confidence in your wise counsel and guidance of the
Council. I should also like to express our appreciation for
the excellent work done by your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Rwanda, Ambassador
Bakuramutsa.

In addition, I should like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Oman for the kind words of welcome
that he addressed to, amongst others, my delegation.

It also gives me great pleasure to welcome the
presence at the Council table of His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Martino, the Foreign Minister of Italy, a
member State of the European Union.

The day must come when the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia, with all the atrocities and suffering of
innocent people caused by it, is settled. Serbian
nationalism - the ruthless readiness to wage war for
more territory - was and continues to be a main cause
of this conflict. This is clearly visible in the unresolved
situation in Bosnia, as well as in the Serb-held territories
of Croatia.

Early last fall, after an important policy shift by the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
 

(Serbia and Montenegro), the Security Council, through
resolution 943 (1994), granted a provisional, limited and
revocable suspension of certain sanctions on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. Today, a hundred days later, the
Security Council must decide on two important questions.

First, did the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities implement the border closure effectively and did
they cooperate with the Mission of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia? Secondly, did
Belgrade sustain its course with regard to acceptance of the
Contact Group plan and its break with the Pale leadership?

This is no easy or routine matter. After very careful
scrutiny of all available information, we have reached the
conclusion that both these questions can be answered with
a sober 'Yes'. At the same time, there is in our view no
reason for any special acknowledgement with regard to the
line followed by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities. A peace-oriented policy by Belgrade is, after
all, in the best interests of the people of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia themselves.

After the adoption of resolution 943 (1994), fuel sent
from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has facilitated
military activities of the Krajina Serb forces, who continue
to be active in border-crossing attacks on the Bihac area.
This was and remains completely unacceptable. We demand
that all so-called Krajina Serb forces withdraw from
Bosnian territory. We have supported the inclusion of new
provisions in the draft resolution, with the aim of cutting
off shipments of fuel and other non-humanitarian supplies
through Bosnia to the United Nations protected areas. We
also welcome the fact that in future the mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY)
will report on whether the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
side is complying with this specific requirement.

The message of the draft resolution to be adopted
today is clear. Belgrade must continue to hold course.
What is necessary are deeds, not words. The Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia authorities must withhold all
support for the Bosnian Serb military. They should
physically block all crossing points that the ICFY Mission
cannot monitor continuously. We urge Member States to
provide the ICFY Mission, to whose dedicated personnel
we pay tribute, with any information that might be relevant
for its reports. On their side, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities must maintain their current
cooperation with the ICFY Mission and not give rise to any
suspicion that they turn a blind eye to smuggling efforts or
other violations of the border of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We must be certain that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities remain firm in this respect.

But our expectations of Belgrade go beyond that.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) continues to bear major
responsibility for everything that has happened in the
former Yugoslavia. This is why we expect the Belgrade
Government to fully use its influence with the various
Serb parties to bring them closer to a negotiated solution.
They must bring home to the Bosnian Serbs that there is
no alternative to accepting the Contact Group peace plan
as the basis for a peaceful settlement. They must also tell
the Croatian Serbs in the United Nations Protected Areas,
in clear terms, that any political concept more
far-reaching than regional autonomy in Croatia is
unrealistic.

Belgrade itself must move closer to important further
steps, and thus prove, by its deeds, that it has really
changed its policy in the former Yugoslavia. Mutual
recognition between all States of the former Yugoslavia
at the earliest possible date is an urgent political
necessity. Such mutual recognition would, in our view,
dramatically change the political landscape in this region
and greatly enhance the chances of ending the conflict. At
the same time, bold steps in this direction by Belgrade
would allow a bold reaction by the international
community.

The recent agreements between the Bosnian parties
on a cease-fire and on a complete cessation of hostilities
for roughly the next hundred days provide a new
opportunity for intensified peace efforts. Together with
our partners in the Contact Group, we are already
pressing ahead for negotiations to achieve an overall
settlement on the basis of the acceptance of the Contact
Group's peace plan as a starting point. With regard to the
United Nations Protected Areas, too, we urge the parties
to negotiate constructively on the international plan, once
it is finalized, and we call on Belgrade to support this
process.

When resolution 943 (1994) was adopted last
September, I had the honour to speak for the European
Union in this forum. Let me reaffirm what I then
emphasized: those who persist in a policy of war and
obstruction will be isolated and only prolong the suffering
of their own people. Those who move forward on the
course of peace will get our support and will be able to
lead their people into a better future.

 

