Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like, on behalf of the delegation of
Togo, to express my gratitude to the Chairs of the three
Committees, Ambassadors Peter Wittig, Hardeep Singh
Puri and Baso Sangqu, for their briefings, and to the
members of the panel for their very helpful work. I also
take this opportunity to express our appreciation for the
role played by the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost,
in seeking out the information needed for the proper
implementation of the relevant resolutions. Finally, I
would like to express our appreciation for the
commendable work carried out by the monitoring team
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities and the experts from the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

Today's briefings have highlighted the need for
the international community to create true synergy in
the work of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), with a
view to effectively countering the scourges that
threaten international peace and security.

A few days ago, on 4 May (see S/PV.6765), the
Security Council deliberated on the threats to
international peace and security and on the need for
cooperation among States themselves, among non-State
organizations, and between States and these
organizations to prevent the threat from perpetuating
itself and to prevent certain materials from falling into
the hands of terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida.

The briefings just presented reveal in a number of
respects how the three Committees have addressed this
need to cooperate in order to confront terrorism. In that
respect, my delegation would like to commend the
work carried out by the Committees, which remain a
vital part of the institutional arsenal of the Security
Council in its ongoing struggle against terrorism. This
struggle requires the cooperation and assistance of -
as well as capacity-building for - subregional entities
charged with promoting the implementation of the
three relevant resolutions of the Council.

It goes without saying that our world today is,
even more than yesterday, haunted by the spectre of
new threats to international peace and security, which,
needless to say, involve weapons of mass destruction,
nuclear weapons and other dangerous materials falling
into the hands of non-State actors. We must all pull
together to face those threats. The briefings just
presented to us were sufficiently enlightening.
Nevertheless, my country would like to make the
following observations.
First, it is gratifying to note that, in the most
recent report presented by those Committees to the
Council, significant headway has been made in terms
of cooperation among States and regional and
subregional organizations in implementing the
aforementioned resolutions and in terms of capacity-
building for the various stakeholders and the assistance
that is given to them in adopting best practices to fulfil
their commitments pursuant to those resolutions.

In the area under consideration, we welcome the
willingness of States to provide the necessary
information, allowing the Committees to deliver on
commitments linked to their respective mandates. The
merit of those positive developments reflects well on
both the group of experts and the Committees.

Next, turning to the 1373 Committee, we note
that the assessment of progress in implementation
reflects the need to improve procedures for States'
implementation of the resolution. However, the
assessment calls for greater awareness and capacity-
building, especially for States, in order to enable them
to better understand this document, which we believe
could yield more conclusive results. We call on the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
continue its tireless work on behalf of States.

Turning to the 1540 Committee, we wish to note
that this Committee is currently revitalizing its expert
capacities, which are, nevertheless, doing excellent
work, which will enable the Committee, as far as
possible, to deliver on its mandate. However, my
delegation would like to recall - and this is a key
concern for the Committee in the context of resolution
1977 (2011) - that the appointment of experts should
take into account their expertise and the principle of
geographic distribution. In my country's view, the
resolution considers those two criteria as cumulative.
We therefore hope that those criteria will retain the
attention of the Council in order to make the
Committee more inclusive and to allow a better
reflection of the concerns of all regions.

Togo would like to invite States to consider,
moreover, the work before these various entities, in
particular the 1540 Committee, in order to consider
strengthening it in terms of structure and technical
manpower.

Finally, my delegation encourages the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities to continue working towards greater
streamlining, in terms of criteria and listing and
delisting procedures in order to prevent terrorists who
have supposedly reformed or died in the meantime
from taking up arms again, thus jeopardizing or
undoing years of hard work and sacrifice.

