Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for his update and the work of his team, and I thank Director Carabali Rodallega for her briefing and courageous efforts to defend human rights. As always, we welcome the presence of Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi with us today. I really want to start out by thanking the President, Mr. Heusgen, for his persistence in making this meeting happen today. I especially thank the people we do not see but who were here - I cannot even imagine at what hours of the morning - to be able to set this meeting up for us and provide a detailed plan and logistics so that we can all be here together in safety and security. My thanks again. May we all take a page from your book on persistence, Mr. President. It is amazing. I commend the Government and the people of Colombia, as well as the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for their efforts to continue implementing the peace accord against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic has worsened an already complex humanitarian situation and has negatively impacted the security situation of women and girls. It has strained health care and social services for many of Colombia's most vulnerable communities, including the 1.8 million Venezuelan refugees and migrants in Colombia. In the face of those challenges, we recognize President Duque Marquez's resolve to ensure that the pandemic does not deter Colombia from its path towards prosperity and security. The Trump Administration continues to stand with the people of Colombia. On | July, we announced the delivery of 200 ventilators donated by the United States Agency for International Development - a continuation of our long-standing partnership and an addition to the nearly $13.6 million we have provided to help Colombia respond to the pandemic. But as I have said before, this is also a personal commitment for me. My travels to Colombia last fall allowed me to see first-hand the heartening way in which Colombia welcomes those in need, providing human dignity to everyone, including refugees and displaced persons in their country. I have carried that touching experience back with me, and I am happy today that we are able to gather together to speak about it. We must reiterate the urgency of protecting Colombia's human rights defenders, social leaders, former combatants and their families. Ending this violence and holding those responsible accountable must be the highest priority. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/603) highlights the impact of the ongoing conflict-related violence on rural, Afro-Colombian and indigenous communities. Let me be clear: there can be zero tolerance for human rights abuses, and reprisals and attacks against civil society actors should be vigorously investigated and prosecuted. We must also condemn the activities of illegal armed groups and criminal organizations, which have used the pandemic to impose social control measures and illegal checkpoints and to expand their territorial control during this pandemic. We welcome Colombia's continued progress in counter-narcotics efforts and reiterate our commitment to continued partnership with the Duque Administration to combat the destructive illegal drug trade. The United States remains fully engaged with the Government of Colombia to reduce coca cultivation and cocaine production. By extending its State presence, Colombia will foster integrated rural development and legitimate economic activities. As we have said before, it is vital to ensure meaningful justice for victims and accountability for the crimes committed over decades of conflict, whether by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, paramilitaries or State agents, including the military in Colombia. A victim-centred transitional justice system that promotes peace and the pursuit of truth and justice is essential to Colombia's peace process. Accountability should be for all. Colombia's peace accord is a_ remarkable achievement, but we are all conscious of the urgent needs that must still be addressed. It is essential to protect the lives of social leaders, human rights defenders and former combatants, to sustain the reintegration process and to address the need of the conflict-affected communities. The Trump Administration stands firmly with the Government and the people of Colombia as we work together to build a more prosperous future.
