Mr. Butagira (Uganda): The Ugandan delegation
is grateful to you, Mr. President, for affording us this
opportunity to take part in this important debate
concerning the situation in Somalia. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
Somalia, of 14 March 2008 (S/2008/178), which shows
his continued interest in the matter and determination
to find a solution to the problems plaguing Somalia.

The Security Council has been seized with the
situation in Somalia for some time now. Indeed,
resolution 1801 (2008), in its first preambular
paragraph, recalls previous resolutions and presidential
statements on this matter. In other words, the Council
has long determined that the situation in Somalia
constitutes and continues to constitute a threat to
international peace and security in the region. It is for
that reason that the Council authorized the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to take all
necessary measures, as appropriate for the maintenance
of international peace and security, in Somalia. That
mandate has been extended from time to time, the most
recent instance being under resolution 1801 (2008),
which extended the mandate for a further period of six
months.

I want to stress here, however, that the
maintenance of international peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council, under
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Council may, however, as has been done under Chapter
VIII of the Charter, authorize a regional organization to
undertake that task on its behalf, and that is what it has
done with AMISOM.

Allow me to point out, however, that that
delegation of authority does not amount to abdication.
That is why Uganda and many other countries have
persistently called on the Security Council to assume
its responsibility in Somalia, because AMISOM. has a
limited capacity thus far to handle the task. I would
like to thank the Security Council for appreciating the
important work that Ugandan forces have carried out in
Somalia and our sustained commitment to supporting
the efforts of AMISOM. I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of Uganda in that regard. Allow me to
now address two issues.

First, only Uganda and Burundi have deployed
troops in Somalia to date. Other countries that have
pledged troops have not fulfilled their pledges. We
have called on the international community to provide
the necessary logistical and financial support, and we
thank the countries that have helped, such as the
United States, but so far not much has been done. The
Security Council, in resolution 1801 (2008), has urged
Member States to provide financial resources,
personnel, equipment and services for the full
deployment of AMISOM. It is our belief, however, that
the Security Council should take a proactive lead in
that exercise by mobilizing the necessary resources,
including finances and other logistics.

Secondly, we have urged the Security Council to
take over from AMISOM. Sadly, nothing has been
done. We are now familiar with the phrase
"development of contingency plans for the possible
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to succeed AMISOM". That was set out in
resolution 1772 (2007); in the presidential statement of
19 December 2007 (S/PRST/2007/49); and now in
paragraph 6 of resolution 1801 (2008). The question is:
when shall we move from the realm of possibility to
that of actuality? We note that from paragraph 40 of the
report of the Secretary-General that, this time around,
he is proposing, under one of the various scenarios, the
deployment of United Nations peacekeepers, subject to
certain conditions first being fulfilled. In fact, we think
that all the scenarios should be considered and not be
mutually exclusive. It is pertinent to quote
paragraph 40:

"Under scenario 4, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation for Somalia would be
deployed, provided that broad-based political and
security agreements are in place. Prior to the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, political agreements reached and
security commitments made should include
general provisions on power-sharing, the laying-
down of arms, respect for human rights,
facilitation of humanitarian assistance and the
development of governing institutions. A total
force of from 15 to 21 infantry battalions would
be required. The total number of United Nations
military could number up to 27,000, with a
possible police component of up to 1,500 police
officers."

But it is apparent from that that no peacekeepers
will be deployed unless there is peace to keep in
Somalia in the first place. The conditions outlined are
important and everything should be done to achieve
them, but they should not be preconditions, in our
view. I have had occasion to tell the Security Council
and the General Assembly that in fact there may be
instances - and Somalia is one - when the Security
Council should engage in peacemaking as well. Indeed,
we are not persuaded by the reasoning as contained in
the report. If there was no peace to keep, why then did
the Security Council authorize AMISOM, which was in
fact acting on its behalf.
08-27826

It is not my wish to draw parallels here, but I
would like to cite the example of Darfur. No one can
say for sure that there is peace to keep in Darfur, and
yet the United Nations has authorized the deployment
of United Nations peacekeepers in Darfur. We should
avoid giving an impression of double standards.

To conclude, therefore, Uganda urges the
Security Council to do the following: to move quickly
to mobilize the international community, with the
United Nations taking the lead, to provide the
necessary logistical and financial support to AMISOM
to fully deploy in Somalia. In that regard, Uganda calls
on the Secretary-General to respond favourably to the
proposal by the Chairperson of the African Union, in
his letter of 20 February 2008, for a financial, logistical
and technical support package.

It is our conviction that the full deployment of
AMISOM. will serve as a stabilization force pending
the arrival of United Nations peacekeepers; indeed, it
should be the nucleus for the planned United Nations
force.

Secondly, there is a need to finalize plans and
move quickly towards the deployment of the United
Nations peacekeeping force to take over from
AMISOM. without preconditions.

Uganda is in Somalia for a good cause and we
shall stay the course, for we believe the international
community should not abandon Somalia.

