Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of
Haiti, for his participation in this meeting. In welcoming
Mr. Edmond Mulet, we congratulate him on his new
position as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Haiti and thank him for his comprehensive
briefing. The contribution he has made since assuming
his new position is highly commendable.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/200) indicates that remarkable progress has
been made in the provision of emergency aid with the
identification of such priority needs as water, food,
health care, sanitation and relief shelters. Nevertheless,
a great deal remains to be done, as initial relief is only
a first step in the long reconstruction efforts to rebuild
lives in Haiti and the infrastructure of the country's
institutions.

We commend the international community and
non-governmental organizations for their swift reaction
to the earthquake in providing emergency relief
support, including technical operations. The exemplary
role played by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in providing initial
specialized assistance to alleviate immediate
humanitarian needs and address the effects of the
disaster deserves the utmost commendation.

MINUSTAH continues to provide technical
support and advice to State institutions, focusing its
priorities on the Government Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development Of Haiti. The
Action Plan encompasses the long-term reconstruction
of Haiti through economic stimulation, social reform,
and the strengthening of State and local institutions
that will ensure better lives for all. In this regard, we
commend the outcome of the international donor
conference held in New York, which raised more than
$5 billion to assist in financing the expenses of the
various reconstruction efforts. Nigeria will continue to
give its full support to the aspirations of the
Government and the people of Haiti. It is in this regard
that Nigeria made an initial donation of $1.5 million
and pledged the sum of $5 million for reconstruction
efforts in Haiti.

At this crucial stage in the country's
reconstruction, the international community should

assist Haiti in taking full ownership of its governance
and State institutions in order to promote balanced
overall development and stability in the country in all
their aspects. We agree with the Secretary-General's
proposal to review the role of MINUSTAH, including
adjustments to its mandates, in the light of post-
earthquake circumstances. We support the
recommendation, which has the approval of the
Government of Haiti. It offers a unique opportunity to
the Haitian Government to transform the demographic
structure of the country, strengthen institutions and
accelerate the economic development of the people.
Most importantly, these efforts will help Haiti to
deliver on its promises, as contained in the Action
Plan.

We call for concerted efforts by the international
community to enable the Government of Haiti to
provide an integrated approach in the areas of
constitutional reform, human rights, the fostering of
political stability, the strengthening of the rule of law,
electoral institutions, the judiciary and law
enforcement agencies.

MINUSTAH has a crucial role to play in the
electoral process in order to ensure the advent of a new
democracy come February 2011. It is in this regard that
Nigeria supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that there be an increase in the
number of police personnel above the force levels
authorized in resolution 1908 (2010) in order to
enhance security in Haiti during the presidential,
parliamentary and municipal elections to be held in
September 2010.

