Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I, too, like my colleagues, wish to begin by
expressing my deep condolences to all of those who
suffered from the effects of the natural disasters in the
United States, China and the Philippines.

I wish also to thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.

Madam President, you suggested that we hold a
Security Council meeting today in an open format;
all the better, because we wanted to draw attention to
the fact that Russia, China and other members of the
Security Council have tried on many occasions, since
progress was made in inter-Korean reconciliation, to
initiate a positive reaction of any kind on the part of the
Security Council to those events. I would recall that six
months ago we would sometimes meet twice a week in
order to discuss yet another launch of a ballistic missile
by Pyongyang. But today we are already talking about
the prospect of signing a peace treaty and the final
rapprochement between the South and the North.

I would like the American delegation to explain to
us and all other Members of the United Nations why it is
opposed to the issuance by the Council ofa presidential
statement in support of these positive developments. It
is blocking even such a reaction as press elements and
refusing to issue any kind ofa positive statement.

We have repeatedly stated that we fully support
the negotiation process that began at the beginning of
this year between the parties concerned. Russia also
welcomes what has already been achieved: a reduction
in military activity and the establishment of direct
contact between the leaders of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea and the
United States.

A liaison office for the two Koreas opened several
days ago in Kaesong. We also hope for a successful
outcome to the summit set to begin tomorrow in
Pyongyang between the leaders of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea.

At the same time, we are seeing today that the
negotiations between the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the United States are at the very least
encountering certain difficulties. The negotiating
process is a two-way street. Diplomacy in the twenty-
first century, or in any century, for that matter, is such
that it is impossible to come to an agreement if one
party offers nothing in return for its demands.

No one doubts the fact that a nuclear-missile
programme in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea is unacceptable. However, what else can be
expected when Pyongyang is called upon to comply
unconditionally with all conditions under empty
promises? The world has already had the opportunity
to contemplate the price of such promises in May,
when the current United States Administration decided
that agreements reached by its predecessors under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action were bad and
made the unilateral decision to withdraw from it. Thus,
the promises made not only to Tehran but also to the
international community were all broken.
The path to denuclearization must begin with the
strengthening of confidence-building measures. For
example, one such measure could be the signing of a
peace treaty to end the war in Korea. We see that both
Pyongyang and Seoul have already come quite close
to achieving that goal. Restrictive measures imposed
by Security Council resolutions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea cannot be an end in
themselves. They should be a tool to engage the country
in constructive negotiations. It is impossible to resolve
the Korean peninsula's nuclear problem only through
sanctions and pressure on Pyongyang. Sanctions cannot
replace diplomacy.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), the delegation of the
United States has intentionally heightened tensions
surrounding the issue of submission to the Council
of the interim report of the Panel of Experts of the
North Korean sanctions committee, and wishes to use
the Council to impose its own view of the situation
on the international community. As has often been
the case with our American colleagues lately, today's
meeting has become one on Russia, rather than on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

It is said that Russia is trying to exert pressure
on the Panel of Experts. We would like to put a stop
to such insinuations once and for all. In reality, the
work of the Panel - which, for reasons beyond our
control, has become increasingly politicized - was
held hostage to the view of Washington. The Panel
should be guided by the principles of objectivity and
impartiality. Regrettably, the first version of the
document prepared by it did not meet those standards.
In that regard, we and other members of the Committee
made some observations that the Panel of Experts
perceived appropriately and took into consideration
while preparing the report for the Security Council.

The Committee's rules of procedure provide for
consultations with Member States on the content of
reports. The Council should not see ill intent in the
fact that Member States are not indifferent to the
section of the report that pertains to the Member States
concerned. The experts asked us relevant questions. It
is perfectly logical that the answers we provided should
be reflected in the report. However, in this case, exactly
the opposite has occurred.

Russia has been consistent in its well-reasoned
responses to the questions sent by the Panel, including in
its responses to the accusations made prolifically against
us today by the Permanent Representative of the United
States. Our views were not taken into consideration.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, we have insisted on having our
position reflected in the document. Let me reiterate that
this was not an attempt to pressure the Panel of Experts;
it was done in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006). I hope that no member of the Council questions
the fact that if accusations are made, responses to
them should be made with equal transparency. That is
precisely why the Russian delegation insisted that its
position be taken into consideration and reflected in the
report in question.

After difficult negotiations, we believed that a
compromise has been reached. I would like to stress
that it was a difficult conversation, but at every stage of
the negotiations, we managed to reach an understanding
with all interested parties, including the American
delegation. In her emotional statement, the Permanent
Representative of the United States did not inform
the Council that a compromise was reached with the
agreement of its expert as well. What changed the next
day, when it was withdrawn? I hope that the Permanent
Representative of the United States understands that it
was her own delegation that prevented the submission
of the report of the Panel of Experts to the Security
Council. That delegation is now preventing the
publication of an independent report of the status of the
implementation of sanctions on North Korea because it
blocked the dissemination of its new version.

I underscore that it was signed by the entire Panel
of Experts, including the American expert. Is the
delegation of the United States preventing the reflection
of views in this document that do not coincide with its
own position? In that regard, the following question
must be asked. Is it not the delegation of the United
States that is currently putting direct pressure on the
Panel by demanding that it change its independent
decision on the report to be submitted to the Security
Council?

The ball is in the United States delegation's court.
It presents the issue as an egregious precedent that
allegedly violates the independent status of the various
Panels of Experts. However, the situation is exactly the
opposite. Introducing changes into the report of the
Panel of Experts is a perfectly normal practice in the
work of the subsidiary bodies of the Council. We wish
to stress that no one is undermining the independence
of the experts, but let us not forget that they do not work
in a vacuum. We need to avoid situations where the
legitimate requests of Governments are not taken into
account. Let me reiterate a few points.
First, with regard to the oil tanker Patriot, the
Panel of Experts itself stated that it was not in violation
of the sanctions regime. That statement is in the
original draft of the report. Secondly, it is untrue that
we allegedly removed the section about violations made
by a Russian company. That is a lie It remains in the
report, unchanged, only it appears in the confidential
appendix with some additional details. Thirdly, we
requested additional information and evidence from the
United States on the issues of quotas and funding for the
representative of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in Russia. We are still awaiting that information.
We have been waiting for two months for information
on the issue of quotas and four months on that of the
representative of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Who is cheating the international community?
Who is spreading lies?

With regard to the implementation of the sanctions
resolutions on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, we cannot fail to draw attention to recent
developments on the peninsula. Some time ago, the
so-called United Nations Command - let us not be
deceived by the name; it is a military structure, led by
the United States in the demilitarized area between
the two Koreas, using the name of the Organization
as a shield - blocked practical steps to implement the
inter-Korean initiative to restore rail traffic. However,
a connection between the railways of the north and the
south is one of the central inter-Korean agreements
fixed in the Panmunjom Declaration for Peace,
Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula. As
far as we know, the so-called Command did not allow
specialists from either side to inspect the conditions
of the tracks. Naturally, comments were made in the
press, highlighting the fact that the United Nations
was allegedly blocking the implementation of joint
inter-Korean projects.

We thank you, Madam President, for your in-depth
economic analysis of the issues facing the Russian Far
East. In that regard, I would remind you that cooperation
on rail transport, including the trilateral Khasan-
Rason project, is not covered by the sanctions regimes,
including resolution 2397 (2017). Instead of creating
roadblocks, the Council should promote inter-Korean
dialogue. However, Washington, DC, is prepared to
sacrifice all hopes for inter-Korean dialogue for its own
opportunistic interests. What is the United Nations
Command - an analog to the Berlin Wall in the twenty-
first century? What is being done by the United States
can be considered a violation of all Security Council
responsibilities under all resolutions of the Security
Council seeking a settlement to the North Korean issue
through peaceful diplomatic and political solution.

On the other hand, such steps are fully in line
with the so-called policy of maximum pressure on
Pyongyang. Here, the United States is increasingly
aggressive in trying to subjugate the Security Council.
We are sometimes left with the impression that
Washington, DC, is beginning to confuse the United
Nations Security Council with the United States
National Security Council, and unfortunately, today's
meeting is no exception.

We also draw attention to the status ofthe so-called
United Nations Command in Korea. The Commander
of those forces is also the Commander of the United
States armed forces in Korea, as well as the Republic
of Korea-United States Combined Forces Command.
From the point of view of international law, when
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea became full Members of the United
Nations in 1991, the preservation of such an institution
as the United Nations Command in Korea, which
places the United Nations on the belligerent side of
the civil war, is legal nonsense. In present conditions,
as the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea officially declare their intention to
prevent a new inter-Korean conflict and are calling for
a declaration to end of the war on the Korean peninsula
and the signature of a peace treaty, we must analyse
the relevance of the role and troops of the United
Nations force, which, as we all know, was established
by resolutions 84 (1950) and 85 (1950), which were
adopted against a particular historical background.

The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics boycotted
those meetings of the Council, while the Kuomintang
authorities occupied the seat of the People's Republic of
China. In fact, the Unified Command bears no relation
to the United Nations. We should therefore consider
its withdrawal, in accordance with the decisions of
the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, which,
for example, provided for the possible dissolution of
the Command by 1976 and its replacement by Korean
border troops in the event of further normalization of
the situation on the peninsula.

The institutions and mechanisms of the United
Nations and the Security Council should be used
to support settlement processes, no to hamper
them. The common goal of all States involved is to
ensure the peaceful settlement of the rising issues
in the region, including the nuclear issue, through
dialogue and mutually acceptable arrangements. The
development of inter-Korean cooperation is in line
with that goal, contributes to easing tensions on the
peninsula and confirms the commitment undertaken
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea at the
beginning of the year to the normalization of relations
with neighbouring countries and the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.

We emphasize that such cooperation should not
violate the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Discussions on future cooperation projects
and properly organized research efforts do not violate
them. The Security Council and its decisions should
not hinder but promote the rapprochement between
the North and South. We invite the members of the
Council to consider creating special conditions in the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) for temporary exemptions from the sanctions
regime for the implementation of inter-Korean
cooperation projects. As far as I know, both sides of the
Military Demarcation Line share that idea.

The sanctions committee on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is a clear example of what
the destructive behaviour of some of its members leads
to. It seems that the Committee is seen by the United
States as a kind of club meant to punish the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea for its intransigence in the
negotiations. It is very convenient, under the cover of
the collective name of the Security Council, to try to
exert pressure on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in its bilateral contacts. Washington, DC,
methodically refuses to allow Member States and
international organizations to have humanitarian,
diplomatic and sports links in Pyongyang, although they
have nothing to do with nuclear missile programmes.
The requests sent by our American colleagues are in no
way justified, since they are intended to be accepted as
the absolute truth by other Member States. They make
it impossible for the Committee to adopt any consensus
decision, even of a technical nature.

In conclusion, we call on all parties to exercise
restraint and we stress once again that the quest for a
mutually acceptable political-diplomatic course is the
only possible way to peacefully resolve the problems on
the Korean peninsula and create strong mechanisms for
security in North-East Asia, which is in the interest of
all countries of the region. However, imposing sanctions
and pressure on Pyongyang without taking into account
its legitimate interests will make it impossible to
achieve that. Once again, I draw attention to the fact
that it was in that vein that Russia and China developed
the road map for the settlement of the situation on the
Korean peninsula that, even with its setbacks, is now
being de facto implemented.

The Russian side stands ready to foster close
interaction with all interested countries to ensure peace
and stability in the region and achieve a comprehensive

settlement of the problem on the Korean peninsula on
the basis of equal and non-discriminatory negotiations
with the participation of all interested States.

