The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Ambassador John
Negroponte, Permanent Representative of the United
States, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of October 2003. I am sure I
speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Mr. Negroponte for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council mission

Report of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan from 31 October to 7 November
2003

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion ofthe item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
ofthe Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bazel
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ambassador Gunter Pleuger, head of the
Security Council mission to Afghanistan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Pleuger to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I would like to welcome the return of members of
the Council and the Secretariat who took part in the
mission to Afghanistan. I give the floor to Mr. Gunter
Pleuger, head of the Security Council mission to
Afghanistan.


