Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab J amahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I join previous speakers in expressing our
appreciation to Justice Renate Winter, President of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and to Mr. Stephen
Rapp, Prosecutor of the Special Court. I also welcome
the presence among us of the representative of Sierra
Leone.

We thank the Special Court for Sierra Leone for
its endeavours, as described today by its President and
its Prosecutor, whom we thank for their briefings and
for the exceptional work they, the other judges and the
Court staff have done. There is no doubt that history
will record their role in enriching international criminal
and humanitarian law in a number of important ways.

Like those given yesterday to the Security
Council Committee on Sierra Leone, today's briefings
outlined the Court's activities, which indicate that there
has been palpable progress towards fulfilling the
completion strategy in keeping with the principles of
due process, fairness and respect for the rights of
indictees. We support measures adopted by the Court
and its Management Committee, in particular those
adopted so far this year. Such measures include
amending the Rules of Procedure and Evidence,
providing support to Court staff and updating the
timeline for trials and appeals.

In the light of the briefings and the Secretary-
General's letters, we believe that in spite of that
progress it is important for States in a position to do so
to take concrete measures to provide financial and
human-resources support for the Court. That is a matter
of urgency given the Court's current difficult financial
situation.

We attach high value to the Court President's
comments on the Court's relationship with the Sierra
Leone judicial and legal system, and on its impact on
that system. In discussing ad hoc courts, my country
has always advocated building national judicial
capacity. We reaffirm that today with a view to
enabling national judicial bodies to continue the
proceedings of all ad hoc courts when those courts
have completed their work, with full commitment to
the principles of due process and fair trials. That would
guarantee respect for the principle of equality and
would entrench the rule of law in the States concerned.
It would also ensure State ownership of court archives,
whose importance transcends the actual proceedings
and involves the history of the States concerned and
the process of national reconciliation. The situation has
changed, and the national judiciaries of States in which
such crimes have been committed and where evidence
and witnesses are available are capable of
professionally handling all unresolved issues, with the
support and assistance of the international community.

Our concern that the Special Court for Sierra
Leone complete its work in line with the completion
strategy - a concern shared by the Court - places
upon us the responsibility to enable the Court to decide
as soon as possible on measures with respect to legacy
issues, through a mechanism with defined tasks and
resources.

