Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Assistant
Secretary-General Humanitarian Affairs for their
briefings and their commitment.

For several months, Yemen has been plunged into a
major humanitarian and political crisis. In that context,
France welcomes the emerging progress. France also
welcomes the holding of talk in Switzerland from 15 to
20 December and the ensuing progress, in particular
the establishment of a military committee tasked with
ensuring respect for the ceasefire and the establishment
of humanitarian access to the city of Taiz. In that
regard, we would be remiss not to acknowledge all the
work undertaken by the Special Envoy in bringing the
two parties together and leading them to the negotiating
table. We also commend the parties' commitment to
putting an end to the hostilities. However, in the face of
the continued fighting, we must recognize the long road
that remains to be covered before lasting trust between
the parties can be re-established. In that context, a
lasting ceasefire respected by all must be put in place
without delay.

The second round of negotiations, which will begin
on 14 January, should make it possible to make progress
towards a compromise agreeable to all the parties
in order to pave the way for the establishment of an
inclusive Government, promote national reconciliation
and re-establish the rule of law. Such a compromise
should also make it possible to relaunch a political
transition process based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), as well
as on the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference.

A political solution is all the more necessary given
that the humanitarian and human rights situation
is now more critical than ever. As the Council was
just reminded, more than 80 per cent of the Yemeni
population currently requires humanitarian assistance.
Millions of people lack access to water, suffer from
malnutrition and have no access to medical attention. We
hope that the mechanism for delivering humanitarian
assistance to the city of Taiz can be rapidly expanded
to other cities in the country. Likewise, the human
rights situation throughout the country is extremely
troubling, if not to say tragic, as we just heard from the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, whose presence
here today I welcome.

The situation in Yemen is not just a regional threat
but an international one. The growing strength on
Yemini territory of the terrorist groups Al-Qaida on
the Arabian Peninsula and Daesh has gone hand in
hand with the disintegration of the Yemeni State. That
development represents a threat to regional stability
and to all countries, as we have seen. The exacerbation
of that threat heightens the urgency of a political
solution, which alone can address the root causes that
are undermining Yemen.

France therefore takes the opportunity of this
formal meeting of the Security Council to call on the
parties to take all the necessary measures to ensure the
success of the negotiations, as well as to urge regional
partners to use their influence to support the efforts
of the Special Envoy. It is incumbent upon all of us
collectively to support the fragile process leading to
an end of the crisis. In that regard, it is vital for the
Security Council to play its full role. France will
continue to spare no effort to work with its partners on
the Council to that end.

