Mr. Jusys (Lithuania): I wish to welcome Minister
Dacie to the Security Council in his capacity as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Chairperson-in-Office, as well as to thank him
for his briefing.

Forty years ago, the Helsinki Final Act spelled
out fundamental principles governing relations from
Vancouver to Vladivostok: the non-use of force,
non-infringement upon each other's sovereignty and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary of
the Charter of the United Nations and the fortieth
anniversary of the Helsinki Final Act, we must
recommit ourselves to the constitutional foundations of
the United Nations and the OSCE.

The very foundation of this Organization has been
seriously damaged, as the Charter of the United Nations
and Helsinki Final Act have been violated by Russia's
military aggression against Ukraine and its occupation
of Crimea. The ink of resolution 2202 (2015) was still
fresh when Russia-backed and -commanded militants
shelled Debaltseve, Gorlivka and Pervomaysk. The
resolution obliges all parties, including Russia, to
implement their commitments under the Minsk
agreement.

The OSCE plays key role. It has the mandate
to facilitate the implementation of all the Minsk
agreements. The challenge is the denial of access. The
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission must be allowed to
carry out its monitoring and verification functions. The
denial of access by pro-Russian militants is a violation
of resolution 2202 (2015).

Effective monitoring of the Russian-Ukrainian
border will be another crucial step, but Russia has so
far denied denied that in order to sustain the war in
eastern Ukraine. In that connection, I wonder, whether
the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office elaborate upon the
possibility of United Nations cooperation with OSCE to
ensure full control over and monitoring of the Russia-
Ukraine border, of which OSCE currently monitor
80 metres.

The protracted conflicts in Europe have been
simmering for too long. The violent trend in Nagorno
Karabakh is worrisome. There is a clear need for the
highest political involvement in order not to let the
situation spiral out of the control. Russia is using all
means to hinder Moldova's European integration
process. The 5+2 talks have been taken hostage by
the separatist region of Transnistria and their political
masters by way of conditioning the 5+2 agreements.

The so-called agreements between Russia and the
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali are a
barely masked annexation and a breach of the principles
of international law and Russia's commitments made
by President Medvedev in 2008. In that connection,
we wonder if the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office
intends to react to the latest annexation of Georgian
territory - when Russia and Tskhinvali signed the so-
called integration agreement?

Fanning protracted conflicts in that corner of
the world should also be seen in the context of the
dismantlement of the European system of conventional
arms control and confidence- and security-building
measures. Lithuania calls for full implementation and
modernization of existing commitments, in particular
the Vienna Document. The OSCE has already made
some tangible progress in its efforts to complement
international processes towards enhancing transparency
in cyber space. It has developed confidence-building
measures to reduce the risks of conflict stemming from
the use of information and communication technology.
The OSCE is also contributing to debates by sharing
best practices and lessons learned.

We commend the focus of the Chairperson-in-
Office on implementing the Basel Declaration on
countering foreign terrorist fighters, and on kidnapping
and hostage-taking for ransom. Good coordination
among the the United Nations, the OSCE, NATO and
the European Union is essential. We support it.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of t
resolution 1325 (2000), on women's role in peace
and security. In order ensure that experiences from
the OSCE region are included in the United Nations-
commissioned study, in April Lithuania will hold a
regional meeting on women and peace and security in
Vilnius.

Fundamental freedoms and human rights are under
threat in parts of the OSCE area. OSCE institutions,
along with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, should take a
proactive stance in addressing the human rights abuses
in illegally annexed Crimea, as well as in the areas
controlled by the armed groups in eastern Ukraine. The
United Nations, the OSCE and the Council of Europe
have to be granted secure, safe and unrestricted access
to the whole territory of Ukraine, including Crimea.

The propaganda waged by State-owned media
inciting hatred and aggressive nationalism highlights
the need to promote tolerance and non-discrimination
and to place fundamental freedoms, especially the
freedom of expression and the freedom of media, very
high on the OSCE agenda.

We look forward to continued cooperation between
the OSCE and the United Nations in seeking a durable
solution to European security.

