First, I would like to join other Security Council Members in thanking Ambassador Djani and Ambassador Ladeb for their insightful briefings and excellent work as Chairs of their respective Committees. I would also like to thank the expert groups, who, despite the challenges posed by the pandemic, have continued to make that work possible, especially the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the Group of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). With regard to the Counter Terrorism Committee (CTC), let me underline our appreciation for transparency and cooperation as key tools in enhancing and streamlining our concerted efforts to counter terrorism. Estonia welcomes the efforts made to integrate human rights, including gender issues, throughout all of the activities of the CTC and CTED. That includes assessment visits and thematic briefings. The Council has recognized the differential impact of terrorism on the human rights of women and girls and their frequent targeting by terrorist groups. This includes sexual and gender-based violence used as a tactic of terrorism. The recognition of the importance of women's leadership and participation is key in developing strategies to counter terrorism. Estonia commends the patience and flexibility that CTED has shown in finding ways to continue its work and the virtual deep-dive assessment missions despite the pandemic. Let us continue our efforts to implement hybrid working methods that allow the CTC and CTED to continue their mandated work. With regard to the influences of the pandemic on the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, it is a matter of regret that the format of the meetings is still considered to be informal. That also applies to the CTC and most other subsidiary bodies that conduct their meetings on a virtual platform. We do not see any valid reason that the meetings of the Committees should not be considered formal. When countering terrorism, the standards of due process and human rights need to be respected for the regime to remain effective. Therefore, Estonia reiterates its full support to the work of the Ombudsperson. The arrangements regarding the status and conditions of service of his Office need to be specific to the distinct role of the Ombudsperson. The use of chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is a recent reminder of the risk of non-State actors gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. The gaps and inconsistencies that persist in Syria's chemical weapons declaration indicate that the Syrian regime continues to keep unaccounted stockpiles and that there is a serious risk that chemical weapons will again fall into the hands of terrorists. In this regard, resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the most critical instruments in ensuring that these threats do not materialize. Let me conclude by reiterating the importance of ensuring that all counter- terrorism measures are carried out in accordance with international law, including international human rights law, international humanitarian law and international refugee law.
