Ms. Loj: In my capacity as Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), I would like to brief the
Security Council on the activities carried out by the
Committee during the past three months and submit the
Committee's fifteenth work programme covering the
period 1 April to 30 June 2005 (S/2005/266).

I had the honour to assume the chairmanship of
the CTC on 1 April 2005. I would like to express my
gratitude to the previous Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Andrey Denisov, for his excellent work
and leadership. Much of what I will be reporting today
took place under his chairmanship, and, together with
his colleagues at the Russian Mission, he deserves
much credit for the many new initiatives taken during
that period. Let me also take this opportunity to thank
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), Mr. Javier
Ruperez, and his team, as well as the CTC secretariat
staff, for the valuable support they have provided the
Committee over the past three months.

Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) set the
stage for revitalizing the CTC and improving the
dialogue with Member States. Based on that and other
resolutions with relevance to the work of the
Committee, the CTC has more effectively discharged
its mandate to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The following key activities
took place.

The dialogue with Member States was
strengthened, including through a first visit to a
Member State. New methods were introduced for
determining technical assistance needs. The dialogue
with international, regional and subregional
organizations was strengthened, for the purpose of
encouraging them to help their members implement
resolution 1373 (2001). Work continued to strengthen
the CTED's practical capabilities. Work on a set of best
practices related to work against the financing of
terrorism was initiated.

As part of its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee continued to respond to incoming national
reports. More than 580 reports have so far been
received, and many States will soon be submitting their
fifth reports to the Committee. However, not all reports
are equally comprehensive, and 75 States are currently
late in submitting their reports. This delay appears to
be due to a lack of available technical capacity in the
States concerned but reportedly also to "reporting
fatigue". Responsibility for the preparation of reports
as well as for implementation of the other provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001), rests with Member States.
However, the CTC has offered to facilitate the
provision of technical assistance to help States in
writing their reports. The CTC has reminded late
submitters to send in their reports. Another part of the
CTC's dialogue with Member States has been to
initiate country visits, which help bring the CTC and
the CTED closer to States and allow for in-depth
dialogue on specific challenges facing a State.

The first such visit, to Morocco, took place from
14 to 18 March. The World Customs Organization, the
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering,
Interpol and the European Union took part in the visit.
A fruitful dialogue took place with the Government of
Morocco and its various entities during the visit. The
visit permitted joint problem identification and a
discussion of how best to overcome the problems that
were observed. The key to the success of this visit, as
will be true for all visits, is follow-up. The CTC plans
similar visits to Albania, Kenya and Thailand in the
near future. The Committee encourages Member States
to welcome country visits by the CTC, including the
CTED, with a View to enhancing their efforts in the
fight against terrorism.

With regard to technical needs assessments, a
methodology has been developed and agreed upon for
how they should be prepared and reviewed by the
Committee. So far 51 such assessments have been
prepared and 11 have been endorsed by the Committee
and have been forwarded to Member States for their
review. Unless a Member State objects, the results of
such assessments will be shared with potential
assistance providers. The Committee has further
engaged with international, regional and subregional
organizations so as to encourage them to help their
members implement resolution 1373 (2001).
From 26 to 28 January 2005, the fourth special
meeting with those organizations was organized by the
CTC and the Commonwealth of Independent States in
Almaty, Kazakhstan. It was attended by 40
international organizations, as well as by 36 Member
States.

Over the past three months the CTC has also
received briefings from the Council of Europe, the
United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization. In addition,
the Committee has cooperated closely with the
Counterterrorism Action Group created by the Group
of Eight, as well as with Interpol, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and NATO. Cooperation has also been
close with the other terrorism-related subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council, namely the 1267 Committee,
the 1540 Committee and the 1566 working group. A
joint briefing of the CTC and the 1267 and 1540
Committees for Member States took place on
24 February.

In his speech in Madrid on 10 March 2005, the
Secretary-General referred directly to the central role
of the CTC and its CTED in the fight against terrorism.
Unfortunately, for technical reasons, the CTED has not
yet become fully operational. This seriously limits the
CTC's ability to sustain the various types of dialogue
with Member States on which it has embarked. Many
reports from Member States, for instance, still require
response from the Committee. A lack of experts has
prevented such responses from being drafted.

Further, the CTC, in accordance with the request
contained in resolution 1566 (2004), has initiated
development of a set of best practices to assist States in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001)
relating to the financing of terrorism.

Finally, the CTC has taken major steps towards
its revitalization, as set out in Security Council
resolution 1535 (2004). The Committee has been
equipped with valuable instruments needed to reinforce
its practical work.

I would now like to briefly present the
Committee's work programme for the next three
months. The work programme has been distributed to
members of the Council in document S/2005/266.
During the next three months the Committee will
continue its efforts to complete the revitalization
process. In particular, it looks forward to having a fully
functional CTED in the shortest possible time. Let me
also add that this, to a large degree, will depend on the
timely finalization of recruitments for the CTED. The
dialogue with Member States on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) will continue, guided by the
principles of cooperation, transparency and equal
treatment. That dialogue, based on Member State
reporting and CTC replies, will be underpinned by
CTC technical needs assessments and visits to Member
States in order to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).

In addition, the Committee will continue to
improve cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, and will encourage them to
seek to develop further ways to help States implement
resolution 1373 (2001). Finally, the CTC will begin to
consider, where appropriate, the development of best
practices in other areas with relevance to resolution
1373 (2001).

The CTC remains a crucial instrument of the
international community in its fight against terrorism,
based on dialogue and assistance to States. Its task
remains vital and urgent. The support of Member
States remains crucially important, and the Committee
is grateful for the support it has received and will
continue to count on it in the future.

The President (spoke in Chinese) I thank
Ambassador Loj. For her briefing.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Mihnea
Motok, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established to pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

