The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Israel, Japan, the Netherlands,
Poland, Spain, Switzerland and the Syrian Arab
Republic to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

At the outset, I would like to make a joint statement
on behalf of the Chairs of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). I
will then brief the Council in my capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001), to be followed by briefings by the Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).

On behalf of the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), I have
the honour to update the Security Council on the
continuing cooperation among the three Committees
and their expert groups, as requested by the Council in
its resolutions 1989 (2011), 1963 (2010) and 1977 (2011),
and earlier resolutions. Taking into account that the
full text of my statement has been distributed to the
Council, I shall, with members' permission, deliver a
summarized version.

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose a serious threat
to international peace and security. It therefore
remains important to ensure Close cooperation and
effective coordination between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Moreover, the three Committees continue to
attach great importance to effective coordination and
cooperation between their respective expert groups, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, and the group of experts assisting the 1540
Committee.

The three Committees welcome the continuing
efforts of their expert groups to cooperate on outreach
activities and country visits conducted within their
respective mandates, enhance cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
increase the exchange of information, participate in
joint meetings and engage in reciprocal representation,
as appropriate.

The need to strengthen capacities remains a key
concern of many States faced with emerging counter-
terrorism challenges. This is true in particular in
respect of the challenges posed by the exploitation of
technological advances by terrorists and non-State
actors. This includes but is not limited to the use of
the Internet as an effective communication channel and
for public outreach. The Committees' groups of experts
can play a pertinent role in advising States seeking
assistance in building counter-terrorism capacity.

The three Committees welcome all efforts aimed
at enhancing the visibility of United Nations counter-
terrorism activities and at strengthening cooperation,
coordination and coherence among United Nations
entities with a view to promoting transparency and
avoiding duplication. The three Committees also note
the invitation extended to the Secretary-General in
General Assembly resolution 66/282 of 12 July 2012,
adopted within the framework of the review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
to provide Member States with greater detail on
the proposal for creating a United Nations counter-
terrorism coordinator. The Committees look forward to
the discussions to be held on this proposal, including
within their respective mandates on further improving
cross-institutional coherence in United Nations counter-
terrorism efforts.

The coordinated outreach activities and country
visits of the expert groups are important tools for the
three Committees in facilitating the full implementation
of their respective mandates. These tools strengthen
dialogue with Member States, help to improve
understanding of the distinct yet complementary
roles of the three Committees, and assist them in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.

I am pleased to report on some areas in which
cooperation between the expert groups has been
increased. Since May 2012, all three expert groups have
been represented at over a dozen workshops and other
outreach events, and more meetings have been attended
by two of the groups. CTED and the Monitoring Team
also conducted two joint visits and, in the course of
their joint constructive dialogue with Member States,
provided advice to two Member States concerning their
respective implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions.

The Monitoring Team and CTED also continued to
participate jointly in events hosted by United Nations
bodies. Since their acceptance as observers to the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force (FATF), CTED and the Monitoring Team have
begun the practice of making presentations on the
other's behalf, where possible, in order to facilitate
engagement with as many partners as allowed by the
available time and resources, and always bearing in
mind their distinct yet complementary roles. Several
recent country visits conducted by CTED on behalf
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee included the
participation of a representative of the Monitoring
Team and, where applicable, of the 1540 Committee
group of experts.

Since May 2012, the coordinated approach to
organizations agreed upon by the three expert groups
continues to be enriched by the significant contributions
made by CTED and Monitoring Team representatives to
conferences involving a large number of international,
regional and subregional organizations. Continued
participation in such events enhances cooperation
between and among the Security Council members
and the participating organizations and also serves
to promote the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) continues to provide a platform for enhanced
cooperation by the three expert groups, not only among
themselves, but also with over 30 United Nations
institutions, agencies and programmes concerned
with various aspects of counter-terrorism. The expert
groups also participate in the Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism Initiative, which is co-chaired
by CTED. The Monitoring Team and CTED have also
assumed leading roles in other working groups, for
example CTED as co-Chair of the Working Group on
Border Management relating to Counter-Terrorism,
and the Monitoring Team as co-Chair of the Working
Group on Countering the Use of the Internet for
Terrorist Purposes. The relevant expert groups have
also worked proactively within the framework of the
CTITF Working Group on Dialogue, Understanding
and Countering the Appeal of Terrorism.

Exchange of information among the expert groups
is carried out on a regular basis. The three groups share
information about forthcoming meetings and relevant
activities with a View to coordinating activities, while
bearing in mind their distinct yet complementary roles.

The three expert groups continue to hold joint
meetings where appropriate, whether involving the
heads of each team or the expert teams, in order to
prepare for country visits and relevant workshops and to
exchange information on particular themes or activities
in specific regions or countries. The CTITF continues
to be invited to participate in these joint meetings.

A fuller version of this statement is available to the
Council.

I would like to make a second statement on behalf
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. I have had the
honour to chair the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) since the beginning of 2011. It
gives me great pleasure to briefthe Security Council on
the work of the Committee since the previous briefing,
held in May this year (see S/PV.6767).

The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and continues to play a critical role in promoting and
facilitating their implementation.

As mentioned in this year's programme of work,
the Committee is organizing a special meeting with
Member States and relevant international and regional
organizations on preventing and suppressing terrorist
financing, which will be held on 20 November at United
Nations Headquarters in New York. Previous special
meetings of the Committee, focusing on various major
counter-terrorism-related themes, have been held in
New York, Washington, DC, Vienna, Almaty, Nairobi
and Strasbourg.

This year's special meeting will focus on raising
Member States' awareness of the terrorist financing
threat; drawing attention to related best practices,
including the revised FATF recommendations, and
their relevance to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001); discussion of experiences and effective
measures in addressing related challenges; and helping
to ensure that combating terrorist financing remains
a priority for Member States. The speakers will
include representatives of invited Member States and
international, regional and subregional organizations. I
encourage Member States to actively participate in this
meeting. Furthermore, as part of its outreach efforts,
the Committee will also explore the possibility of
collaboration with the Inter-Parliamentary Union.

In June this year, the Committee conducted
an interim review of CTED, in accordance with
resolution 1963 (2010), which stipulated that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
would continue to operate as a special political mission
under the policy guidance of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee for the period ending 31 December 2013.

The Committee, through CTED, has also
been constantly improving its analytical tools to
monitor and assess the progress in implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) around the
world. Having developed preliminary implementation
assessments of the entire United Nations membership
and achieved considerable progress in stocktaking,
the Committee has agreed to revised assessment tools,
including the overview of implementation assessment
and the details of implementation survey. These tools are
designed to further enhance thoroughness, consistency,
transparency and even-handedness in the Committee's
stocktaking process, with a view to identifying States'
strengths and challenges in countering terrorism
worldwide.

The Committee continues to focus on region-specific
discussions and on issues identified in the 2011 Global
Survey. The Committee also continues to organize
and participate in discussions and workshops on
thematic issues. The major thematic issues considered
by the Committee during the past six months include
challenges in adopting and implementing counter-
terrorism measures for the effective cross-border
control of small arms and light weapons, the revised
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force on
Money Laundering and the role of central authorities in
enhancing international counter-terrorism cooperation.

CTED has also been active in conducting a number
of workshops on specific topics aimed at specific
regional audiences. Important workshops organized
during the period include the practitioners' seminar on
the role of the prosecution in terrorist cases, in Algiers
from 5 to 7 June; the regional seminar for southeast
Asian States on international joint investigations, in
Kuala Lumpur from 26 to 28 June; the workshop for
Member States of the Maghreb and the Sahel on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), in Rabat
from 17 to 19 July; the southeast Europe workshop
on countering violent extremism, in Istanbul from
l to 2 October; the first experts' meeting on the
establishment of an operational freezing mechanism,
in Amsterdam from 22 to 24 October; and the fourth
regional workshop on preventing abuse of the non-profit
sector, in Buenos Aires from 14 to 16 November.

In addition, the Committee and CTED have
continued to enhance ongoing dialogue with Member
States, donors and beneficiaries on facilitating technical
assistance for capacity-building at the national and
subregional levels. Since the most recent briefing to the
Security Council (see S/PV.6767), CTED, on behalf of
the Committee, conducted eight assessment missions to
Member States, namely, Argentina, Canada, Djibouti,
Finland, Norway, the Russian Federation, Sweden and
Uruguay.

I would like to emphasize that the Committee and
CTED have will continue to pay close attention to the
question of respect for human rights and the rule of law
in the counter-terrorism measures taken by States, in
accordance with the relevant mandates conferred by the
Security Council.

The Committee and CTED continue to work
closely with the relevant working groups of the CTITF,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the
Global Counterterrorism Forum in order to support,
coordinate and complement each other's counter-
terrorism endeavours.

In conclusion, the Committee will continue to play
a critical role in the global fight against terrorism, and
will strive to do so in a more strategic and transparent
manner in order to contribute more effectively to the
global counter-terrorism effort within the scope of its
mandate.

I should like to conclude by expressing my sincere
appreciation to Mr. Michael Smith, Executive Director
of CTED, and to his team for their excellent work on the
Committee's behalf and to thank the Secretariat for its
continued support.

I am now required to make a statement in my
national capacity. As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, it has been India's constant endeavour to
provide political direction to the work of the Committee
and greater momentum to the efforts to bolster the
ability of Member States to confront the scourge of
terrorism.

The international community must step up
its collective efforts with real cooperation among
Member States in order to confront the scourge of
terrorism squarely and decisively. We need concerted
action against terrorists and their sponsors, including
the complete dismantling of terrorist safe havens,
sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures. We need to adopt a
holistic approach that ensures zero tolerance towards
terrorism.

India fully supports all efforts to strengthen
international and regional cooperation to counter
terrorism and, most important, to help ensure the
effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005), and comprehensive and the integrated
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

We welcome the listing of the Haqqani Network
by the Sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011). That Group has also targeted
Indian interests in the past. The unity of the international
community is critical in isolating the terror groups
that threaten peace and security in our region and in
other parts of the world. The Monitoring Team needs to
put greater focus on comprehensively and objectively
examining the linkages between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, which pose serious threats to international
peace and security.

It is critical that all sanctions regimes established
by the Council ensure swift, fair and transparent
decision-making procedures. The process of listing
and delisting must be guided by the same set of
principles - fairness, credibility and transparency.

India has an unwavering commitment to supporting
international efforts to prevent non-State actors and
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. The international
community must continue to strengthen its efforts to
eliminate the risks related to sensitive materials and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists and
non-State actors. The international response to the
threat needs to be national as well as multilateral and
global.

India believes that meeting new proliferation
challenges requires fresh approaches for evolving a more
cooperative and consensual international security order
to effectively address genuine proliferation concerns.
As announced by Prime Minister Mr. Manmohan Singh
at the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit, held in March,
India will host a 1540 Committee workshop on the
theme "Building new synergies on nuclear security"
from 30 November to 1 December. At the workshop,
India intends to bring together important stakeholders
for a brainstorming session on building synergies that
will contribute to the overall objectives of nuclear
security.

Success in the fight against terrorism goes hand
in hand with progress in strengthening counter-
terrorism cooperation and the exchange of information
at international, regional and subregional levels. Our
collective endeavour should be to enhance coherence
and synergy among the various counter-terrorism
structures that are dealing with the issue ofterrorism at
the United Nations. The Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) and the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) must continue to further
strengthen their ongoing efforts in the fight against
terrorism.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to my colleague, Mr. Baso Sangqu,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

