Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and through you, your
country, Cameroon, for the guidance you have been
affording the Security Council in the cause of
international peace and security. I vividly remember
how profoundly the Economic and Social Council
benefited from your leadership only last year in the
cause of development, and I wish to express my
delegation's support for your efforts in steering the
deliberations here to a fruitful and just conclusion.

On 12 September 2002, the Secretary-General set
the tone of this year's general debate when he said that
the Middle East, Iraq and South Asia constitute the
existing threats to international peace and security. He
also explained why multilateralism offers the best
possible solutions to such problems. Today, under your
able presidency, Sir, the Council is debating the
situation in Iraq, one of those great hotspots in the
international security landscape. My delegation should
like to hope and believe that the deliberations here
would be taken on board while charting our collective
course on the very sensitive and complex issue before
the Council.

Nepal joined the United Nations out of her
conviction that the Organization was the best and only
way to go about averting the scourges of wars and
devoting all available energy to the promotion of
peace, development and human dignity. In the 47 years
since then, Nepal has always worked hard and
responsibly, be it on the Security Council, on which she
has had the honour to serve twice, or elsewhere within
the United Nations system, including in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, or outside it, in the interest of
peace and security around the world, as well as for the
development and the welfare of humanity.

Nepal believes that membership in the United
Nations comes with an undeniable responsibility to
ensure that the Charter principles are always upheld in
the pursuit of the purposes of the Organization. Respect
for the sovereign equality of all members, the peaceful
settlement of international disputes and avoiding the
threat or use of force to violate the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State constitute the
inviolable principles of the conduct of international
relations. Likewise, the fulfilment of obligations in
good faith, providing assistance to the United Nations
in its Charter actions, and non-intervention in issues
essentially within domestic jurisdiction constitute other
core principles that must be respected as well.

Nepal's firm belief in and commitment to the
solemn purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations flow directly from, and
are deeply engraved in, the constitution of our country.
Accordingly, Nepal has always abided by both the
spirit and words of all those principles and purposes,
and our passion to do so remains as strong as ever. Let
me also add that Nepal's own experience as a victim of
terrorist violence at home, deflecting the already scant
resources that could otherwise be employed to propel
development, has further reinforced our commitment to
the twin purposes of peace and development. More
than ever before, we are convinced that one will not be
achieved without the other.

I made reference to the United Nations Charter
principles and Nepal's convictions because we believe
that the situation in Iraq, as well as that existing
between Iraq and Kuwait, cannot be addressed without
unflinching commitment on the part of all Member
States to these very purposes and principles of the
United Nations. We must derive our strength, moral
and legal as well as otherwise, from the framework of
the United Nations Charter and international laws that
reflect our collective conscience. This is the View that
Nepal has always maintained at the United Nations and
within the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), whose
statement yesterday at the Council we support.

At the NAM. ministerial meeting in Durban last
April, we welcomed the assurances given by the
Republic of Iraq to respect the independence,
sovereignty and security of the State of Kuwait and to
ensure its territorial integrity. We underscore the
importance of implementing such policies to ease
tensions and to promote understanding in the region,
and call for action that would place those guarantees in
an operational framework, manifest not only in good
intentions but also in good-neighbourly relations and
non-interference in one another's domestic affairs.

In the same vein, we also call on all sides to
respect in spirit and in action the independence,
sovereignty, security and territorial integrity of Iraq by
not using external force, unless clearly authorized by
the Council as a measure of last resort. Until other
Charter measures have all been utilized, particular care
should be taken before setting out to ignite a spark in
an already volatile region - a spark which could well
spread to the entire world. We also firmly believe that
the sanctions on Iraq should be lifted so that the harsh
suffering of its people, including women, children and
the elderly, can be halted and stability and security in
the region be promoted.

In the context of current developments having
grave implications for the situation in Iraq, Nepal
welcomes the most recent resumption of dialogue
between Iraq and the United Nations and the events
that have followed, which should ensure a complete
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that connection, I wish to place on
record our sincere appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his untiring efforts to address the situation
in Iraq while upholding the ideals of the United
Nations in dealing with these issues.

In that context, while we firmly maintain that
there is no room for action against Iraq - or against
any other State for that matter - outside the United
Nations Charter, we also call on Iraq to comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions and to assure
the world through convincing action that there is no
impending danger from their side to international peace
and security.

Likewise, we are firm in our conviction that
multilateralism is the only acceptable path to ensuring
collective global security. Unilateral action, however
pious its objective may be, undermines the integrity of
international law and flouts the fundamental principles
of the rule of law, causing uncertainties and the loss of
hope, especially among the weak and vulnerable
Members of the Organization. Full implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions by all parties
constitutes the only means for establishing durable
peace, security and stability in the region and
elsewhere.

Finally, as Nepal is duty-bound in its commitment
to maintaining international peace and security and to
making the world a safer place to live in for ourselves
and for posterity, we call on the Council to harness this
public meeting to find a peaceful and just way to
ensure peace and security in the region and at the
global level and to avoid the devastating scourges of
war.

We should like to believe that a peaceful solution
should be possible if we collectively resort to making
the United Nations a genuine centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations in the attainment of our common
purposes, so clearly and categorically spelled out in
Article 1 of the Charter of the Organization.

