Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
we welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We
also thank her for her briefing to the Council on the
situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

The adoption of resolution 1593 (2005) under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, which
referred the situation of Darfur to the International
Criminal Court, provides for the Court's jurisdiction to
extend to a State not party to the Rome Statute, in this
case the Sudan, and compels it to cooperate with the
Court. The Council has the primary responsibility for
following up the situation in Darfur in the International
Criminal Court, which should not be seen as having
been discharged solely by referring the situation to the
Court, holding such debates or receiving briefings from
the Prosecutor.

The eight communications from the Court to the
Council on non-cooperation in the case of Darfur
are an example of the need for that follow-up. In that
regard, the Security Council should continue due
dialogue with the Court and its Prosecutor and respond
to the Court's requests. The silence of this body with
regard to those requests indicates a failure in meeting
its responsibility. Chile therefore supports effectively
following up the situations referred by the Council to
the Court, to ensure the effectiveness and impact of the
Council's resolutions.

In order to ensure successful investigations and
prosecutions by the International Criminal Court,
States must duly cooperate, either by virtue of being
parties to the Rome Statute or in line with Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, as provided in
resolution 1593 (2005).

The specific case of Darfur has generated a series
of situations of non-cooperation with the Court, in
particular and quite regrettably on behalf of the Sudan
as well as on the part of other States. Chile therefore
reiterates its call upon all the relevant States to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court and to
comply with the rulings handed down by the Court.

The humanitarian situation in Darfur as described
in the recent report is even more worrisome than it
was in the Prosecutor's previous report. This year,
the number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) has
surpassed the numbers of 2011 and 2012. All told that
is half as much as those who had to flee their homes in
2013, resulting in more than 2 million displaced persons
in Darfur since the conflict erupted.

We are also concerned that, according to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, serious
crimes falling under the Rome Statute continue to be
perpetrated. We underscore the need for ongoing support
to those institutions aimed at strengthening respect for
the rule of law and human rights, while promoting full
compliance with the obligation to cooperate with the
Court and with the Prosecutor.

On repeated occasions the Council has addressed
the humanitarian situation in Darfur. In particular we
call for immediate compliance with resolutions 2138
(2014) and 2148 (2014), referring to the need to cease the
violence, particularly against civilians and especially
against women and children.

My delegation welcomes the briefing on the recent
judicial activities of the Prosecutor's Office, especially
in the case ofAba'allah Banda Abakaer Noarain, and the
registering of individuals outside of the Sudan who face
the Court's arrest warrants.

Chile underscores the serious nature of the crimes
set out in the report, including aerial bombardments
against civilians, sexual and gender-based crimes and
crimes against human rights activists and members of
civil society and community leaders. Abductions and
attacks have also been carried out against humanitarian
assistance providers and staff of peacekeeping
operations. We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor
to continue gathering evidence on new allegations of
crimes perpetrated in Darfur, as that could serve as the
basis of new investigations.

Chile is concerned about the alleged manipulation
of reports carried out by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as described
in paragraph 10 of the Prosecutor's report. Those
would cover up crimes against civilians and against
peacekeepers. We firmly support an investigation by
the Secretary-General into that matter.

Lastly, my country emphasizes the importance of
maintaining appropriate relations between the Court
and the Council with regard to their jurisdiction and
responsibility. We also reiterate our commitment in
support of the work of the Court and of the Prosecutor.

