The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Liberia, in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. 0sode
(Liberia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/648, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2009/640, containing a letter
dated 11 December 2009 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia, transmitting
the report of the Panel of Experts on Liberia.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1903 (2009).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.25 a.m.
09-65510

