Mr. Ag Oumar (Mali) (spoke in French): Ijoin
preceding speakers in thanking not only you, Mr.
President, for organizing this open meeting on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke for introducing the
report to us and for his leadership of the Security
Council mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As is usual for him, he led it most ably and
with great knowledge of the situation. My delegation
thanks him for that. In January, he focused his
presidency of the Security Council on Africa, and now,
by the nature of things, China's presidency in this
month of May again has a lot of work to do on Africa,
even though all these meetings on Africa were not on
the schedule. I should like to say to Ambassador
Holbrooke that Africa remembers the commitments he
made in January and that he must not rest until all
those commitments are implemented.

Having said this, however, my delegation is very
pleased with the positive outcome of the Security
Council mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Kisangani incident and the violations in
the Equateur Province are indeed deplorable, but my
delegation considers that this was not a rupture
between the parties to the conflict, but they do need to
be followed up urgently. The response to the main
issues raised by the Security Council mission enables
us to say today that we are in a new and positive
situation, and it is urgently necessary now to
implement phase II of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC).

The deployment of phase II of MONUC is no
longer just something we would like to happen, but
rather an imperative for all of the signatories to the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and, indeed, for all of
Africa, despite the lessons that can be drawn from the
tragedy in Sierra Leone, which my delegation deeply
deplores. It is our view that the problem of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement of the armed groups is an essential
element for re-establishing confidence in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and for
putting an end to the many violations of human rights.
We fully support the recommendations to the
Secretary-General on the deployment of phase II of
MONUC.

In the recent past, Mali itself witnessed how
beneficial a national dialogue can be, which is why we
are glad that the signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and representatives of civil society,
political parties and the church are all aware of the
urgent need for the inter-Congolese dialogue. It is our
ardent hope that the parties will very soon reach
agreement on the venue where the dialogue is to take
place so that it can start as soon as possible: because
without a political option, there is a real danger that the
parties might focus exclusively on the military option.
We commend the efforts made by Sir Ketumile Masire
in his work as facilitator.

My delegation supports the appointment of a
high-level, French-speaking adviser to the facilitator
who would be based in Kinshasa, as the report before
us today recommends. My delegation welcomes the
idea of a new meeting in June, under the French
presidency, of members of the Political Committee of
the Lusaka Agreement and the Security Council, with a
view to continuing the dialogue among the parties and
giving it a new impetus. This would help not only the
Security Council, but also the parties.

