Mr. Ito (Japan): On behalf of the Government of
Japan, I extend our deepest appreciation to the
Government of the Russian Federation for organizing
this important meeting. I would also like to express our
gratitude for the work of the Secretary-General and the
Quartet to date.

The Middle East peace process is at a critical
juncture, with new political developments on many
fronts. Japan believes that the Security Council should
continue to play a constructive role in the Middle East
peace process.

We sincerely hope that the new Israeli
Government will strive for the realization of a Middle
East peace based on the two-State solution. We
strongly call on the Israeli Government to fulfil its
obligations under the Road Map and Security Council
resolution 1850 (2008). Japan expects that the
Government of Israel will strive to achieve a peace in
the Middle East by overcoming the current obstacles in
cooperation with the international community.

Improving the humanitarian conditions in Gaza is
a top priority for all of us. From that perspective, it is
necessary to keep the crossings open continuously. At
the same time, we condemn the sporadic rocket attacks
on Israel, which undermine not only the security of
Israeli citizens but also the efforts for the
reconstruction of Gaza and the peace process. Here
again, I call on the parties to fulfil their obligations
under Council resolution 1860 (2009).

To realize a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace, it is also indispensable for the Arab States to
play a more active role. The Arab Peace Initiative can
serve as a solid foundation for a comprehensive Middle
East peace.

At the International Conference in Support of the
Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza,
in which I participated, Japan pledged $200 million in
assistance to the Palestinians. Japan is supporting the
efforts of the Palestinians under the Palestinian
Authority led by President Abbas to build a viable
national economy through the "Corridor for Peace and
Prosperity" initiative and other projects, in order to
realize the establishment of a Palestinian State
comprising the West Bank and Gaza.

Japan also has been actively engaged in the
Middle East peace process through its diplomatic
efforts. Foreign Minister Nakasone visited the region
last week. In Egypt he reiterated our unchanged
support for Egyptian efforts for the realization of peace
based on the two-State solution. Mr. Tatsuo Arima, our
Special Envoy for the Middle East, also Visited Israel
and the Palestinian territories last week to assist in
reinvigorating the peace process.

Last November, a historic series of high-level
meetings of the General Assembly was held here in
New York, with the attendance of leaders from around
the world, including those of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, as well as our Special Envoy, Mr. Koumura.
At the meeting, the leaders stressed that peace could
only be cultivated through dialogue and tolerance. In
that regard, I wish to stress the importance of a
balanced approach in pursuing peace. There are many
factors underlying conflicts, such as poverty and
despair. Resorting to force will not be the ultimate
solution to these problems. We need to help ensure a
decent standard of living for those in dire situations
and work to achieve economic prosperity and improve
the quality of education. Values such as pluralism,
multiculturalism, tolerance and moderation are
required in order to achieve peace. They can be
developed through dialogue among civilizations. I
believe that our efforts to that end will benefit
generations to come.

Over the course of our history, Japan has always
aspired to accommodate differences and learn to
coexist with others. Differences should not lead to
mutual estrangement, but rather should serve as a
catalyst for enriching a society. We believe with
conviction that the ultimate goal of diplomacy is to
create a global society in which people of different
cultures, religions and ideologies can live together in
peace.

We hope to be a reliable partner of the parties to
the Middle East peace process. Japan believes it has a
constructive role to play in the achievement of peace
and prosperity in the region. We will do whatever we
can in the form of financial as well as intellectual
contributions. We will maintain our commitment to the
two-State solution, which will make it possible for
Israelis and Palestinians to live side by side in peace.

