Mr. Jallow: Some five months ago, in my last
report to the Security Council, I projected that the
prosecution expected to close its case in the trial of 10
accused persons before the end of the year and of four
others early in 2005. I reported that we were ready to
commence the trial of six other accused before the end
of 2005, to conclude our investigations into new targets
by the end of 2004 and to determine new indictments,
if any, by October of 2005, and that consultations with
Rwanda and other countries on the transfer of cases to
national jurisdictions for trial would be initiated.

I am happy to report progress in those matters.
Since that report, the prosecution has closed its case in
the Military 1 trial and in the Butare trial, totalling 10
accused persons. The defence case is expected to
commence in January 2005. We expect to close the
prosecution phase in the Government II trial of four
accused persons by June 2005. The multiple-accused
trials present a considerable challenge to the
completion strategy because of their complexity and
the logistics involved in keeping them going. With the
conclusion of the prosecution case in the Government 1]
trial in June 2005, the challenge posed by this category
of cases will have been considerably reduced.

As projected, the prosecution opened its case in
respect of six more accused during the second half of
2004 with the Military H case and the single-accused
Simba and single-accused Seromba cases. I am pleased
to report that we have already closed the prosecution
phase in the Simba case and would have done so in the
Seromba case but for the defence request for
adjournment. We expect, however, to close our case in
the Seromba trial by the end of February 2005.

As the President of the Tribunal has indicated,
my Office remains committed to the deadline for
concluding investigations into any new indictments by
the end of 2004 and the filing of any new indictments
which may arise by the last quarter of 2005, as we
advised the Security Council at our previous meeting.

The Office of the Prosecutor is also preparing for
trial the cases of the remaining detainees, who now
number 18. In that connection, we propose to be ready
to commence new trials in respect of at least eight of
those detainees during 2005, in accordance with the
new indictment policy of single-accused cases. In
addition, the trial of four other accused should be ready
to commence de novo by January 2005 in the
Government 1 case, in accordance with the recent
decision of the Joint Appeals Chamber of the two
Tribunals.

I have initiated discussions with Rwanda and
other States on prospects for the transfer of cases to
those States. Those discussions are ongoing. At the
same time, the Office of the Prosecutor is preparing the
case files that have been identified for transfer. We
propose to make the necessary applications to the Trial
Chambers in early 2005 for orders for transfer of those
cases. Nevertheless, I must caution that, apart from
Rwanda, it is not proving easy to find States which are
ready, able and willing to take on cases for prosecution
from the Tribunal. Our options in the choice of States
are considerably limited.

The apprehension and transfer of indicted
fugitives also continues to be fraught with difficulties.
Ephrem Setako, who was arrested earlier this year in
the Netherlands, was finally transferred to the Tribunal
a week ago. Fourteen other indicted persons remain at
large. The level of international support by States in
which such persons reside has fallen below what is
required for a successful arrest programme. The bulk
of our fugitives continue to be based in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Several attempts by the
Tribunal to have a dialogue with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on this matter have
elicited no response, save for the isolated case of Yusuf
Munyakazi, who was surrendered earlier this year. We
shall nonetheless continue our efforts and report back
to the Council on the situation. Meanwhile, we believe
that it is necessary for the Council to exhort Member
States to live up to their legal obligations in this
respect and to comply with Security Council resolution
1503 (2003) in arresting indicted fugitives in their
territory and transferring them to the Tribunal for
prosecution.

We remain committed to the implementation of
the completion strategy and see no need for any further
revision of it. In many respects, as I indicated at the
beginning, we are on schedule. But in my previous
briefing, I did alert the Council to the potentially
adverse impact of the recruitment freeze on the success
of the completion strategy. I said then that the trials
cannot proceed optimally unless adequate resources are
provided for the core activity of the Tribunal - that is,
prosecution - to be carried out effectively.

The year 2005 will pose a real challenge. During
that year we expect to have the highest number ever on
trial simultaneously at the Tribunal. I do not expect the
peak to decline before 2006. The number of appeals
cases, currently standing at 14 persons, is expected to
rise considerably with the conclusion of each new trial,
as every decision in respect of each accused will -
based on experience - lead to one or perhaps two
appeals. It is anticipated that in 2005 the Office of the
Prosecutor may have to deal with as many as 30
appeals.

Intense work will continue on the preparation of
cases for trial and for transfer. While 2004 has
registered some progress in the preparation and trial of
cases, it will be a great challenge to sustain this
progress and deal with the anticipated increased
workload while continuing to suffer the consequences
of the recruitment freeze and resource constraints.

The freeze on recruitment has hit the Office of
the Prosecutor particularly hard. Although the Security
Council created a separate Office of the Prosecutor for
the ICTR last year, the recruitment of the staff for the
Office has been interrupted by the freeze. Only half of
the complement of six support staff are in place.
Likewise, the new Appeals Unit, which was established
pursuant to the same Council resolution that created
that Office, is below full capacity - in fact, it is at
about half its budgeted strength due to the freeze - at
a time when its workload is increasing, and will
continue to increase as more trials are completed and
more appeals are lodged.

In the Prosecutions Section, the interruption of
recruitment has left 17 vacancies, comprising the posts
of senior trial attorney, trial attorney, senior legal
adviser, legal adviser, legal researcher and case
manager. Recent developments have added the post of
chief of prosecutions to the list of vacancies, which is
therefore subject to the freeze on replacement.

There are currently 21 vacant posts in the
Investigations Division in Kigali, as well as four
vacant posts in the Legal Advisory Section. The
Section, which is responsible for the drafting of
indictments, is now almost non-existent at a time
when, by the conclusion of investigations at the end of
2004, the Office of the Prosecutor is to turn its
attention to evaluating the results of investigations and
preparing new indictments through the Unit.

The filling of all those positions is crucial and
absolutely necessary for us to meet the challenge of
proper completion. Those positions are directly
concerned with the critical and core function of
prosecution. A way must be found to lift the
recruitment freeze if we are to avoid putting the
completion strategy at risk. With a considerably low
capacity the Office of the Prosecutor will be hard put
to prepare new cases, continue ongoing trials and deal
with the new and increased appeals workload at the
same time that it undertakes the programme of
transferring cases.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Security Council and the Secretary-General and his
Office for their continued support for the ICTR in
general, and for the Office of the Prosecutor in
particular.

