Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): Our purpose this evening is not to put Iraq on trial
or to go back over international events in recent weeks
showing that relations between Iraq and the Special
Commission had deteriorated.

You, Mr. President, informed the international
community, and Iraq in particular, of the Security Council's
position through a Council statement in which you recalled
certain principles and the need for Iraq to abide by certain
Council decisions.

Today the Security Council wants to show once again
that it draws a distinction between the Iraqi Government
and the Iraqi people. The Council wants to show eloquently
that it never intended to punish the Iraqi people; that it
rightly wanted to impose sanctions on a Government that
had violated the United Nations Charter, though it has
always been aware of the suffering of an innocent people.

By adopting resolution 986 (1995), the Security
Council wanted to indicate clearly its awareness of the
realities in Iraq, which remind us that there are vulnerable
sectors of society that are suffering and that there are
children who do not receive proper nourishment, do not get
enough food to turn them into tomorrow's upright men and
women - people able to take part in building their
country, citizens of the world who could someday sit at this
table to discuss and decide with us what should be done in
order to bring about world peace, which is something we
all desire.

From the report submitted to the Security Council by
the Secretary-General, the Council has seen that there are
serious shortages in Iraq and that it is necessary for all
Council members, as well as for the rest of the
international community, to respond to the appeal from
Baghdad - a distress call from a people which itself is
the victim of schemes that are surely incoherent, perhaps
irresponsible and most definitely in violation of
international law.

This evening we have gathered together to tell the
Iraqi people that we have nothing against them, that we
are aware of their suffering and that in our discussions we
wanted to see and to decide how we can contribute to
alleviating their suffering. Security Council resolution 986
(1995) was not designed to resolve all of the problems of
the Iraqi people. This cannot be done since, as everyone
knows, it is the responsibility of the Iraqi Government to
contribute not only to the development of its country but
also to the well-being of its people.

However, there is a situation we must all understand.
As suggested by the Secretary-General, we must bring a
human viewpoint to this debate and remember our
common humanity while contemplating what we propose
to do.

This is the point we have reached, and this is what
the draft resolution we are about to adopt is intended to
express. In the draft resolution we acknowledge that there
are shortcomings; we acknowledge that improvements
should be made; we recognize that resolution 986 (1995)
established a process that was new, that for the United
Nations had no precedent, that could serve as a line of
conduct and that would help us implement a proper
procedure that would be approved of by the international
community as a whole.

We saw that it was necessary to correct certain
shortcomings and that it was necessary to remember that
in Iraq there are children who are suffering, sick people
who cannot get treatment and children who do not go to
school. We had a duty to respond to those needs, and that
is what we have done.

On behalf of my delegation, I would like to say how
much we welcome the great courage shown in
recognizing that we have the duty not to remain
indifferent to what is happening in Iraq, not to remain

 

indifferent in the face of the suffering of a people that is
itself a Victim. We will never forget, of course, that it is the
responsibility of the Iraqi leadership to redress this
situation. It is up to them to subscribe to and to respect the
relevant Security Council resolutions and to ensure that the
Special Commission can conclude its work quickly so that
the sanctions can be lifted. But in the meantime, this
evening we have the responsibility to respond, albeit
modestly, to the appeal that has come to us from Iraq, as
well as to the message to us from the Secretary-General.

The draft resolution asks that we spare no effort to
ensure that the mechanisms that were created be improved,
that certain shortcomings be resolved and that we respond
quickly to the pressing needs of the Iraqis for the
humanitarian aid that we want to dispatch to them. We
have seen that we ought to review the mechanisms, the
modus operandi and the very working methods of the
sanctions Committee established under resolution 661
(1990). We all agree on the need to contribute
constructively to improving the Committee's modus
operandi. But perhaps we should also recall that all of us
seated around this table are also members of that
Committee, that if there are shortcomings then we are all
responsible, and that if there is any possibility of improving
the working methods of that Committee, then perhaps we
are all called upon to display more willingness in that
regard.

Let me say, on behalf of my delegation, that we agree
with what the Secretary-General says in his report. We
agree with what he advocates. We agree with what he so
courageously recommends: that we re-examine the revenues
and consider how much we might be able - and I hope in
the near future - to add to Iraq's resources, so that the
Committee, within the requisite norms, can approve the
requests to provide all the humanitarian aid required to
meet the needs of the Iraqi population.

We hope that when the plan is adopted, and when the
Secretary-General submits his latest thoughts on the need
that we are already recognizing today - that of increasing
oil revenues - on behalf of my delegation, I hope that this
Council will be true to itself and that it will respond to this
heartfelt call to all of us to stand up, show our humanity,
respond to this urgent distress call and respond favourably
to the need to help the Iraqi people - its children and its
elderly people, who are all suffering and who are looking
to us this evening for a glimmer of hope.

