Ms. Lisson (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's debate. Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate, thanks the Secretary-
General and congratulates him on his latest report on
small arms. It marks a welcome return of this
important issue to consideration by the Council.
Recognizing the significant and interlinked arms
control, humanitarian, peacebuilding and development
aspects inherent in the issue, we urge the Council to
continue to make an active contribution towards
combating the illicit proliferation of small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects.

We recognize that the Council cannot work on its
own in addressing the small arms threat. It is critical
that all Member States continue to work actively to
implement the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
including the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons.

Australia is also committed to working with
regional partners and civil society to address the
challenge of illicit small arms proliferation in the Asia-
Pacific region. Recognizing, as noted in the Secretary-
General's report, that leakage from official stockpiles
is a significant source of illicit weapons, Australia has
taken practical measures to assist regional States, at
their request. Through its Defence Cooperation
Programme, Australia provides assistance on matters
such as the construction and refurbishment of official
armouries and magazines, support for training in
firearms and armoury maintenance and accountability,
and identification and destruction of surplus weapons.
Similar work is also undertaken to assist regional
police forces.
The challenges presented by unstable and
conflict-prone environments highlight the urgent need
for the international community to improve the
effectiveness of its assistance in restoring access to
justice and security. The intrinsic link between
peacebuilding and development and a secure enabling
environment is acknowledged and promoted as a key
contribution to the effectiveness of development
cooperation. However, as noted by the Secretary-
General in his report, "key quantitative indicators
should be developed and used as a base against which
to set measurable goals" (A/2008/258, recommendation 2, p. 15) in order to facilitate effective project
development and evaluation.

In March, Australia funded a United Nations
Institute for Disarmament Research activity facilitating
the matching of needs to resources for the effective
implementation of the Programme of Action on small
arms and light weapons in the Pacific region. That
study will develop a mechanism to help States identify
their priorities for small arms assistance and
communicate those priorities to potential donors. We
encourage Member States to take advantage of the
results of the study when they are released later in the
year.

The Australian Government places a high priority
on preventing the illicit trade in not only small arms,
but all conventional weapons. To that end, we are
proud to be one of the authors of General Assembly
resolution 61/89, "Towards an arms trade treaty". We
are encouraged by the spirit of cooperation displayed at
the first meeting of the Group of Government Experts
in February, and anticipate further progress on
examining the scope, feasibility and parametres of an
arms trade treaty at subsequent meetings in May and
July.

Australia believes that some forms of small arms
and light weapons pose such a significant threat in
unauthorized hands that they should be subject to
specific transfer controls. In 2005, Australia announced
an initiative to address the threat posed to civil aviation
by man-portable air defence systems (MANPADS).
Our initiative has sought to encourage practical
implementation of existing controls over the
manufacture, storage and transfer of MANPADS and
related equipment, training, and technology to prevent
the illicit transfer of MANPADS to terrorists and other
non-State groups. These efforts culminated in General
Assembly resolutions that Australia coordinated in
2004, 2005 and 2007. We will continue to work with
all interested Member States in a variety of forums to
address this particular aspect of illicit small arms
proliferation.

Finally, Australia strongly supports initiatives for
reflecting this practical approach in our formal
discussions on the Programme of Action. We warmly
welcome the proposals put forward by the Chair-
designate of the next Biennial Meeting of States
Parties, Ambassador Cekuolis of Lithuania, for
focused, structured, detailed and results-oriented
discussions. We also agree that the specific themes
identified for the Meeting represent a strategic focus on
key areas of the Programme of Action, which will
facilitate fruitful and targeted discussion. We look
forward to working closely with the Chair, the
facilitators and all other Member States to achieve
concrete outcomes in July.

