Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): We have come here on
numerous occasions and stated that the Palestinians have
the right to live like the rest of us. They have the right to
be free and secure, and they have the right to enjoy what
is their own. Yet nothing has changed. A systematic
effort is being made to undermine the inalienable
rights of the Palestine people. The illegal occupation
continues. Illegal settlement activities continue. The
Israeli security forces use disproportionate force against
Palestinian civilians. Gaza is still under blockade.

Since the Great March of Return demonstrations,
humanitarian circumstances have become even worse.
Thousands of people have been deliberately shot in
the kness by Israeli forces and left with devastating
wounds. Humanitarian organizations on the ground
report that many of the wounds have become infected,
preventing reconstructive surgery, which is rarely
available in Gaza. The violence continues and recent
weeks have seen a further escalation of tension in the
area. Inaction in the face of persistent non-compliance
with international law and United Nations resolutions
further encourages Israel. The international community,
in particular the Security Council, cannot turn a blind
eye to the situation. There is an urgent need to revitalize
the peace process.
The only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is the two-State solution based on the 1967
borders, with Palestine and Israel living side by side in
peace. The rights ofthe Palestinian people, including the
right to self-determination, are not up for negotiation.
For decades, the basis for peace negotiations has been
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. That was explicitly reaffirmed in
resolution 2334 (2016). The terms ofreference cannot be
changed. What is needed now is to define a time frame
to realize the two-State solution, with an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Unfortunately, the plight of Palestine refugees
is compounded by the financial crisis of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). In the absence
of a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict, the Agency's mandate remains
vital to the refugees and to the region and beyond. It
is our collective and moral duty to support the Agency
and extend its mandate later this year. As Chair of
the UNRWA Advisory Commission and the Working
Group on the Financing of UNRWA, Turkey will step
up its efforts to contribute to the Agency's work and
calls on all actors to do the same.

Recently, one Member State decided to recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights. That decision
is and should be null and void. It is in contravention
of resolution 497 (1981). It violates international law.
Unilateral steps will not change the facts. The Golan
Heights is territory occupied by Israel. The annexation
of territory by force is prohibited under international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations, and
under the law of State responsibility, States are obliged
not to recognize the annexation of territory as a result
of force.

In each and every open debate on the Middle East,
we are obliged to focus on a gloomy picture. But these
problems are not inherent to the history or culture of
the region; they are there because of the lack ofjustice
and fair treatment. For a lasting peace, justice must be
served, and we should contribute to that by collectively
upholding international law. That requires unity,
courage and resilience, particularly on the part of the
Security Council.

