Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I congratulate you,
Madame, on the presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I thank the outgoing members of the
Council and congratulate to the new members. We will
continue to work closely with all members of the
Council, of course.

Australia is genuinely committed to peace and
security in the Middle East. We support a just and
enduring peace based on a negotiated two-State
solution based on the 1967 borders that would allow
Israel and a future Palestinian State to live side by side
in peace and security. As our Foreign Minister said
during the general debate of the General Assembly at
its sixty-fifth session,

"All States members of the General Assembly
should welcome the prospect of both an Israeli
and a Palestinian State being represented at the
sixty-sixth session of the Assembly, to be held
next year" (A/65/PV.16, p. 41).

We should all support every serious effort to achieve
that.

Australia commends ongoing international efforts
to realize peace, including by the Quartet and the Arab
Peace Initiative. During his visit last month to the
region, including to Egypt, Jordan, the Palestinian
territories, and Israel, our Foreign Minister, Mr. Rudd,
underscored to both parties and to regional leaders that
now is the time to seize the opportunity for peace. As
he said publicly at the time that time was running out
and that what was needed was not just another peace
process, but a peace outcome. What is needed is not
another Road Map; we need to see the destination to
which the road is taking us.

Israeli and Palestinian leaders need to return to
direct talks as a matter of urgency. Both sides must
refrain from actions that undermine confidence,
including - decisively - the construction of
settlements. Australia unambiguously opposes new
Israeli settlements. They are illegal. They are not only
an obstacle to peace - they actively undermine the
prospects for achieving peace. They compromise the
future of a two-State solution, and they must stop. We
agree with the Quartet in its statement of 21 September
that Israel's previous moratorium on settlements had a
positive and beneficial impact on the environment for
negotiations. In our view, a cessation of settlement
activity now would unquestionably assist peace efforts.

Australia is serious about its support for a two-
State solution. We will continue and increase our
support for the practical establishment on the ground of
a viable Palestinian State. We have already provided
almost $70 million in direct budget support to the
Palestinian Authority, and Foreign Minister Rudd
announced in Ramallah in December that Australia is
now developing a five-year development partnership
with the Palestinian Authority that will include regular
budget support and the provision of scholarships
focusing on those disciplines critical to institution-
building. This multi-year agreement - the starting
point for an enhanced development partnership - is
the first of its kind by a development partner with the
Palestinian Authority and reflects our recognition that
an independent, viable Palestinian State requires
predictable funding to plan ahead and to budget for the
provision of services that any functioning State must
be able to provide to its citizens.

We are also increasing our support through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, including our first multi-year
commitment, rather than the annual contribution that we
have made in the past to the core resources of the
Agency.

The situation on the ground in Gaza remains
extremely serious. We welcome the relaxation of some
Israeli restrictions on access to and from Gaza, and of
course we recognize Israel's legitimate security
concerns. But we remain very concerned at the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The easing of
restrictions already announced must be implemented
now, and we urge Israel to lift the remaining
restrictions.

Finally, I must note that Australia remains firm in
our support for the sovereignty, independence and
unity of the Lebanese State and its people. All parties
need to play a constructive role and, of course, refrain
from any actions that might create instability. We
encourage and support the current international efforts
to mobilize in support of Lebanon. We call on all
parties to cooperate with the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, in accordance with resolution 1757 (2007),
and to allow it to complete its important work.

To conclude, there can be no doubt that the
situation between Israel and Palestine is - as was said
by the Permanent Observer of Palestine this morning -
at a critical juncture and that the prospects for resuming
a credible peace process are quickly fading. As one of
the Council members reminded us today, it is 20 years
since the current peace process was launched in
Madrid. It is, in fact, 65 years since the question of
Israel and Palestine has been before the United Nations
in one way or another. We very strongly agree with the
comment made this morning that this should and must
be the last year of the process. All the parties have an
historic and indeed human obligation to do more than
just recommit to peace and speak the rhetoric of peace.
They and all of us in the international community need
to act to do all we can to achieve peace now and to
move, as another speaker recently said, beyond the
rhetoric and the inability to act to produce the ability
and determination to act, and then to act.

