Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of the State of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

My country will take the opportunity provided by
this debate to address the Israeli-Palestinian issue and
the situations in Syria and Lebanon.

Today's consideration of the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, offers yet
another occasion to my delegation not only to express
its profound concern at the ongoing events in the region,
but also to draw the attention of the international
community, and especially the Security Council, to the
urgent need to work to urge all parties to overcome the
obstacles blocking the path to peace and security in the
region.

It is indeed time for the Palestinian and Israeli
parties to decide to genuinely embrace rapprochement.
We believe that the status quo has gone on for too long
and that the two parties should resolve to make good
on their commitments to achieve a negotiated solution
for the creation of two States, in conformity with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Israel
and the Palestinian Authority must now take steps to
strengthen mutual trust.

In that regard, we welcome the reopening on 19 April
of the Kerem Shalom crossing, reserved for goods
and the humanitarian aid delivery to the Gaza Strip.
We urge the Israeli authorities to do more by raising
the blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip. We also urge
them to release Palestinian prisoners and detainees who
have not been charged but are still currently in Israeli
prisons. We also believe that the time has come to end
the expansion of settlements.

At the same time, we once again urge Hamas to
take all steps possible to control the armed groups that
refuse to renounce violence and whose acts undermine
the trust that otherwise could have been strengthened
between that movement and Israel since the ceasefire
agreement was signed in November 2012.

The issue of Palestinian refugees living in camps
remains a source of major concern for my country. The
United Nations is making enormous efforts to assist
those thousands of persons through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA). That is why my country
condemns the attacks aimed at the UNRWA office
site by the demonstrators in Gaza on 4 April. We
believe that nothing could justify such acts of violence
against humanitarian personnel and United Nations
installations trying to assist refugees. The authorities in
Gaza should provide the guarantees needed to allow the
Office to continue its operations peacefully and free of
impediments.

It cannot be overemphasized that the solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can only be achieved
through direct negotiations between the two parties.
Those negotiations, interrupted now almost three years
ago, must absolutely be resumed. In that regard, Togo
would like to call on the international community,
and more specifically on the Security Council and the
Quartet, to exert pressure of all kinds on the two parties
to agree on a renewed timeline for the resumption of
negotiations. We are convinced that dialogue is the only
way to a lasting settlement of the conflict.

In this regard, my country reaffirms the call it
issued at the debate in January (see S/PV.6906) for
the reactivation of the Arab Peace Plan, the Madrid
principles and the road map, with the support of the
States Members of the United Nations that have any
influence with either party. We therefore welcome the
recent decision of the Arab League to resume work to
revive the peace process. The creation ofan independent
and viable Palestinian State, living alongside Israel
in peace and security within recognized borders,
remains the goal that all our efforts should contribute
to achieve. In that respect, we welcome and support all
initiatives, in particular those recently undertaken by
the United States of America, that could contribute to
that objective.

In Syria, the prevailing political and military
situation has plunged the international community
into growing uncertainty about a future solution to the
crisis. The destruction of the country's infrastructure,
the unbridled pursuit of killings, massive violations
of human rights, and the mass movement of displaced
persons and refugees lead us to believe that the country
is self-destructing even as the whole world watches
without being able to act to end this tragedy. Given such
a state of affairs, an end to the war is indubitably the
solution.

In this respect, Togo welcomes the Security
Council's 18 April call on the parties to end the violence
in all its forms and to start negotiations for a political
transition based on the Geneva communique of 30 June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex). The Security Council must
build on the unity it attained on 18 April 18 to compel
the parties to sign a ceasefire that would open the way
to the national dialogue that alone can end the conflict.

With respect to Lebanon, my country is concerned
not only about the ongoing insecurity on its border
with Syria, but also and especially by the scale of its
humanitarian needs. Beyond the security implications
of the Syrian war, which has been manifest in clashes
between factions and supporters of each party to the
conflict, which my country condemns, the issue of
Syrian refugees, who are estimated at more than
1.2 million and whose numbers are increasing every
day, fuels our concerns. Indeed, the burden of these
refugees is felt at all levels of life in Lebanon, and it
is to be feared that this situation may jeopardize peace
and stability in that country.

Togo again calls on the international community
and donor countries to further support the Lebanese
Government in addressing both the humanitarian
needs of the refugees and the growing insecurity in the
host cities. We reiterate our warm thanks to the donor
countries for the efforts they have undertaken to that
end.

