Ms. Rice (United States of America): We would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his briefing on the work of
his Office and actions taken pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).

As we have consistently noted, resolution 1970
(2011) and its referral of the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court represented an historic
milestone in the fight against impunity. The Security
Council's unanimous decision to refer the situation
underscored the importance of the role of justice and
accountability in the resolution of conflicts and
maintenance of international peace and security. The
referral has served to keep accountability and the rule
of law as key elements of Libya's transition to a
peaceful and democratic future.

We are pleased with the Prosecutor's report that
his Office has received a high degree of cooperation
from a variety of States and other actors in response to
requests for assistance from the ICC. As the Prosecutor
described in his briefing, Libya recently filed an
admissibility challenge with the Court on the grounds
that it is actively investigating Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi for the same and different crimes as the
ICC. Libya has also detailed the steps it has taken to
conduct that investigation and has stated its
commitment to adhering to international standards in
the process.

This is an important moment, both for Libya and
for the Court. The Rome Statute of the ICC is
predicated on a system of complementary justice and
contains provisions to deal with situations in which a
State with jurisdiction wishes to pursue charges itself.
In this regard, we are encouraged by the Prosecutor's
report of the ongoing cooperation his Office has
received from Libya. That having been said, as the
Prosecutor notes, ultimately it will be for the judges to
decide whether to defer to Libyan proceedings.

As the ICC proceedings move forward, we will
continue to encourage the Government of Libya to
maintain its cooperation with the Court and to adhere
to its international obligations, including under
resolution 1970 (2011). In addition, we continue to
emphasize that it is critical that Libya take all
necessary steps to ensure that the detention of and any
further domestic proceedings against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi fully comply with Libya's international
obligations.

Moreover, there is much work to be done
domestically in Libya not only to account for the grave
crimes committed in the past, but also to ensure a
functioning justice system for the future. It is vital that
Libya build a fair and credible criminal justice system
that guarantees humane treatment and due process and
conforms to Libya's international human rights
obligations.

We agree with the Prosecutor that the
Government of Libya faces critical challenges in
assuming custody over the thousands of detainees that
continue to be held by militias or local authorities, and

in arranging for their expeditious release or the
adjudication of their cases. The international
community should respond to the needs of the Libyan
Government as it approaches that significant
administrative, logistical and judicial task.

We are deeply concerned by the patterns of rape
documented by the International Commission of
Inquiry, as highlighted in the Prosecutor's report. For
the sake of the individual victims and in order to
achieve a lasting and inclusive peace in Libya, sexual
and gender-based violent crimes must not go
unpunished. It will be important to ensure that there is
accountability for violations and abuses of applicable
laws committed in Libya by all sides, including for
alleged attacks committed against civilians for their
perceived loyalties to the Al-Qadhafi regime. Impunity
for such crimes cannot be reconciled with respect for
human rights and the rule of law.

Independent and impartial investigations of all
alleged crimes will be a critical part of the effort to
create an inclusive, democratic State in which all
Libyans, of all backgrounds, have a future and an
opportunity to participate in the rebuilding of their
country. We are pleased to hear that the Government is
working on a comprehensive strategy to address those
issues, and we support the Ministry of Justice's
expressed commitment to justice-sector reforms. We
welcome the Government of Libya's statements in its
submission to the ICC that it is receptive to assistance
and support from the international community in that
important work. We are working with the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the international
community to assist the Libyan authorities in
addressing those justice-sector reform goals.

