Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I have had the
honour to chair the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
since the beginning of this year. It has been an
extremely eventful year, and today it gives me great
pleasure to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee since the previous briefing in May
(S/PV.6536).

Perhaps the most significant event of the year for
the Counter-Terrorism Committee was the special
meeting held on 28 September to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001). Representatives of Member States, United
Nations entities and other international and regional
organizations had a comprehensive exchange of views
on counter-terrorism during the day-long event, which
was held at United Nations Headquarters. The
Committee also adopted an outcome document in
which it urged

"all Member States to ensure zero tolerance
towards terrorism and take urgent action to
prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations through the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
other relevant international instruments relating
to terrorism".

The outcome document will be circulated as a
document of the Security Council and is also available
on the Committee's website. A separate event for
members of civil society was also held on the margins
of that meeting.

Coinciding with the special meeting, the
Committee issued an updated global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States, prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) at the request of the
Security Council on the basis of information available
as of 31 May. The survey provides a comprehensive
overview, on a regional as well as a thematic basis, of
the status of counter-terrorism efforts around the world
as they relate to the implementation of the resolution.

The survey evaluates Member States' strengths
and vulnerabilities, identifies gaps in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and

recommends future action. It underscores, among other
concerns, the fact that Member States continue to
struggle to secure porous borders, monitor financial
systems, strengthen their judicial systems and
prosecute or extradite terrorist suspects. Inadequate
funding and training constrain the ability of many
States to be as effective as they would wish. The
survey expresses concern that terrorists are
increasingly turning to the Internet and other new
technologies to recruit, incite and raise funds for their
activities. Another area of concern is the link between
terrorist networks and organized crime.

Despite these challenges, however, States have
made significant progress since the adoption of the
resolution, which, over the past decade, has
strengthened solidarity and dialogue among Member
States in their efforts to counter the terrorist threat.

The survey offers several recommendations
aimed at strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). It is essential that Member
States address terrorism by means other than law
enforcement. Prevention is critical and a condition for
the effectiveness of any comprehensive strategy to
counter terrorism, as noted in the survey. Effective
responses will necessarily include other aspects of
legal and social policy. Development, education, social
integration, the rule of law and human rights are
among the key components of such responses.

The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant resolutions, especially 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010), and continues to play a
critical role in promoting and facilitating their
implementation. Pursuant to resolution 1963 (2010),
CTED is currently preparing a global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) for
submission by 31 December.

The Committee continues to focus on region-
specific discussions and on issues identified in the
2011 global survey. It also continues to organize and
participate in discussions and workshops on thematic
issues. Some of the major issues considered by the
Committee during the past six months include
facilitating the provision of technical assistance to
Member States, and the challenges involved in
adopting and implementing counter-terrorism measures
relating to legislation and law enforcement, with an
emphasis on prevention and emergency response.
With the Council's permission, I would now like
to make a brief statement in my national capacity.

It is important that the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) continue to explore ways
and means to enhance their synergies in the fight
against terrorism. International cooperation and
concerted action against terrorists and their sponsors -
including the complete dismantling of terrorist safe
havens, sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures - are the critical
imperatives needed to defeat this scourge.

The outcome document adopted by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee at its special meeting on
28 September is a major milestone in providing
strategic direction for the work of the Committee to
strengthen the capacity of States in their counter-
terrorism efforts. The outcome document introduces a
new zero-tolerance paradigm in the international
community's fight against terrorism and will be helpful
in raising the bar in the fight against terrorism to a
higher level.

Speaking at the general debate at the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly, our Prime Minister,
Mr. Manmohan Singh, said:

"The fight against terrorism must be unrelenting.
There cannot be selective approaches in dealing
with terrorist groups or the infrastructure of
terrorism. Terrorism has to be fought across all
fronts." (A/66/PV.22, p. 11)

Indeed, our entire region, South Asia, has been
racked by the activities of the biggest terrorist
organizations and entities in the world, be they
Al-Qaida, elements of the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba or
others. It is our expectation that the splitting of the
1267 sanctions regime in June this year will enable the
Afghan Government to have a greater say in
confronting the challenges emanating from those
constituting a threat to the peace, security and stability
of Afghanistan. We are concerned that the functioning
of the 1267 Sanctions Committee continues to be
subject to political pulls and pressure. This is a
scenario that we can ill afford in our fight against
terrorism.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) and the 1267 and 1989 Committee, both
newly created, are in the process of formulating
guidelines for the conduct of their work. We hope that
these will address the deficiencies in the existing
guidelines for these Committees. It is critical that all
sanctions regimes established by the Council ensure
due process in their working procedures and decision-
making. The decision-making process should be swift,
fair and transparent. The process of listing and
de-listing must be guided by the same set of principles:
fairness, credibility and transparency.

The 1267 and 1989 Committee and the 1988
Committee must continue to focus on the linkages
between Al-Qaida and the Taliban, which pose a
serious threat to international peace and security. The
Monitoring Team should examine the linkages between
Al-Qaida and the Taliban comprehensively and
objectively, and submit its reports and
recommendations periodically, as mandated by
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011).

India supports the international efforts to prevent
non-State actors and terrorists from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of
delivery. We are conscious of the dangers that the
transfers of such WMDs to non-State actors could
entail. Given the evolving complex challenges to
international peace and security emanating from
non-State actors, such risks are greater than ever
before.

The international community must join hands to
eliminate the risks relating to sensitive materials and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists and
non-State actors. The international response to the
threat needs to be national as well as multilateral and
global. We support the work of the 1540 Committee in
accordance with its mandate.

Finally, I apologize for having taken up so much
of the Council's time.

