Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): We also welcome the
High Representative to the Security Council, and we
appreciate his comprehensive report updating the
Council on the current environment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also thank Mr. Spiric' for his
statement.
We wish to reconfirm our support for the High
Representative and the policy of progressively handing
over responsibilities to the Bosnian leadership.

South Africa encourages the Bosnian Government
and the relevant parties to remain focused on the
fulfilment and implementation of the five specific
objectives and the two general conditions set out at the
Peace Implementation Steering Board meeting in
February 2008.

Despite the fact that the Stabilization and
Association Agreement is not strictly a part of the
workplan of the Office of the High Representative, my
delegation considers that it is important to ensure
progress and stability in the region. We are therefore
encouraged to note that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made progress in that regard, resulting in the initialling
of the agreement in December. My delegation would
like to continue to encourage all parties to ensure that
the necessary conditions are met for the finalization of
that process.

South Africa notes with concern the incidences in
late 2007 of renewed tensions between political actors
over the future constitutional makeup of the country and
the role and competencies of the State. We reiterate that
dialogue and cooperation are vital to ensuring effective
and broad-reaching government for all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's citizens through the establishment of a
stable, democratic and prosperous society.

On the issue of internally displaced persons,
South Africa is encouraged by the work of the Office
of the High Representative, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
stakeholders in drafting the new strategy that will be
finalized and adopted later in the year. We note the
focus not only on the return of those people to their
homes but also on the need to sustain those who have
returned. South Africa continues to believe that
addressing the situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons can facilitate reconciliation and
State-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and can
therefore contribute to the long-term stability of that
country.

As the High Representative mentioned in his
report, Bosnia and Herzegovina is uniquely vulnerable
to political instability in the region. We wish to
emphasize our hope that the recent developments in the
region will not have an adverse effect on the progress
made and that all parties in the region will avoid
inflammatory statements, which have the potential to
undermine the progress made and agreements reached
through dialogue and negotiation. South Africa
reiterates its support for all the people in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for the continuous process of moving
towards a stable and vibrant democratic society in the
Balkan region.

