Mr. Kaeiriainen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union on Burundi. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with
the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated countries Cyprus and
Malta, as well as the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area,
Liechtenstein, align themselves with this statement.

With our message today to the Security Council, we
want to express our serious concern about the slow pace
of progress in the peace process and to deplore the
deterioration in the security, humanitarian and human
rights situation in Burundi and its regional implications.
These developments call for even more active engagement
by the international community and by the leaders in the

 

region. We should continue to support Burundi and its
people. We look forward to possible recommendations from
Under-Secretary-General Prendergast when he returns from
his mission to the region.

We had hoped that this year would have seen the
conclusion of a general peace agreement in Burundi.
Unfortunately, that is not the case. The current situation is
in stark contrast to that of a year ago, when the
international community regarded Burundi as a good
example of a peace process in the Great Lakes region.

The death of His Excellency Mwalimu Julius Nyerere
was an enormous setback to the Arusha peace process. The
European Union acknowledges his pivotal role as the
Facilitator who tirelessly worked towards peace and
reconciliation. He is greatly missed. Nevertheless, the
European Union considers it to be of the greatest
importance that the talks continue while a new Facilitator
is agreed upon.

The European Union welcomes the news that regional
leaders are due to discuss the future of the Burundi peace
process. The EU urges all parties involved to reach an
agreement rapidly on a new Facilitator and a format for the
deliberations. The European Union is of the View that the
continuing peace process must be based on the progress and
results already achieved in Arusha. We also note with
satisfaction that the Burundian Government has publicly
announced its commitment to the process.

The European Union reaffirms its support for the
internal negotiations and the Arusha peace process, which
are fundamental elements in the search for a sustainable
solution to the Burundian crisis. The European Union
encourages all Burundi rebel movements to join the Arusha
peace process so that the parties will choose the path of
negotiation rather than that of violence and conflict. The
Union is convinced that there can be no military solution
and that lasting peace in Burundi can be achieved only
through a negotiated settlement.

The European Union deeply deplores the renewed
outbreak of indiscriminate violence in Burundi, the main
Victims of which continue to be the people of that country.
We call once again on all the Burundian parties and other
armed groups in the region to immediately end all acts of
violence in Burundi. The EU urges that the neutrality of
refugee camps in the region be assured. It calls upon States
in the region to prevent the use of their territory to stage
attacks against neighbouring States.

The European Union strongly condemns the
targeting of civilian populations, including refugees and
humanitarian organizations. In the struggle between the
armed forces and the rebels, the Victims are mostly
women, children and the elderly. The European Union is
particularly outraged at the attack on the humanitarian
mission in Rutana province in October. It was shocked by
the massacre of several members of that mission,
Burundians and expatriates, including two representatives
of United Nations agencies. We call for the perpetrators
of this massacre to be brought to justice. The
humanitarian community's ability to distribute aid is being
severely hampered by the violence.

The European Union is deeply alarmed that, as a
consequence of the latest outbreak of violence, the
number of refugees and displaced persons has risen
dramatically, putting at risk the lives and well-being of a
large part of the population, especially the most
vulnerable groups. More than 1.1 million Burundians have
been displaced since the beginning of the conflict in 1993.
The European Union is particularly concerned about the
recent forced removals by the Burundi army of some
300,000 civilians in the countryside around Bujumbura.
We deplore the violation of human rights, the loss of
human life and the destruction of property which have
been the hallmark of this operation. We regret the anguish
and suffering to which the civilian population were
subjected during their forced transfer to the assembly
areas. The European Union calls upon the Burundi
Government to call a halt to the policy of forced removals
and to allow the people to return to their homes as
quickly as possible. In the meantime, it urges that
Government to provide the people with improved sanitary
and temporary accommodation conditions.

The bleak picture painted by the humanitarian
organizations in Burundi is coupled with a warning that
the situation will deteriorate. The humanitarian
community is warning that levels of malnutrition are on
the rise, particularly among children, and that the risk of
epidemics, aided by the lack of sanitation and safe
drinking water, is threatening the general population.

The European Union reiterates its appeal to all
parties to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law, to cooperate with humanitarian
organizations in the delivery of emergency relief
assistance and the protection of civilians and to guarantee
the safety and freedom of movement of their personnel,
as well as access to affected populations. We note that the
Burundi Government has assured representatives of the

 

United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations free access to all of the camps concerned to
enable them to provide humanitarian assistance. The EU
looks to the Burundi authorities to provide security
guarantees for personnel of the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations and to continue to afford the
Burundi Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and its observers the same access.

The European Union also notes with interest a plan for
reform of the judicial and penitentiary system prepared by
the Government of Burundi, and it welcomes the adoption
of the new code of criminal procedure which will enter into
force next year. The EU emphasizes the importance of the
fight against impunity and urges the Government of
Burundi to accelerate investigations relating to human rights
violations, especially those where army units have been
involved, and to bring those responsible to justice.

The international community cannot be passive about
the situation in Burundi. All international actors have to use
the means at their disposal to contribute to the stabilization
of the country. The European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General's decision to extend the United Nations
political presence in Burundi until the end of December
2000. The European Union considers that the United
Nations presence can contribute positively to a peaceful
settlement of the conflict. It remains ready to support the
United Nations Secretary-General and the Secretariat in
their task of facilitating the restoration of constitutional rule
and to promote peace and reconciliation and the rule of
law. The EU calls upon the Government of Burundi to
continue its cooperation with the United Nations human
rights mechanisms, in particular with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. The
Security Council has a special role in helping Burundi and
its citizens to find a peaceful solution to this crisis.

In accordance with the "enhanced humanitarian"
strategy decided at the donors' meetings in Ottawa and New
York, the European Union gave 15 million euros in
humanitarian assistance in 1998, and this year it has
dedicated approximately 10 million euros. In addition,
bilateral contributions have been made.

Furthermore, two suspended development projects will
be reactivated, and 48 million euros are allocated for a
rehabilitation programme targeted at the resettlement and
reintegration of displaced persons. The European Union has
supported the Arusha peace process financially, and we call
upon States also to give their financial support for this
process.

We stand ready to provide further support for the
reconciliation, reconstruction and democratization of
Burundi. In this context, the willingness and readiness of
the parties to fully engage themselves in the peace
process play a pivotal role.

