Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Portugal is
fully aligned with the statement delivered by the
European Union.

At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
United Kingdom on having chosen this topic for an
open debate at the Security Council. This reflection on
how to better seek peaceful settlement of disputes is
of paramount importance for international peace and
security and for the success of the United Nations.

The duty of States to settle their differences by
peaceful means is clearly set forth in Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations and enshrined in countless
international instruments, such as the Charter of the
Organization of American States, the Constitutive Act
of the African Union and the treaties establishing the
European communities and the subsequent treaties and
acts modifying and supplementing them to name just
a few.

We commend the Secretary-General's efforts to
strengthen the mediation capacity of the United Nations,
calling for a surge in diplomacy for peace. The creation
of the High-Level Advisory Board on Mediation is
already a tangible result. The ongoing United Nations
reform in the areas of management, peace and security,
and development will certainly help to strengthen the
holistic approach to conflict resolution. We reiterate
the importance of strengthening conflict prevention
through the development of early warning systems and
the increase in capabilities for situations that require
immediate action by the international community.
Non-proliferation, the legal accountability of those
responsible for mass atrocity crimes, and follow-up
actions in transition processes during post-conflict
periods are of significant relevance to the consolidation
and support of peace.

To better implement mediation efforts, it is important
to enhance national capabilities to better support special
envoys. Also, greater international coordination and
complementarity in mediation and conflict resolution
actions are required in order to optimize resources and
avoid overlapping. Partnerships, civil society at local
and national levels, and the role of women and young
people are key to successful mediation efforts.

Mediation has an interdisciplinary character.
It involves a political and diplomatic approach;
specialized expertise, for example, in conflicts over
natural resources; and a legal dimension in support of
transitional justice.

Finally, I would like to recall the interdependence
between security and development, and reiterate
that lasting peace will be achieved only if the causes
of conflicts are tackled and addressed. Therefore,
mediation and development must happen in parallel
and in complementarity. Portugal is ready to continue
to play an active role in those two parallel and
complementary efforts.

