Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like to
join previous speakers in congratulating the Republic
of Chile and you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month and,
more important, for organizing this important open
debate on inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security. I would also like to
thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
His Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and Ms. Leymah Gbowee,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate and President of the
Gbowee Peace Foundation Africa, for their briefings
this morning.

In many ways, the world in which we are living
in is at a critical juncture, and the current picture is
rather bleak. The international community remains
seriously concerned about recent geopolitical security
developments in many parts of the world. While we
are accelerating our efforts to attain the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), the existence of internal
and external conflicts still cause disruption to our
overall development.

The respective attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram,
the murders of school children in Pakistan, the brutal
attack by terrorists against the French magazine Charlie
Hebdo in Paris and the terrorist attacks in Nigeria
have posed further challenges for the international
community in maintaining its commitment. Therefore,
the United Nations must become more relevant to
address the increasing terrorism and extremism, which
threaten peace and security.

Cambodia would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate its condemnation, in the strongest terms, of the
recent terrorist attack against Charlie Hebdo. Cambodia
will engage with the international community to fight
all forms of terrorism.

Many conflicts have arisen from disparity,
including from socioeconomic and gender inequality
and religious and ideological differences, which require
us to further focus on finding a better and long-lasting
solution.

To secure equity and proportional distribution,
the regional and international integration of post-
conflict countries is important to ensure that they
do not fall back into conflict. Peace can be fragile.
It should therefore be sustained through long-term
development, which includes the rule of law, human
rights, democracy, national reconciliation, poverty
eradication, gender equality, sustainable economic
growth and development, justice and interreligious
interfaith.

At its core is the quest to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), which range from
alleviating extreme poverty to providing universal
primary education. However, Cambodia believes that
many developing countries did not attain their MDGs
primarily due to unfulfilled commitments, lack of
resources, insufficient dedication and food insecurity.
The situation was further aggravated by financial
uncertainty in the developed countries, which had an
effect on their commitment to official development
assistance. Therefore, bolder global efforts are needed,
as we are approaching the deadline to realize the MDGs.

Cambodia also attaches great importance to the
promotion of equality and fundamental rights. In that
regard, Cambodia welcomes the celebration of the
twentieth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference
on Women, which would give greater impetus to efforts
to advance gender equality and women's empowerment
in the post-2015 development agenda, and is prepared
to join the high-level thematic debate on that topic,
which will be convened by the President of the General
Assembly in March 2015.

On regional efforts, I wish to endorse the statement
delivered by the representative of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) at the General
Assembly in December 2014, which laid out ASEAN's
long-standing vision to integrate our people from
different backgrounds, ethnicities, languages, religions
and cultures towards a common future of peace and
prosperity while we strive to realize the goals of the
ASEAN Community in 2015. My delegation also
wishes to acknowledge the ASEAN commitment to
working towards the Millennium Development Goals
and post-2015 development agenda, as we believe that
peace must go hand in hand with development. In
the meantime, we are working to realize the ASEAN
Community's post-2015 vision, which was agreed upon
at the 2014 ASEAN Summit.

