The Secretary-General: The tragedy in Darfur
has reached a critical moment. It merits the Council's
closest attention and urgent action. It is vital that we all
speak candidly about what is happening and about
what it will take to bring to an end the suffering of so
many millions of people. I am very pleased to see the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference represented
here today. It is also important that the Government of
the Sudan is participating in this meeting.

We have all heard the latest deeply dismaying
reports of renewed fighting - particularly in north
Darfur - among the various factions. Thousands of
Sudan Armed Forces troops have been deployed to the
area in clear violation of the Darfur Peace Agreement.
Even worse, the area has been subjected to renewed
aerial bombing. I strongly condemn the escalation. The
Government should stop its offensive immediately and
refrain from any further such action.

The latest clashes have brought even greater
misery to a population that has already endured far too
much. Once again, people have been displaced. The
06-51559
total number of displaced now stands at 1.9 million.
Nearly 3 million people in Darfur depend on
international aid for food, shelter and medical
treatment. The fighting has made it much, much harder
for humanitarian workers to reach them.

In July, insecurity prevented the World Food
Programme from delivering food to 470,000 people in
desperate need. In August, the World Food Programme
reached the people in south Darfur, but some 355,000
people in north Darfur remained cut off from food aid,
most of them for the third consecutive month. Never
since July 2004, when I signed a joint communique
with the Sudan's Foreign Minister, has access been so
severely limited.

Humanitarian workers have continued to be
targets of brutal violence, physical harassment and
rhetorical vilification. Many of their vehicles have
been stolen. Twelve aid workers have lost their lives in
the past two months alone - more than in the previous
two years. We pay tribute to their sacrifice, but we
cannot and must not accept the acts that led to it. Relief
personnel must be allowed to do their jobs unhindered
and in safety.

As access gets harder, the humanitarian gains of
the past two years are being rolled back. Unless
security improves, we face the prospect of having to
drastically curtail an acutely needed humanitarian
operation. Can we in conscience leave the people of
Darfur to such a fate? Can the international
community, having not done enough for the people of
Rwanda in their time of need, just watch as this tragedy
deepens? Having finally agreed - just one year ago -
that there is a responsibility to protect, can we
contemplate failing yet another test? Lessons either
learned or not, principles either upheld or scorned, this
is no time for the middle ground of half measures or
further debate.

This latest fighting shows utter disregard for the
Darfur Peace Agreement. That Agreement created
hopes that are being shattered. Current developments
defy several of the Council's resolutions and violate
commitments that were made, including the non-
deployment of additional Sudanese armed forces. Such
action is legally and morally unacceptable.

Evidently, those who have ordered this action still
believe that there can be a military solution to the crisis
in Darfur. Yet, surely, all parties should have
understood by now, after so much death and
06-51559
destruction, that only a political agreement in which all
stakeholders are fully engaged can bring real peace to
the region.

As the Council made clear in resolution 1706
(2006), the Darfur Peace Agreement gives us a chance
to achieve peace. In the coming days, we in the
Secretariat will be meeting senior officials from the
Commission of the African Union to finalize a support
package for the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS). The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will also convene a meeting of potential troop and
police contributors to discuss the expansion of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan to Darfur.

The African Union has been very clear about the
need for the transition from AMIS to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, on which the Council has
decided. The AU has been equally clear about the need
for AMIS to continue until then, as well as about the
need to resist any attempt to subvert decisions aimed at
achieving those vital objectives. The League of Arab
States has also offered vital backing for the transition,
and has voiced its conviction that AMIS should stay
until the end of the year. Indeed, there can be no
walking away from AMIS. The AU troops have
performed valiantly, in very difficult conditions. They
have a vital role to play until a United Nations
operation can be put in place, but they still lack the
necessary resources. Once again, I call on AMIS's
partners to ensure that it can continue to work during
this crucial transition period.

But let us be clear: we all know that the
Government of the Sudan still refuses to accept the
transition, and the Council has recognized that without
the Government's consent the transition will not be
possible. Once again, therefore, I urge the Government
of the Sudan to embrace the spirit of resolution 1706
(2006), to give its consent to the transition and to
pursue the political process with new energy and
commitment.

The consequences of the Government's current
attitude - yet more death and suffering, perhaps on a
catastrophic scale - will be felt first and foremost by
the people of Darfur. But the Government itself will
also suffer if it fails in its sacred responsibility to
protect its own people. It will suffer opprobrium and
disgrace in the eyes of all Africa and the whole
international community. Moreover, neither those who
3
decide such policies nor those who carry them out
should imagine that they will not be held accountable.

But my voice alone will not convince the
Government. I have tried repeatedly to explain the
transition to the Government and to clear up any
misconceptions or myths. In public and in private, I
have stressed the humanitarian situation and appealed
to the Government's own sense of pragmatism. It is
time now for additional voices to make themselves
heard. We need Governments and individual leaders in
Africa and beyond who are in a position to influence
the Government of the Sudan to bring that pressure to
bear without delay. There must also be a clear, strong
and uniform message from this Council.

This is a perilous moment for the people of
Darfur, but it is also a decisive moment for the Council
itself. For more than two years, the Council has been
working to stem the fighting and improve the situation
in Darfur. Yet, once again, we find ourselves on the
brink of a new calamity. The current situation cannot
be sustained. It is time to act. This is seen - not only
in Darfur but by people around the world - as a
crucial test of the Council's authority and
effectiveness, its solidarity with people in need and its
seriousness in the quest for peace. I urge the Council,
in the strongest possible terms, to rise to the occasion.

