Mr. Takasu (Japan): I, too, would like to thank
Mr. Ould Abdallah for his very helpful briefing this
morning. I am also grateful to Mr. Lamamra and
Mr. Omaar for their very useful statements.

I should like briefly to discuss four issues. First,
Japan shares the serious concern about the fragile
security situation as a result of continuing attacks
against the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) by
rebel groups, particularly since the Security Council
took up the issue of Somalia earlier this month. A
series of attacks have taken place, including violence
against humanitarian workers, attacks on United
Nations offices and abductions of French personnel.
We strongly condemn these acts of violence and call
for the immediate release of the hostages.

At the same time, we are heartened by the active
efforts of the TFG to maintain security, including by
regaining control over Beledweyne. Every possible
support should be provided to the TFG. The ongoing
efforts of the TFG to promote the political process are
also commendable. We hope that opposition groups
will follow the example of Ahlu Sunna Wal J ama'a and
join in the Djibouti peace process.

Secondly, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) plays an indispensable role in support of
the TFG in protecting Mogadishu and assisting the
Government. It is essential to strengthen the activities
of AMISOM. We are grateful to the troop-contributing
countries Burundi and Uganda for their contributions.
We should extend every support to build up AMISOM
to the full troop level of 8,000. We therefore sincerely
hope that the pledges of additional troops by several
countries will materialize as early as possible.
However, it has been a major challenge in the current
security situation to deliver the logistical support
package to AMISOM. in a timely fashion. We commend
the untiring efforts of the Secretariat, particularly the
Department of Field Support, and urge that these good
efforts be continued.

The international community must enhance its
support to the TFG. The instability in Somalia is caused
by internal as well as external factors. It is essential to
cut off external military and economic assistance to the
rebel groups. The countries in the region need to come
together to assist the TFG.

The Somalia sanctions Committee is currently
engaged in appropriate measures to implement
resolution 1844 (2008). It is our belief that the
effectiveness of these measures must be carefully
considered. We are ready to take part in the discussion
in the Committee to determine the most appropriate
course of action.

My third point concerns the capacity-building of
the TFG. Building the capacity of the Somali security
forces and police is critically important, particularly in
the northern and north-eastern regions, where the
security situation is relatively calm. The effort to
define the Somali national security strategy should be
further promoted with the support of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS).

Japan welcomes international support for the
programme to recruit and train 10,000 Somalia Police
Force personnel by June 2010. The programme needs
to be implemented through strong coordination among
UNPOS, the United Nations Development Programme
and AMISOM. Most importantly, however,
coordination among donor countries is essential. Japan,
for its part, will disburse $9 million to the Trust Fund
for AMISOM, through which we support the training
of the Somalia Police Force.

My fourth point concerns piracy. Piracy continues
to pose a threat to the stability in the region and to
orderly international commerce. The ongoing concerted
efforts of the international community are absolutely
essential to addressing piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Japan has been actively engaged in such efforts by
providing two destroyers and two P-3C maritime patrol
aircraft. In our Parliament, a new law has been enacted
on the penalization of acts of piracy and measures
against acts of piracy. Through that effort, we can now
protect foreign vessels.

It is Japan's turn to chair the fourth plenary
meeting of the Contact Group on Somali Piracy on
10 September here at Headquarters. A longer-term

solution will require restoring stability and governance
on land in Somalia. Measures on land are therefore
important from that point of view. Japan welcomes the
discussion that is now under way to establish a
working group, within the Contact Group framework,
on land-based issues. The programme of the United
Nations country team and UNPOS to establish a
framework document to improve standards of living
along the coast and in the hinterland of Somalia are
also useful for the purpose of combating piracy. Japan
has provided assistance to those programmes. We hope
that the coordinated efforts of the international
community will also have a positive influence on the
security situation on land.

