Mr. Pyvovarov (Ukraine): I should like at the outset
to express our gratitude to the Lithuanian presidency
for holding this debate on the protection of journalists.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made by
the delegation of the European Union on this matter.

My delegation welcomes draft resolution 2222
(2015), adopted today, and we are glad to have been one
of the sponsors of this important document.

Today's subject is particularly sensitive for my
country, which is now continuing to struggle against
Russian hybrid aggression, and we are grateful for
this opportunity to make some remarks that we deem
important.

There is no doubt that today information has a direct
impact on the principal global political processes. In the
past two years, the world has witnessed a steady increase
in the number of journalists killed or injured while
performing their professional duties. Unfortunately,
one of the main reasons for this unacceptable situation
is the increase in the number of areas of instability,
the imperfect nature of the existing international legal
mechanisms to protect journalists, and the impunity of
those who commit crimes and who hinder journalists'
professional activities.

Ukraine believes that free, independent, responsible
and professional journalism is the basis of modern
civil democratic societies. My country supports all
international mechanisms aimed at strengthening
the protection of journalists throughout the world,
particularly those promoted by the Human Rights
Council. Ukraine is also actively engaged in UNESCO's
work to strengthen the intergovernmental response
to acts of violence and aggression against journalists
working in areas of high risk and danger.

My country is a strong supporter of the
comprehensive and practical implementation of the
principles laid down in the United Nations Plan ofAction
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
We consider it to be a significant document for global
counteraction against the impunity of persons and
criminal entities who threaten media representatives
directly in hot spots.

The strengthening of the professional activities of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) worldwide
could also become an important element of the efforts
aimed at a general improvement in the security of
journalists. These NGOs should continue to draw
Governments' attention to the shortcomings in existing
practices of the physical and legal protection of media
representatives. We believe that close cooperation
among various governmental entities and NGOs
could give a positive impetus, including with respect
to a revision of the list of new areas of informational
activity, where journalists should have the same rights
as if they worked in zones of instability, for example in
the blogosphere and for social media networks.

Ukraine strongly believes in the need to enhance
international experts' efforts to upgrade the process
of investigation and of holding accountable those who
affect the legitimate rights of journalists who work in
zones of instability.
We also pay tribute to those journalists who
have died or been injured in the performance of their
professional duties. Our country will remain an active
supporter of free and secure journalism, and we
consider the United Nations and its Security Council as
the foremost actors in strengthening their basic rights
and freedoms at the global level.

I am proud to say that in Ukraine, despite all of
the internal difficulties we are being made to go
through, an independent journalism that represents
all existing opinions has become a reality. It now
serves as a powerful tool for continuing democratic
transformations in our society and reflects our people's
current need to live in an atmosphere of freedom of
speech and expression, to live in a country where one
feels no threat of being imprisoned for one's position if
it does not coincide with the official one.

Our independent national journalism has been one
of the major factors that inspired a revolution of dignity
more than one year ago. Because of the many impartial
investigations carried out by Ukrainian media and
courageous journalists, our society discovered all of
the terrifying aspects of life under and the corruption
of the previous pro-Russian regime. Ukrainian
journalists became a real fourth branch of power and
formed a strong public mechanism of control over our
Government officials and politicians, leading to a more
transparent and democratic public sector.

The Government of Ukraine and its competent
agencies are doing their utmost to protectjournalists. On
14 May, our Parliament adopted a law on amendments
to certain legislative acts of Ukraine concerning the
strengthening of guarantees for the lawful professional
activities ofjournalists in Ukraine. This law envisages
additional security guarantees for the lawful
professional activities ofjournalists, including changes
in Ukraine's criminal code. The law also provides for
additional social guarantees for journalists and their
families.

For more than a year, Ukraine has been suffering
from the aggression of the Russian Federation, which
has occupied part of our sovereign territory, the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, and continues its
hostile military actions against my country in the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

All of those factors have had a grave impact on
journalists working in Ukraine, having increased the
number of crimes against them to a level higher than
it has ever been throughout the entire history of our
independent country. Our own example has clearly
shown to the entire world that information can be used
not to promote democratic values and principles but as a
method to inspire, fuel and maintain exported conflicts,
to brainwash citizens on both sides of the border and
to lie about the real reasons and consequences of this
brazen military aggression at the very centre of Europe.

Since the beginning of the crisis, Ukrainians and
the rest of the world have felt and seen the obvious
distinction between independent international
journalism and Russian propaganda-style production,
with ridiculous theatrical television scenes made
mostly for internal consumption. Such activities on the
part of the Kremlin-controlled media directly violate
the European Convention on Transfrontier Television,
which was signed by Russia in 2006. That Convention
is, unfortunately, yet another international document
that that country simply ignores as if it did not exist.

The reports of all international monitoring missions
convincingly and factually demonstrate that numerous
cases ofviolence against members ofthe media continue
to be committed by Russia-backed illegal armed groups
in Donbas as well as by quasi-authorities exercising de
facto control in the occupied Crimean peninsula.

Murder, physical assault, kidnapping, intimidation
and threats against journalists are among the most grave
human rights violations there. Moreover, the ongoing
hostilities and violations of the ceasefire regime by
militants in eastern Ukraine continue to jeopardize
the safety ofjournalists in Donbas, where Ukrainian
television channels were long ago illegally cut off and
replaced by State propaganda television channels from
the Russian Federation.

Against that backdrop, we continue to witness a
real information war by the Russian State-controlled
media aimed at destroying peace and stability in
Ukraine. Anti-Ukrainian falsifications by the Russian
media defy the norms of journalistic ethics and human
morality, and crudely incite inter-ethnic hatred. The
Russian State media are being widely utilized by the
Russian Government to disseminate propaganda and
violence and to promote aggressive nationalism and
chauvinism, which runs counter to a number of United
Nations Charter principles and commitments.

We emphasize that the overall media freedom
situation in the affected regions of eastern Ukraine and
the steps undertaken by the Ukrainian Government to
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms
should be perceived against the backdrop of the
security challenges stemming from the aggressive and
subversive activities pursued by the Russian Federation
towards Ukraine, including through support to illegal
armed groups in eastern Ukraine. We strongly condemn
all attacks against journalists in eastern Ukraine and
worldwide and fully share the view that journalists'
safety must be guaranteed at all times.

Finally, let me conclude by reiterating the Ukrainian
Government's commitment to further safeguard and
promote media freedom and the protection of journalists
in the country, in full accordance with our international
commitments and standards.

