Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank and congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
for its efforts in the presidency this month. I would also
like to thank you, Sir, for your comprehensive report on
the activities of the Security Council during the month
of February.

(spoke in English)

Of the many difficult issues that the Council has
dealt with in February, I would like to concentrate on
three. They include two important crises on which
the Council will make important decisions today
and, hopefully, tomorrow. One is the nuclear test and
ballistic missile launched by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Another is Syria. The third issue
that I want to touch upon is the working methods of the
Council, on which the President reported at length.

First, on 6 February, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea launched a ballistic missile. After
the nuclear test in January, that launch is yet another
clear and flagrant violation by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. These are not just violations of Council
resolutions, but also totally unacceptable challenges
to the Charter of the United Nations. The combination
of nuclear and ballistic missile development pursued
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is a
real threat to the national security of Japan. It also
seriously undermines the peace and stability of the
region and beyond. Yesterday, a draft resolution was
introduced by the United States. That draft resolution
is very comprehensive and robust. I would like to
express our sincere appreciation to Ambassador Power
and her team for taking the lead. My appreciation also
goes to China for its efforts. It is now crucial for all
of us in the Council to unite in order to adopt a draft
resolution as quickly as possible - tomorrow, to be
more precise - in order to send a strong message to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The adoption
of a new draft resolution is not an end, but a beginning.
Resolutions are effective only when fully implemented.
Implementation is therefore crucial to changing the
policy of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
with regard to its nuclear and missile development, and
to bringing it back to dialogue. I would like to take
this opportunity to emphasize the importance for all of
us to fully implement the obligations contained in the
relevant resolutions, including the draft resolution that
will be adopted very soon.

The second matter is Syria. With profound regret,
I have to point out that five long years have passed
since the outbreak of the crisis in Syria. According
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, more than a quarter of a million Syrians have
been killed, and 4.6 million fled their country during
in that time. It is clear that there is no way to end the
dire situation of Syrians without a comprehensive
political solution. Once again, let me underscore the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
2254 (2015), unanimously adopted on 18 December
2015. The Council is expected to adopt a new draft
resolution today endorsing the recent joint statement
of the United States and the Russian Federation on a
cessation of hostilities in Syria. The implementation of
that new draft resolution will be another responsibility
for all of us.

Thirdly, let me mention the working methods. In
my capacity as Chair of the Security Council Informal
Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural
Questions, I have the pleasure to announce that our first
meeting will be convened on 7 March. I am delighted
to inherit the significant achievements already made in
this field, including the work ofAngola as former Chair
of the Working Group, the presidential statements
issued under the Spanish presidency last October and
the most recent presidential note, S/2016/170, issued
under the Venezuelan presidency this month.

Japan also took the lead in comparing presidential
note S/2010/507 when we last served on the Council. I
would like to make a concrete contribution in that area
during my chairmanship, building upon the significant
achievements to which I just referred. To that end, I
seek strong cooperation and support from the members
of the Security Council. It is also my intention to
continue to listen closely to the voices of the broader
membership of the United Nations. In that context, I
was very encouraged by the recent discussions held at
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform. Many delegations expressed their strong
expectations that the Informal Working Group would
make further progress on transparency and closer
cooperation with the General Assembly. I was very
encouraged to hear from Ambassador Matthew Rycroft
of the United Kingdom - who is no longer here - who
said that the Security Council could benefit greatly
from listening to the voices coming from the General
Assembly. He did not say the often-quoted phrase
that the Security Council is the master of its rules of
procedure.

Before concluding my statement, though I do
not seem him in the Chamber, I wish to express my
profound gratitude to Movses Abelian for his invaluable
contribution as Director of the Security Council Affairs
Division, and congratulate him on his promotion. I
hope my appreciation will be conveyed to him. My
only regret is that Movses will be gone when I have the
honour to preside over the Council during the month
of July.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and to the entire Venezuelan team
for your tireless work. There are only three days left.
I wish Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins - who is
also not present - and the Mission of Angola every
success in March.

