Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): First of all, let me express
once again, on behalf of the Angolan delegation,
our sincere condolences to and solidarity with the
delegation of France on account of the attacks in Paris.
We strongly condemn those barbaric acts.

We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, as well as
Ms. Leila Zerrougui and Ms. Zainab Bangura for their
comprehensive presentations on the humanitarian
situation and the challenge facing the Syrian population.

It is deeply troubling to bear witness to constant
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by the parties to the conflict and to
the continued suffering of communities and individuals
inside Syria. The massive refugee crisis facing Syria's
neighbours and now Europe is one of the consequences
on the international community's inability to promote
and facilitate a political solution to this conflict.
Additionally, growing extremism, radicalization and
nationalism will truly leave a bitter legacy with long-
term consequences that will affect the region and the
world as a whole.

We have a common responsibility to resolve this
crisis, and must therefore step up efforts to support the
talks being held in Vienna on a political settlement to
this irrational conflict. The countries participating in
the political process, including the permanent members
of the Security Council that have undisputed leverage
over the warring parties, bear a special responsibility
to work together to put resolute pressure on them to
end the violence. The Vienna talks represent a global
effort. We are pleased that an agreement has been
reached on holding talks between the Government and
the opposition in January and on ways to enforce a
ceasefire. We believe that establishing a ceasefire and
blocking the proliferation and supply of weapons and
logistical support for the rebel groups on the ground is
a top priority. Only then will the Syrian people feel a
genuine commitment on the part of the relevant actors
and stakeholders to reaching a comprehensive peace
process that responds to their basic aspiration to peace
and respite.

Resolutions 2139 (20145), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014) represent a determined effort by the Security
Council to address human rights issues underlying the
Syrian conflict and find ways to alleviate the people's
suffering and despair under extremely stressful
conditions. However, at this point, we must forcefully
insist that the parties to the conflict show respect for
civilians' right to access to basic necessities, including
shelter, food, water and medical care. The conflict
has been going on for far too long. Its irrational
proportions and disregard for human rights and
international humanitarian law are unacceptable. The
circumstances require us to urge all actors, including
the Syrian authorities and outside Powers, to cease
all hostilities and reach a political settlement to the
conflict. Moreover, we must ensure that the outcome
of the peace process and political transition holds the
perpetrators of atrocities and the worst violations of
human rights accountable. That is a prerequisite for a
true healing and reconciliation process among Syrians.

