Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its satisfaction that the
Security Council has convened this open debate regarding
the situation in Liberia. We consider it essential for the
members of the United Nations to address the country's
tragic situation and to explore the full realm of options that
may be taken to end hostilities and to resume the process
of national reconciliation.

In this regard, the Indonesian delegation would also
like to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/ 1996/362) of 21 May 1996, the
seventeenth in a series of progress reports on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). We would
equally like to extend our gratitude to Mr. James Jonah, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his efforts in
promoting peace in that country through his recent mission
to Liberia. We are also deeply indebted to Mr. Anthony
Nyakyi, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General; the leaders of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS); the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG); and all the personnel of UN OMIL who
have courageously endeavoured to restore peace and
stability in an extremely precarious and dangerous situation.

Having carefully considered the report, and given the
facts on the ground, my delegation notes with dismay the
sombre and grave situation prevailing in the country. We
cannot in this regard but express our deep concern at the
rapid deterioration in Liberia since the new flare-up of
fighting on 6 April in a resumption of the six-year civil
war. Although we are aware that there have been lulls in
the fighting, it is distressing to note that thus far no cease-
fire seems to hold. It is therefore clear to my delegation
that the failure of the parties involved to implement and
respect the terms of the Abuja Agreement only further
underlines the lack of genuine political will among the
Liberian leaders. As we have repeatedly expressed, the
implementation of the Abuja Agreement is ultimately the
responsibility of the Council of State, established by the
Liberian leaders themselves.

Since the adoption of resolution 1041 (1996) by the
Security Council early this year, extending the mandate of

 

UN OMIL until the end of this month, we had hoped that
this period of time would provide the opportunity -
which they would take - for the parties to strive for
progress in resolving the outstanding issues between them.
However, it is regrettable that, instead, we must register
our distress at the use of the peace process only to
advance the personal ambitions of the Liberian faction
leaders. My delegation therefore reiterates its dismay that
the Liberian leaders continue to blatantly disregard the
greater interest of the Liberian people, who have
undergone untold suffering since the beginning of the
conflict in 1989.

It is in this regard that my delegation welcomes the
convening of the ECOWAS Committee of Nine on 7 May
in Accra in order to explore ways and means to end the
hostilities and reactivate the stalled peace process. It is
furthermore gratifying to note that the Mechanism for
Returning Liberia to the Abuja Agreement, adopted by the
meeting, reaffirmed that the Abuja Agreement constitutes
the only basis for peace in Liberia. The Indonesian
delegation fully subscribes to this position. We also share
the view that the protocols recently adopted by the
Council of State contradict the spirit of the Abuja
Agreement, and that any Government that comes to office
through the use of force should not be recognized.

One aspect which my delegation wishes to underline
is the fact that the Council of State and General Johnson
have both welcomed and indeed accepted the
recommendations and conditions set by ECOWAS, and
both have stated their intention to abide by them. In our
opinion, this constitutes a positive development which
could become the basis for further confidence-building
measures. Considering the negative consequences that
might arise from the latest turn of events and its possible
destabilizing effects on the whole subregion, my
delegation welcomes whatever efforts are being
contemplated by Member States to redress the situation.
In this respect, we welcome the United States initiative in
establishing an International Contact Group on Liberia
(ICGL). This Group met for the first time in Geneva,
bringing together interested donor countries to discuss the
issue of restoring security, reinforcing ECOMOG and
returning the factions to the Abuja Agreement. These are
indeed critical and fundamental issues if the conflict in
Liberia is to be resolved.

The present security situation is indeed alarming.
Looting is rampant and hostage-taking is again on the
rise. A continued situation of instability does not provide
a conducive atmosphere in which to pursue the
organization of the electoral process. Thus the elections
scheduled for August 1996 according to the Abuja
Agreement are unlikely to be held, given the prevailing

 

absence of functioning institutions and the politically and
militarily volatile situation. In this context, and bearing in
mind the recrudescence of the civil war, my delegation
wishes to stress the necessity for all States to strictly
comply with their obligation under resolution 788 (1992)
with regard to the embargo on all deliveries of weapons
and military equipment to Liberia.

In this context, we believe that a solution to the
Liberian conflict must be found internally and regionally.
It is therefore imperative that ECOMOG be provided not
only with the necessary assistance, but also with a status-of-
forces agreement between ECOWAS and the Council of
State, in order for it to fulfil its mandate. An effective
ECOMOG would in turn be able to provide adequate
security for the personnel not only of UNOMIL but of
other humanitarian agencies as well, and quell the exodus
of Liberians to neighbouring countries. It is therefore
essential for the Council to consider the future role of
ECOMOG, so that it may be in a position to perform its
duties appropriately.

We are deeply concerned at the serious human rights
Violations prevailing in the country, such as robbery,
beating, torture, killing and rape. One of the most Vile
human rights abuses has been the abuse of children through
the practice of creating child soldiers, which we vehemently
condemn. My delegation considers that it is of the utmost
importance that these violations be properly addressed and
that once hostilities cease, and security conditions permit,
UNOMIL's Vital role of investigating these abuses resume
as soon as possible.

The humanitarian situation continues to be alarming.
The difficulties encountered are mainly due to increased
insecurity in reaching certain areas of Liberia to bring
humanitarian aid. We are concerned that some communities
have become inaccessible and that relief has been
suspended, rendering precarious a situation in which
civilians are already in need. In order to ameliorate this
situation, it is a matter of urgent importance that all parties
extend their fullest cooperation to humanitarian
organizations and personnel. In this regard, we call on the
Liberian parties to do their utmost to permit free access of
humanitarian assistance and provide credible security
guarantees.

As for the refugee question, we are aware that the
civil war has created a Liberian refugee population of over
a million in neighbouring countries, greatly burdening them
and thus increasing the risk of regional destabilization. In
this respect, we commend the initiative of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to provide
assistance to those countries that grant asylum to the
Liberians. Needless to say, we maintain the view that the

 

long-term solution to this humanitarian problem resides in
the return of peace and stability in Liberia, and that
refugee camps can be only a temporary solution.

Finally, Mr. President, considering the debilitating
consequences of the continued conflict, we urgently call
upon the warring factions to immediately re-establish a
cease-fire and to take concrete steps by reaffirming their
commitment to the Abuja Agreement. Failure to do so
would only confront the Liberian leaders with the risk of
losing any form of credibility or support from the
international community, particularly in the event that
ECOWAS decides to withdraw ECOMOG, with the
consequence of UNOMIL's taking a similar step. We
therefore share the Secretary-General's observation that
the Liberian factions should carefully consider the wide-
ranging consequences their actions will have during the
next few months.

In the light of these observations, the Indonesian
delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the mandate of UNOMIL be
extended for another three months, until 31 August 1996.
This position is based on the hope that during this period
the Liberian parties will demonstrate, through concrete
steps, their political will to resolve the conflict that has
beset the Liberian people for far too long. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's recommendations on
the future role of UNOMIL beyond 31 August, based on
the decision of ECOWAS with regard to its own role in
Liberia.

