Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate. I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zerrougui, Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous, Executive Director Lake and
Mr. Tolbert, President of the International Center for
Transitional Justice, for their briefings. Before I begin I
would also like to thank former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy
for her six years of dedicated service and enormous
contributions, and to welcome Special Representative
Zerrougui to that very important and demanding
position. The United States very much looks forward to
working with her.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2012/26l) notes
some encouraging developments. In 2011 the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General signed three
action plans, with the Government of Chad and two
armed groups in the Central African Republic. Thus
far in 2012, the United Nations has signed four action
plans, with South Sudan and Burma and two with
Somalia. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
submitted a draft action plan on child soldiering,
which is being reviewed by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General's office. Such action plans
are a proven tool for promoting child protection and
rehabilitation.

There were other signs of progress as well. The
Maoist party in Nepal was delisted from the Secretary-
General's report after it ended the recruitment and
use of child soldiers and completed its action plan
commitments to suspend payments, cease providing
housing and encourage disqualified minors to register
for reintegration programmes. The delisting of the
Iniya Bharati faction was a major step in resolving the
last elements of child soldiering in Sri Lanka, although
more remains to be done.

Discussions on action plans with armed groups
also made progress. In Afghanistan the Ministries of
Interior and Defence undertook initiatives to prevent
the recruitment and exploitation of children. Those are
real and tangible results, and we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General's Office for
its success in significantly improving the situation of
children in such countries.

Still, much of the Secretary-General's report
documents many ongoing instances of appalling abuses
against children. The Lord's Resistance Army, for
example, continued its barbaric operations in several
African countries, abducting 101 children in the
Central African Republic and carrying out 211 attacks
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Many of
those attacks used child soldiers, and they resulted
in the abduction of 124 children in a portion of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's Orientale Province
alone. The report documents almost 1,000 cases of
child recruitment in Somalia, mainly by Al-Shabaab,
and notes the registration of 7,800 child casualties of
conflict in the three main hospitals in Mogadishu.

The carnage committed by Al-Assad and the clique
around him is particularly distressing. As the report
states,

"Children as young as 9 years of age were victims
of killing and maiming, arbitrary arrest, detention,
torture and ill-treatment, including sexual
violence, and use as human shields. Schools have
been regularly raided and used as military bases
and detention centres." (5/2012/26], para. 19)

Such atrocities, including the torture of young
children, continue with alarming frequency and serve
as further evidence that the Council should do more to
support humanitarian assistance and political transition
in Syria.

As we look to the future of the process we should
reflect on what more we can do to better protect
children in areas of armed conflict. We agree with
the Secretary-General that we must find a better way
to affect the conduct of persistent perpetrators. Since
most Government forces have signed action plans or
given indications that they will do so, our main concern
should be with non-State armed groups. In addressing
such armed groups, we must consider two issues.
First, because national Governments have the primary
responsibility to protect children in their territory, the
United Nations must work with armed groups only in
close cooperation with national authorities. Resolution
2068 (2012), which we adopted a few minutes ago,
correctly reaffirms that position, which the Council
emphasized last year in resolution 1998 (2011).

Secondly, the United States strongly believes that
the Security Council should consider a broader range of
options to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators
of violations and abuses committed against children in
situations ofarmed conflict. At this time, a free-standing
sanctions regime on children in armed conflict would
not seem to address the need for better tools to deal
with persistent perpetrators. As the Secretary-General
documents in his report (S/2012/261), four country-
specific sanctions committees with designation criteria
on violations and abuses against children already exist.

However we encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to provide a report to the
working group evaluating the range of possibilities
in this area, with a view to facilitating a report by
the group to the Council. A thoughtful analysis of
different proposals on how to promote accountability
would help bring an end to the cycle of violence that
plagues children living in conflict-affected areas where
persistent perpetrators operate.

Our work today to remove children from the scourge
of armed conflict has seen great progress, through
the implementation of action plans and focused work
to educate armed groups. But we must still summon
the resolve to hold accountable the most recalcitrant
perpetrators, and redouble our commitment to end
impunity.

