Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
statement.

We should like to thank the Chinese presidency of
the Security Council and you personally, Mr. President,
for providing the Council and the United Nations as
a whole with this unique opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter ofthe United Nations. This debate also gives us
the opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of those
who sacrificed themselves in the hope of a free and
democratic world, established on the universal values
and principles that also inspired the foundations of the
European Union.

In the concept note (S/2015/87, annex), you remind
us, Sir, of the core promise of the founders of this
Organization: to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. But preventing future wars was not
the only undertaking of the signatories of the Charter
70 years ago. The very same preambular passage of the
Charter also stresses their determination to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small; to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law can be maintained; and to promote
social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom. In its very first paragraphs, the Charter thus
defined the three pillars of this Organization: peace and
security, human rights, and development.

The Security Council obviously has a very specific
role with regard to the first of these pillars, due to
its primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. But
the European Union also believes that the Security
Council has its own specific responsibilities with regard
to the other two pillars. The Security Council itself has
underlined this fact in a number of landmark statements
and resolutions. In May 2009, the Council welcomed a
statement by the African Union that unconstitutional
changes of Government can pose a threat to peace
and security. In July 2011, the Council expressed its
concern that possible adverse effects of climate change
may, in the long run, aggravate certain existing threats
to international peace and security. And in April 2006
and again in November 2009, the Council noted that
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
situations of armed conflict may constitute a threat to
international peace and security.

The European Union and its member States believe
that the Council can in particular make its own key
contribution to the protection of fundamental human
rights as one of the core purposes of the United
Nations. In particular, it has the important power to
refer situations in which genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes have been committed to the
International Criminal Court, as well as by deciding on
targeted sanctions.

The Charter calls on all Members ofthe Organization
to refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State. The European
Union and its member States are deeply committed to
this core principle of the United Nations, which the
Chinese presidency has also highlighted in its concept
note. We firmly believe that there is no place for the
use of force and coercion to change internationally
recognized borders in Europe or elsewhere in the
twenty-first century. In this regard, the European
Union recalls General Assembly resolution 68/262
and remains strongly committed to upholding the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.

The concept note prepared by the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council rightly underlines
the centrality of international law as well as of the
rule of law as foundations of this Organization and of
international relations in general. The Charter itself is
one of the cornerstones of international law. Respect
for the principles of the Charter and international law
is also one of the guiding principles of the European
Union's international action, as set out in the Treaty of
the European Union.

Abiding by the rule of law is essential for the
peaceful settlement of international disputes. We
attach great importance to all the various instruments
described in Article 33 of the Charter. In recent years,
particular attention has been paid to mediation.

At the same time, we would like to emphasize
the role of judicial mechanisms in the prevention and
resolution of legal disputes. We strongly support the
role ofthe International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations for the peaceful
settlement of disputes among States. We recognize
the importance of its advisory opinions, and we call
upon all States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance
with its Statute.

We also see the linkages between the rule of law
at the international and domestic levels. As former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan already put it in his
report,"In larger freedom: towards development,
security and human rights for all" (A/59/2005), some
10 years ago: "I strongly believe that every nation that
proclaims the rule oflaw at home must respect it abroad
and that every nation that insists on it abroad must
enforce it at home" (ibid., para. 133). This is a position
the European Union fully shares.

Finally, let me say a short word about the contribution
of regional and other organizations to the realization
of the purposes of the Charter, This was the subject
of another milestone thematic debate of this Council,
also under Chinese chairmanship, in January 2010
(S/PV.6257). The presidential statement agreed at that
time (S/PRST/2010/l) recognized the important role
that regional and subregional organizations can play
in the peaceful settlement of conflicts, as well as in
peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding, inter
alia.

In another presidential statement, agreed in
February 2014, the Security Council specifically
recognized the European Union's comprehensive
approach to the maintenance of international peace
and security, as well as its commitment, and that of
its member States, to international peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, humanitarian assistance and financial
and logistical support (S/PRST/2014/4). We see this
statement as an encouragement to further develop and
deepen our cooperation with the United Nations, but
also with other regional organizations, in particular the
African Union.

Chapter VIII of the Charter bears testimony to the
fact that the founders of the United Nations foresaw
some of the advantages that the cooperation with
regional arrangements could provide. We now have
a much clearer picture of the huge contribution that
regional and cross-regional cooperation and integration
can make to international peace and security, the rule
of law, human rights and sustainable development, by
no means only in Europe, but also in many other parts
of the world. This is a new dimension of international
relations that can substantially enrich the work of the
United Nations in our collective efforts to reaffirm,
defend and realize the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

