Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding this meeting. We also thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for his detailed and comprehensive briefing,
and we renew our appreciation and support for all
the efforts that he is making to activate and advance
a political settlement, especially his most recent
efforts to establish a constitutional committee. I would
like to join Ambassador Karen Pierce of the United
Kingdom in taking this opportunity to express our
deep appreciation for the intensive and earnest efforts
that Mr. Staffan de Mistura has made over the past four
years in his very difficult task. We also commend his
commitment to continue working until the very last day
of his mandate.

The international community finds itself at an
important and sensitive stage of the political process
to resolve the Syrian crisis. As my colleague the
Ambassador of France has said, we are now at a
crossroads. On one side, we see a bright and illuminated
path with clearly defined landmarks, in accordance
with the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). That path
gives us hope that we can put an end to the crisis that
Syria has been enduring for the past eight years. On
the other side of that crossroads, we find a dark and
difficult path riddled with obstacles and fabricated
impediments, which could take us back to square one.

Nine months after an agreement was reached in
Sochi to form a constitutional committee, and after
many rounds of negotiations over the three lists with
the relevant parties, we had hoped to see a launching of
the committee's work. However, it is clear, as we have
just heard from the Special Envoy, that no progress has
been made. In that context, we hope that the visit of
Special Envoy De Mistura to Damascus next week,
which he just announced in his statement, will lead to
results that will facilitate the launch of the committee's
work. We look forward to hearing his briefing on the
outcome of his visit soon.

We call for an intensification of efforts aimed at
an early launch of the work of a credible constitutional
committee that is inclusive of all segments of Syrian
society. We believe that this would constitute an
important landmark in the Syrian political process and
would push it forward. It is a first step in a political
transition that would include drafting a constitution
and holding free and fair elections in accordance with
such a new constitution, under the supervision of the
United Nations and in line with the highest international
standards of transparency and accountability. We hope
that all Syrians, including members ofthe diaspora, will
participate in the elections, in keeping with resolution
2254 (2015).

We were on the brink of a humanitarian disaster
a month and a half ago because of a potential military
escalation in the province of Idlib, which is home to
approximately 3 million people, most of whom are
innocent civilians. The Council, which has adopted a
policy of preventive diplomacy, played an important
role in shining a spotlight on Idlib by holding a series of
meetings dealing with the possibility of a humanitarian
crisis in the event of a military escalation in Idlib. We
all followed the agreement that was reached in the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding, which
helped de-escalate the situation and averted what we
had most feared. As the deadline for that memorandum
of understanding draws near, we call for intensifying
efforts to sustain the ceasefire, not just in the province
of Idlib but throughout Syria, pursuant to resolution
2401 (2018), which was unanimously adopted by the
Council in February to protect civilians and guarantee
unimpeded humanitarian access to those in need
throughout Syria.

The State of Kuwait reaffirms today, and every
day, that there is no solution to the crisis in Syria other
than a political one that is agreed by all segments of the
Syrian population, achieves their legitimate aspirations
and preserves the unity, independence and sovereignty
of Syria.

In closing, as I mentioned earlier, we are at a
crossroads, and the next few days will determine
the path that the political process will take. There is
an urgent need for international political will and
intensified diplomatic efforts by all parties at the
highest levels over the next few days in order to achieve
a political settlement and to put an end to the suffering
of the Syrian people and the repercussions of that
destructive crisis on the stability and security of the
region and the entire world.

