Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation associates itself with the statement
presented by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and we would
also like to associate ourselves with the statement that
will be presented by the Permanent Representative of
Zambia on behalf of the African Group.

I would like at the outset of my statement to
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Austria
on presiding over the Security Council for this month,
while expressing my appreciation for his concern in
dedicating today's deliberations to the theme of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My thanks are
also due for the concept paper that was circulated to
enrich the deliberations on this item, bearing in mind
the fact that ten years have passed since the Secretary-
General delivered his first report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957) to your
Council. We are still hopeful that the current
deliberations of the Security Council on this subject
will lead to the crystallization of a comprehensive
approach and a distinct, objective vision of the optimal
means of protecting civilians, foremost among which
must be uprooting the causes of armed conflicts.
Avoiding the causes of conflicts and supporting
integrated comprehensive political settlements
constitute the best safeguard of the protection of
civilians. As we say, prevention is better than cure.

Needless to say, atrocities and threats against
civilians are no longer merely a matter of violence and
displacement but have now escalated, in the blatant
aggression against Gaza, into more devastating and
destructive acts in a manner that has alarmed humanity
at large. Indeed that assault represents an
unprecedented transformation in the targeting civilians
using the most modern of lethal technologies that the
death-and-destruction machine has come up with,
including cluster and phosphorus bombs, in addition to
all other internationally prohibited weapons, producing
scenes that have upset the conscience of the world in a
manner that has put the credibility of this Council at
risk as regards the seriousness with which it deals with
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Today's
deliberations may help us to find a way out of this
complex maze of prejudice and double standards in
tackling this matter.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General
and all his relevant reports have focused on the
importance of activating and increasing the capabilities
of United Nations peacekeeping missions in the field
of the protection of civilians. However, the reality of
practical experiences in a number of countries has
evidently shown that, when peace on the ground does
not exist to be maintained, peacekeeping missions, no
matter how they enhance their capacities in the field of
protection, will never achieve the desired goals in this
regard because what protects civilians fundamentally is
peace. I repeat, what protects civilians is the peace that
everyone is seeking, as well as the ensuing speedy
implementation of development, rehabilitation, revival,
rebuilding, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and the quick return of social services, so as to
facilitate a speedy settlement of returnees and to ensure
that civilians leave their camps and shelters to go back
to their countries of origin and to the resumption of
their everyday activities. The United Nations must
therefore make peacemaking its priority and not be
distracted by secondary, incidental matters that
accompany conflicts. We must stress the proven
capabilities of regional organizations in peacemaking
and peacekeeping owing to their direct relation and full
familiarity with the nature and causes of the conflict at
hand. Here we should like to recall the decisions of the
meeting organized by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in Dakar in April 2007 on the
role of regional organizations in the protection of
civilians and in peacemaking.

The principle of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a sublime principle to which we all
aspire. Yet we are concerned by the attempts by some
States to use that principled goal to serve specific
political objectives, such as the current propagation of
the so-called responsibility to protect. And we should
like to emphasize in this forum that the principle of the
responsibility to protect, though contained in the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document, is, as you know,
still subject to varied interpretation by various Member
States. We must also bear in mind the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations with
regard to each State's sovereignty, legitimacy and
complete and full responsibility for the protection of
the civilian population of that State. We must recall
that the right to protect civilians in armed conflict is
part and parcel of an integrated, interrelated system of
rights and obligations that was confirmed by that same
Outcome Document. The main pivot of that Summit
was to follow up on the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals, in particular
development, poverty reduction and conflict prevention
by tackling its root causes, as I mentioned. Hence the
protection of civilians has to take place within a
comprehensive integrated framework. I repeat: the
protection of civilians has to be done within an
integrated, comprehensive framework that focuses
principally on tackling the root causes of conflict at an
early stage, with effective support from the Security
Council in guiding processes of reconciliation and
political settlement. This should be complemented by
the parallel roles of the Secretariat and the specialized
agencies of the United Nations, with regard to
humanitarian aspects and in support of sustainable
economic development, and of donors, in honouring
their development commitments.

The protection of civilians is, at the end of the
day, the responsibility of the State. Thus, States
concerned have to be equipped with better capabilities
to shoulder their responsibilities appropriately and
must not be weakened by means of sanctions and other
measures that those who impose them sometimes call
smart sanctions, sometimes targeted sanctions, or other
twisted interpretations that have never changed the fact
that the population is inevitably hurt by them.

In conclusion, we should like to reaffirm the
importance of adopting a comprehensive approach to
addressing the matter of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, without selectivity or discrimination.
We also hope that the Security Council will prove, in a
practical manner, its commitment to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict by dealing decisively with
what was done to the civilians in Gaza. It is a
fortuitous coincidence that our discussion of this topic
follows the General Assembly's examination of the
Goldstone report (A/64/490), which proved where
peace-loving nations stand. There are those who claim
to support peace and fight against impunity, but with
great hypocrisy. That is the main lesson we have
learned.

