Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia align themselves
with this statement.

International terrorism continues to be one of the
most dangerous threats of our time. Over the past
decade, terrorist networks have proven capable not
only of inflicting massive casualties and human
suffering but also of destabilizing entire societies and
States. The attack in Kabul on the 28 October reminded
us once again that terrorism has become a direct and
increasingly serious threat to the United Nations and its
personnel as well. The men and women who were
killed in the Kabul attack deserve our deep gratitude
for serving the United Nations and its principles under
dangerous circumstances and for paying for that noble
cause with their lives. The European Union extends its
deepest condolences to their families and friends.

Arresting terrorists, disrupting their plots and
eliminating their sources of financing are essential in
keeping the threat at bay. The European Union will
continue to support firm multilateral action against
terrorism and is committed to implementing and
improving the multilateral counter-terrorism
framework. The effectiveness of our measures is
founded on their credibility and perceived legitimacy.
The European Union is actively engaged in the
ongoing discussions about enhancing the design,
implementation and effectiveness of sanctions. We
welcome the continuous efforts to ensure that fair and
clear procedures within the 1267 regime are enhanced.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1822
(2008) last year was an important step in that direction.
We welcome the specific measures taken to improve
the listing process on the basis of that resolution, such
as providing statements of case for new listings and
publishing narrative summaries of reasons for listings.
Another major step forward is the review of the 1267
list; it has already shown significant results. Further
improvements on many points, and especially with
regard to de-listing, are necessary. The resolution to be
adopted by the Security Council in December presents
an important opportunity. The tenth report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(see S/2009/502) offers a valuable basis for this effort.

In response to resolution 1822 (2008) and the
demands of the European Court of Justice, the
European Union is in the process of modifying its
procedures for implementing the 1267 regime. With
these improvements, the European Union hopes to
meet the due process requirements set out by European
courts. Further improvements at the United Nations
level are also called for in order to ensure the effective
implementation of the United Nations sanctions
regime.

Our collective ability to curb terrorism ultimately
depends on the abilities of individual Member States.
The strengthening of legal frameworks and the
bolstering of national capacities to respond to terrorist
threats are of vital importance. The European Union
and its member States are among the main providers of
capacity-building measures in the rule of law and
counter-terrorism areas under resolution 1373 (2001).
We continue to support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and its Executive Directorate
(CTED), and we will continue to make significant
contributions to their work as well as to the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

The European Union welcomes the results of the
interim review of the work of CTED, as set out in
resolution 1805 (2008). We support the ongoing
stocktaking of the implementation process with its
special focus on countries that have not regularly
reported to the Committee and the ambition to
strengthen cooperation with regional specialized
organizations. We also encourage deeper integration of
human rights in the CTC's and CTED's work with
Member States.

It is difficult to imagine a more frightening
scenario than terrorists using nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons. Resolution 1540 (2004) provides a
strong legal basis for our diplomatic, legal and
financial efforts to prevent non-State actors, including
terrorists, from acquiring those types of weapons and
their means of delivery. The European Union Strategy
against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
Destruction underlines our commitment to the highest
export control standards. We continue to provide
significant assistance to third countries. The European
Union, in addition to its member States' individual
contributions, plans to spend around €300 million on
cooperation to counter proliferation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear weapons and
materials in the period 2007 to 2013.

We also welcome the comprehensive review
process through which Member States were recently
invited to share views and experiences on the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540
Committee is an important clearing house, matching
assistance offers and requests, a role that should be
further developed.

In order for sanctions and other measures aimed
specifically at terrorists to be effective, they must
comply fully with all aspects of international law and
be combined with efforts aimed at addressing the
conditions conducive to terrorism. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy stands as the most
significant expression of our common ambition to
address international terrorism in all its aspects. But
more needs to be done when it comes to
implementation. One concrete step that should be taken
urgently is to institutionalize the Secretary-General's
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

The European Union welcomes the efforts of the
Security Council and its Committees to seek effective,
legitimate and coherent implementation of United
Nations counter-terrorism measures. We will continue
to be a committed partner in the period ahead.

