The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Somalia and Uganda, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, Without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Butagira (Uganda) took the seat reserved for
him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mulet to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/l78, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ould Abdallah.


