Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, we would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's important debate and for the concept
note (S/2016/969, annex). I also thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Danilo Tiirk, Ms. Christine Beerli and
Mr. Sundeep Waslekar for their briefings.

Our delegation believes that a discussion on water,
peace and security is important, since that natural
resource is essential for humankind's survival, but
also, because of its scarcity and people's dependence
on it, it could be the fundamental cause of the outbreak
of conflicts. Guatemala shares the concern that water
could be viewed as a cause of conflict, which could
occur because of its uneven global distribution and
its ongoing scarcity caused by urbanization, global
warming and the excessive or disproportionate use of
water. That is why we must be careful and sensible in
the use and conservation of water, especially given the
expected global population increase in the not-too-
distant future. That is why we agree with the remarks
by former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who said that

"competition for fresh water may well become a
source of conflict and wars in the future, but at the
same time it has the potential to be a catalyst for
development and cooperation."

Our strong commitment to multilateralism is based
on the conviction that global challenges such as the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
fight against poverty, the promotion of sustainable
development and the rule of law can be effectively
addressed only within a multilateral framework based
on the premise of cooperation and solidarity. Without
that, the arbitrary and illogical use of resources will
lead not only to shortages but to clashes between
peoples and nations in an attempt to gain access to
those resources.

Environmental protection and appropriate
management of our natural resources will enable us
to achieve harmonious human coexistence, marked
by development and sustainability and guided by
conservation and sustainable use. We need to prepare
a strategic rapid response focused on the underlying
structural issues related to the problem of water
resources, which requires not only a change in rhetoric
but also a substantial change in the way we see and
understand the reality that determines the conservation
of, access to and use of water.

For Guatemala, it is particularly worrying that for
various reasons, and to a great extent man-made ones,
the world's populations are currently encountering
a serious shortage of fresh water owing to the
unsustainable use, poor management and pollution of
water, as well as to climate change, industrialization,
rapid demographic growth and the reappropriation of
water, all of which add up to a greater demand for the
resource, which could lead to confrontation among
communities, peoples and nations.

Under those circumstances, it is unnecessary
and pointless to emphasize that, unless we change
the conditions under which we are currently using
that resource, the improper use or lack of access to
water will generate still more structural violence in
various regions, putting at risk development and the
implementation of the economic, social and cultural
rights of populations, as well as international peace
and security. That is why we condemn attacks against
water supplies as a method of waging war, whether
of a national or international nature, since that is a
clear violation of international law and international
humanitarian law. Indeed, to use water as an instrument
of war is a crime against humanity, which is why the
relationship between water and peace deserves to be
analysed with reference to current practices and with
a View to coordinating policies on conservation and
sustainable use.

In that regard, we recognize the timeliness of this
debate in the interest of highlighting the problem of
water and its supply, which deserves greater attention
from the international community. That is why we
welcome with pleasure the efforts undertaken by the
Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace to address
the development of proposals for strengthening the
global architecture for the prevention and resolution
of conflicts related to water, as well as their work
to enhance the relevance of water-related issues in
local, regional and international policies with a view
conserving that vital resource for future generations.

The Security Council has the paramount
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. In order to achieve that, it has been recognized
that it is essential to count on a set of mechanisms and
tools applicable to the situations and local circumstances
of the populations involved. In most cases, those tools
have been used to react to conflicts rather than to
prevent them. However, we believe that it is necessary
to ensure that all instruments at the Security Council's
disposal should be used in an appropriate way to deal
with the various issues involved in order to achieve
sustainable peace and, of course, conflict prevention.

Finally, my delegation considers it important
to include this topic on the Council's agenda, while
underscoring that water is a strategic resource that
belongs to all humankind and has an impact on security,
development and human rights. That is clear. We have
at hand two important agendas, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the sustainable peace
agenda. We can make use of and build on them together
for a sustainable and harmonious future.

