Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
warmly thank our four briefers for their enlightening
interventions. I would also like to welcome the presence
of Mr. Norbert Rottgen, Chair of the Foreign Affairs
Committee of the German Parliament. I would like to
make three points today.

First of all, I would like to strongly reaffirm
France's support for the tireless efforts of the Special
Envoy and of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, the latter
within the Redeployment Coordination Committee and
as Head of the United Nations Mission in Support of
the Al-Hudaydah Agreement. We must stress that
only a political solution can put an end to the conflict
in Yemen. We are sending that message to all our
interlocutors, including regional interlocutors,

The Special Envoy has told us, and we share his
analysis, that the window of opportunity to put an
end to the conflict is still open and must urgently be
taken advantage of by the parties. We also support
the proposals submitted to the Yemeni Government
and the Houthis to facilitate the implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We call on both parties
to respect their commitments and start redeployment
operations without delay or seeking to exploit any
redeployments that may be carried out by the other
party. Achieving results in Al-Hudaydah must indeed
enable us to recreate a virtuous cycle for a political
solution and forge bonds of trust between the parties,
which is an absolute must. The military solution is less
of an option than ever.

Secondly, we remain very concerned about the
situation on the ground. The relative holding of the
ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah is a positive development,
which should be welcomed. Nonetheless, the intensity
of hostilities has increased throughout the rest of
the country and the humanitarian situation remains
extremely worrisome. The parties must therefore
maintain their commitment to the Special Envoy
and General Lollesgaard and play a responsible and
constructive role in order to avoid jeopardizing the
process. Against that backdrop , the role played by the
United Nations Mission in Support of the Al-Hudaydah
Agreement, deployed in January, and the strengthening
of the United Nations presence on the ground are
essential. It is important that the remaining observers
provided for in the Mission's mandate be able to arrive
as soon as possible. We expect the parties, in accordance
with their commitments, to ensure the security and free
movement of United Nations personnel.

The parties must also do everything necessary to
ensure that humanitarian actors can work safely and
have the required access. Bureaucratic impediments,
threats, harassment, arrests and defamation
campaigns, in particular in Sana'a, must stop.
Infrastructure - especially hospitals, which have
been damaged by hostilities in Taiz and Saada - and
schools, where children are particularly vulnerable,
must also be protected.

I would like to draw the Council's attention in
particular to the situation of children in Yemen.
Children are among the first victims of the conflict and
are widely recruited and used. The Secretary-General's
next report on that subject should shed light on that
unacceptable situation. In Yemen, as in other conflict
situations, every effort must be made to put an end to
serious Violations against children in particular.

After the hope created by the Stockholm

agreements, the impact on the people of a further failure
of the political process would be catastrophic and would
push us into unknown territory. It is therefore urgent to
make progress in the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement in order to create the necessary confidence
to resume discussions with a view to a comprehensive
political agreement. But the political process cannot be
conditioned on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement alone; the two processes must move forward
in parallel in order to fuel genuine momentum.
Resuming the discussions on a comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement that takes into account
the diversity of Yemen's political and civil society
actors is the only real prospect for putting an end to the
suffering of the Yemeni people. The Special Envoy's
attention to the role of Yemeni women is essential in
that regard. Strengthening women's participation in
peace discussions, in Yemen as it is elsewhere, is an
essential condition for success.

The Council, after unanimously adopting
resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452 (2018), must at
all costs avoid the trap of letting the hope generated
in Stockholm die. We simply cannot allow it. Our
collective efforts are needed now more than ever,
and the Council's unity on the arduous path towards
peace in Yemen is our greatest asset. That is not the
case, as we know, in all crises, to put it diplomatically.
Therefore, let us leverage that unity in order to put the
full weight of the Security Council behind seeking a
political solution, which today, despite the magnitude
of the challenges, is within our grasp.

