Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
expresses its appreciation to the delegation of France
for organizing this timely meeting on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. Today's meeting provides us yet
another opportunity to make an honest and frank
assessment of the situation in general and the increasing
humanitarian crisis in particular.

We thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his statement today. We also thank United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio Guterres
for his statement. Both of them painted a rather
gloomy humanitarian picture for both Syria and the
affected neighbouring countries. We also thank the
Ministers of Syria's immediate neighbours - Turkey,
Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon - for their statements. It
will also be important to later hear directly from the
Syrian Permanent Representative about the unfolding
humanitarian situation in his country.

South Africa is on record as condemning the
ongoing violence in Syria and conveys its heartfelt
condolences to the families of all of those who have lost
their lives as a result of the Syrian crisis.

While today's meeting is focused on the
humanitarian situation, it is essential that we remain
fully engaged in pursuing a sustainable political
solution in Syria. Divisions within the Council have
rendered it irrelevant and unable to play a constructive
role in fulfilling its Charter-mandated responsibilities
to promote peace in the Syrian Arab Republic. It is
important that the Council approach this crisis in a
balanced manner by calling on and applying pressure
on all sides to bring an end to the violence, establish a
ceasefire and comply with their respective obligations
under the six-point plan and the final communique of
the Action Group for Syria.
It is essential that a credible political process be
supported by a united, cohesive international effort
towards a Syrian-led negotiated political transition
aimed at establishing a democratic pluralistic society
that meets the legitimate aspirations of all of the
Syrian people. We therefore thank Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan for his outstanding leadership and
commitment to the peaceful resolution of the Syrian
crisis. We welcome the appointment of Mr. Brahimi
as the new Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States on Syria, and we express
confidence in his abilities and leadership. I assure him
of South Africa's full support.

We also wish to commend the role played by the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria, albeit
for a limited period, serving as the Organization's
eyes and ears on the ground and operating under very
difficult circumstances. The unending violence and the
intransigence of the parties have made it impossible to
continue that Mission.

Despite the setback, we are confident that the
Secretary-General's proposed liaison office will be in
a position to make an assessment of the situation and
identify windows of opportunity that could be exploited
to launch a political process. We appeal to the parties
to cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy and the
United Nations liaison office with a view to urgently
kick-starting a credible Syrian-led and owned political
dialogue.

Needless to say, the collapse of Syria will certainly
adversely affect regional stability in the Middle East,
and could even spark a dangerous and undesirable
struggle for regional hegemony. Any tilting of the
proverbial political scales in favour of one country or
grouping of countries in the Middle East will certainly
unleash a geopolitical crisis with the potential to further
destabilize an already unstable and fragile region. We
are already seeing the impact of the Syrian crisis on
neighbouring countries, particularly Lebanon.

South Africa reiterates that the situation in Syria
cannot be solved by military means or by helping one
side, militarily or otherwise, to defeat the other. Perhaps
it is appropriate, given the allegations being made
that some are arming the opposition, to ask whether
arming the opposition in Syria is not indirect military
intervention. We contend that a military approach may
be convenient in the short term, but it will surely expose
the country's fault lines and result in unending civil
strife, as we have witnessed in other situations where
solutions of this nature were pursued without taking
internal political dynamics and contexts into account.

We hope that humanitarian and protection-of-
civilians pretexts will not be used to effect regime
change in Syria, at least not in the name of the Security
Council. We recall that the United Nations Charter
states that

"All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations."

It is evident, by any measure, that the humanitarian
situation in Syria is appalling, the more so because the
conflict continues unabated, with the parties seemingly
determined to defeat each other militarily with no
consideration for the resulting human suffering. With
more than 2.5 million people in need, including about
1.2 million displaced, the situation is indeed dire, and
also affects the most vulnerable, that is, women and
children.

South Africa appreciates the work of the United
Nations, through such relief programmes as the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children's
Fund, the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Population Fund, and their efforts to alleviate
the humanitarian situation, which is compounded by,
among other things, shortages of the basic amenities of
life, as well as internal and international displacement.
We also want to thank other humanitarian relief
agencies, such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the
numerous national and international non-governmental
organizations whose workers have risked their lives
and expended significant resources to help the Syrian
people.

We have heard numerous concerns about the
humanitarian situation in Syria but have seen very
little action aimed at providing the requisite resources
for humanitarian relief. In that regard, we applaud
the United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator
Valerie Amos for visiting Syria and engaging with the
Syrian authorities on the humanitarian situation. The
cooperation of the Syrian authorities and the opposition
in facilitating humanitarian access should also be
acknowledged and encouraged.

The situation of refugees is of equal concern. As
the conflict continues, the number of people fleeing
and seeking refuge in neighbouring countries is rising
dramatically. What is worrying about this is that these
people are fleeing to countries that already have their
own challenges. Even more worrying is the fact that
while Syrians are fleeing their country, Syria itself
is host to large refugee communities from Somalia,
Iraq, the Sudan and Afghanistan, as well as more than
500,000 Palestinians. It is not surprising that those
displaced people are concerned about the future, as they
are certainly in a precarious situation, with nowhere to
go but back home, which they fled for similar reasons.

There can be no doubt that the refugee situation is
putting increasing strain on the neighbouring countries
of Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon and Jordan, which are
hosting refugees. We must applaud them for providing
shelter and other help to those desperate people. We
should also thank the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the
Near East and other humanitarian relief agencies for
helping to ease the plight of Syrian refugees. Given the
escalating humanitarian crisis in Syria and the apparent
lack of funds, we appeal to the international community,
including the countries in the wider Middle East region,
to respond to the humanitarian appeal by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Syria
regional response plan.

In conclusion, South Africa reiterates that all Syrian
parties must be responsible for ending the violence
immediately and commit to finding peace. As for the
Council, it is now crucial and ever more urgent that we
set aside the differences between us that are predicated
on narrow nationalistic interests and save Syria and
the region from total collapse. The international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
should work in a spirit of unity to find a solution to the
situation in Syria before it is too late.

