Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank our briefers - Under-Secretary-General
Stephen O'Brien, Mr. Amir Abdulla and Mr. Peter
Salama - for the valuable information they have given
us today.

The situation in Syria continues to be shameful. The
country continues to be immersed in a bloody civil war
that, after six years, has left it in ruins and destroyed
the own roots of its society. However, for the first time
in many months, there seems to be some improvement.
The end of the military conflict in eastern Aleppo, the
swift evacuation of its population and the cessation
of hostilities at the end of December, reflected in
resolution 2336 (2016), have made it possible to reduce
substantially the levels of violence in some areas,
giving its inhabitants necessary respite.

In addition, the meeting in Astana that took place
this week makes it possible to hope that next month in
Geneva the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, will manage, based on
those exchanges, to give significant new momentum to
the political process to put an end to conflict. All of
us here trust in the ability of Mr. De Mistura to bring
the parties together, reduce tensions and still-existing
distrust and to work on the road map charted by
resolution 2254 (2015) to achieve a process of political
transition that would benefit the Syrian people. He has
our full support.

Nevertheless, we are still seriously concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Syria which, as pointed out
by the briefers today, presents quite a different picture
than the political process. Although the end of the siege
of eastern Aleppo was a necessary relief, which made
it possible to reduce significantly the total number of
people residing in besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
almost 700,000 people remain there, subsisting with
extreme needs, their situation aggravated by the hard
winter conditions.

It is neither acceptable nor tolerable that, in spite of
the tremendous effort made by humanitarian workers
of the United Nations and its partners in the field, in
December barely 1 per cent ofthe total of the population
could be reached. Neither is it acceptable or tolerable
that none of the convoys included in the January plan
were able to reach the recipients, with the exception of
one that arrived in Muadamiyat Al-Sham on 7 January
as part of a plan approved in November.

It is also highly worrying that, despite the cessation
of hostilities in force and the end of the seige of eastern
Aleppo, humanitarian access seems to be worsening
instead of improving. Also, with regard to deliveries
by air in Deir ez-Ezzor, and after the excellent work
undertaken by the World Food Programme, which
has completed 177 deliveries to date, unfortunately,
on 15 January operations were suspended due to the
intense fighting in the area. We hope that they can
restart shortly.

I wish to briefly mention the situation in Wadi
Barada. Let it be clear: the sabotage over the past
month of the water supplies that serve the capital,
Damascus, and surrounding areas - whoever may be
responsible - should be considered a war crime, one
of many suffered daily by the Syrian people. We hope
that soon a cease fire will be achieved that will make
it possible to quickly re-establish access to drinking
water for more than 5 million people.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the priorities
of Uruguay with regard to substantially improving
the Syrian humanitarian situation. It is necessary that
the cessation of hostilities be consolidated throughout
the territory; that all parties to the conflict continue
to protect and improve the protection of citizens,
infrastructure, hospitals and medical and health-care
staff; that all sieges be lifted; that, in accordance with
the monthly plans submitted by the United Nations,
immediate and sustained humanitarian access be
granted throughout the country; that the fight against
terrorism in all its forms be continued; and that
progress be made towards reaching a political solution
to the conflict.

