Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of May. I extend my sincere
thanks to you for providing me with this opportunity to
speak before the Council.

We too have taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
5
Nepal (UNMIN) (S/2010/214), which highlights an
assessment of the situation in Nepal over the past four
months. Furthermore, I acknowledge the remarks just
made by Ms. Karin Landgren, Representative of the
Secretary-General, on the latest status of Nepal's peace
process. However, I would like to stress that conflict
has not returned to Nepal and that the overall situation
is very much under control despite the current tensions.

The Council is aware that at the moment, we are
going through a difficult time in the country, with some
roadblocks in the peace process and the constitution-
making exercise, coupled with the agitation caused by
the opposition party. Following the past tradition of
resolving mutual differences with dialogue and
compromise, we are hopeful that it will be possible to
bridge the differences, while keeping the long-term
perspective of the peace process in mind.

Commitment to and the effective fulfilment of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement are key to movement
out of the current situation. After all, it was to raise the
quality of life of the people through stable, democratic
and accountable governance that Nepal went through
various movements and transformation processes in the
past several decades. The general welfare of the
greatest number of people, if not immediately all the
people, is the fulcrum around which the whole process
of change and progress revolves. It is on that basis that
the resolution of the current situation will be found. As
I speak here, substantive and serious dialogue is under
way among the major political parties in order to find a
reasonable compromise that we hope will substantially
move forward the peace process.

The Government of Nepal is committed to
making sure that we reach the logical conclusion of the
peace process, with the sole objective of ensuring
stability, peace and prosperity for the people of Nepal.
The people of Nepal have long waited, with great hope
and expectation, to resolutely move ahead towards the
post-transition era.

Looking over the long term perspective, however,
the nationally driven peace process of Nepal has
achieved some remarkable progress since the signing of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement on 21 November
2006. The promulgation of the Interim Constitution,
followed by the elections to the Constituent Assembly,
and subsequently, the declaration of Nepal as the
Federal Democratic Republic stand as notable
achievements. Moreover, in the past several months, the
6

successful discharge of disqualified Maoist combatants,
with the help of the United Nations, has reinforced our
belief that our peace process can deliver substantial
progress, even though at times it moves slowly, with
occasional setbacks. The fact that the process of
discharging the disqualified was completed recently,
within the shortest possible time once it started, also
reassures us that once modalities are agreed upon,
implementation of the issues in question will be
expedited.

We have seen elsewhere in the world that
transition from a situation of armed conflict to one of
lasting peace and stability is always fraught with many
uncertainties and obstacles. That is the nature of such
conflict-induced transformations. We may establish
peace with a great breakthrough, but for peace to be
sustained, we need to address a myriad of issues that
surround that undertaking.

Nepal's peace process, historic and unique as it
is, is not confined solely to the signing of the Peace
Agreement and elections to the Constituent Assembly.
It also means writing a constitution that guarantees
multiparty democracy, human rights, a federal structure
and inclusive governance. It has a much broader
agenda to deal with the historic transformation of
Nepal's political, economic and social structure.

This transformation process is, undoubtedly, a
colossal task by any measure. Taking this historic
challenge as an opportunity, we have already taken
some hard-hitting but specific measures to ensure
inclusiveness and democratic governance. The
Government and all the stakeholders in Nepal have,
therefore, time and again expressed commitment to
bringing the peace process to a meaningful conclusion
with that broad objective.

Concerns have been expressed in different
quarters as to the future course of Nepal's peace
process, especially in the light of the slow progress in
meeting the constitutional deadline to promulgate a new
constitution for the country, which is an integral part of
the peace process. I take this opportunity to assure the
Council that dialogue is continuing among the major
political parties on the future course of action to be
followed in the post-28 May 2010 situation.

Given the seriousness of the issues involved and
the commitment of the major political players to
resolving the deadlock through dialogue, we are
hopeful that a solution acceptable to all stakeholders in
the peace process and to the general public will be
found, with a view to ensuring that Nepal's peace
process reaches its logical end in a reasonable period
of time, in keeping with the high hopes and aspirations
of the Nepalese people.

The Government and the people of Nepal remain
thankful to the United Nations for having provided a
helping hand since the advent of our peace process.
UNMIN has already accomplished many of the tasks
set out in its original mandate by fulfilling many of the
key responsibilities, including the elections to the
Constituent Assembly.

There are always successes and shortcomings in a
complex peace process like ours. We need to build on
the positive prospects to maintain the momentum, and
we are aware of that. For that reason, and also as we
are at an important juncture of the peace process, the
Government of Nepal has decided to seek the extension
of UNMIN's mandate.
10-34793

As the Government of Nepal is fully committed
to pursuing the peace process with vigour and agility,
with the help of all stakeholders, we are confident that
we will be able to conclude the peace process with
tangible progress in the days ahead. We highly value
the international goodwill, support and cooperation in
our peace process, including that of the Security
Council.

I am hopeful that the Council will favourably
consider the request of my Government for the
extension of the mandate of UNMIN until 15 September
2010.

