The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
thank Council members for this opportunity to brief the
Council on the situation in Zimbabwe.

I have just returned from the African Union
summit in Sharm el-Sheikh, where I conveyed to
leaders the Secretary-General's message that the crisis
in Zimbabwe represents a moment of truth for
democracy on the continent. Today, I would like to
convey to the Council that the Zimbabwe issue also
poses a challenge to the world.

When an election is conducted in an atmosphere
of fear and violence, its outcome cannot have a
legitimacy that is built on the will of the people.
Consequently, the principle of democracy is at stake.
Zimbabwe's flawed elections produced illegitimate
results. The seriousness of the situation and its possible
consequences have the potential to effect regional
peace and security in profound ways.

Since the last briefing to the Security Council on
this question, by Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe
2

(see S/PV.59l9), Zimbabwe held a presidential election
with only one contender, incumbent President Robert
Mugabe, who sought his sixth term in office. The
Council will recall that Movement for Democratic
Change (MDC) leader Morgan Tsvangirai had been
declared the winner, with 47.9 per cent of the vote. As
Council members are aware, that result was not enough
to avoid a run-off. Mr. Tsvangirai withdrew from the
run-off, arguing that State-sponsored violence,
intimidation and the killing of over 80 of his supporters
made free and fair elections impossible.

Despite calls for the election to be postponed
until proper conditions were in place, including by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, second-round
elections were held on Friday, 27 June. Unlike in the
first round, this time there were no national observers
on the ground, as both the Zimbabwe Election Support
Network, which had covered the first round in a very
efficient manner, and the non-governmental
organization Lawyers for Human Rights withdrew,
citing the lack of minimal conditions to operate.

The lack of national observation stripped the
elections of a critical measure of transparency and
credibility. However, missions from the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), the African
Union and the Pan-African Parliament were present on
the ground. Anticipating increased tensions in the
second round, the regional groups had substantially
augmented the number of observers for the second
round. SADC more than doubled its contingent,
deploying over 400 observers, compared to 163 in the
first round. The African Union deployed over
60 observers, compared to just under 20 in the first
round, and the Pan-African Parliament deployed 30.
The United Nations provided logistic and technical
support to SADC efforts to increase observation in the
second round. The observers included parliamentarians
of both the ruling and opposition parties, members of
civil society and civil servants. I would like to say a
word of appreciation for the work of those observers,
many of whom were themselves intimidated and
harassed in the conduct of their duties and showed
commendable courage.

On election day, observers reported many
irregularities. A serious example is that voters were
required to report the serial number of their ballots to
Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front
(ZANU-PF) officials, rendering the concept of
anonymous voting utterly meaningless. Some people
08-41390
spoiled their ballots in protest; spoiled ballots
accounted for 5.1 per cent of the total votes. Voting
took place on 27 June, and official results stated that
President Mugabe had won with 85.5 per cent of the
votes. He was inaugurated on 29 June and subsequently
travelled to Egypt to participate in the African Union
summit.

It is of note that the three African observer
missions present on the ground issued unequivocal
condemnations of the electoral process and its results.
The Pan-African Parliament observer mission stated
that "these elections were not free and fair", and that
"Conditions should be put in place for the holding of
free, fair and credible elections as soon as possible, in
line with the African Union declaration on the
principles governing democratic elections".

The SADC mission stated that the process
leading up to the presidential run-off elections did not
conform to its principles and guidelines governing
democratic elections. In addition, it stated that the
election did not represent the will of the people of
Zimbabwe. Finally, the African Union observer
mission also concluded that the election process fell
short of the accepted African Union standards, citing
the violence in the run-up to the elections and the lack
of access to the media.

Those observations clearly indicate that the
electoral process leading to the declared re-election of
President Mugabe was seriously flawed. This profound
crisis of legitimacy is further compounded by the
paralysis of State institutions. There is currently no
functioning parliament. Civil society has been silenced
and intimidated. The economy is crippled, with annual
inflation reaching 10.5 million per cent by the end of
June and unemployment being over 80 per cent, and
severe shortages of food and basic services exist. There
is an urgent need to restore the rule of law and to start
building public institutions.

It is clear that Zimbabwe will have to go through
a political transition, bringing together its people
around a common project. It will also need a process of
national healing and reconciliation, which should
include wide-ranging and participatory national
consultations.

Recognizing that the country is deeply divided
and that the political future of Zimbabwe depends on a
transitional arrangement promoting national unity, both
ZANU-PF and the MDC have accepted a dialogue
08-41390

towards a negotiated settlement. Talks are ongoing
under South African mediation to press for an urgent
solution to the current political impasse. President
Mbeki has been actively consulting with the concerned
parties and is reported to be working towards a direct
meeting between President Mugabe and the MDC
leader, Mr. Morgan Tsvangirai.

In my meetings with the African Union
Commission Chairperson, Mr. Jean Ping, and other
African leaders, some of whom expressed their fear
that the situation would deteriorate further, I expressed
my appreciation for their efforts thus far and my hope
that they would remain fully engaged in helping the
people of Zimbabwe. The creation of a government of
national unity as a way forward enjoys broad support
in the region. In its declaration, the African Union
called for SADC efforts to be continued and
strengthened by the establishment of a mechanism on
the ground to support the mediation efforts. The
Secretary-General strongly supports that recommendation
and calls for the speedy establishment of such a
mechanism. I also reiterated the Secretary-General's
offer to put all the means at the disposal of the United
Nations at the service of SADC and the African Union
to strengthen the mediation process.

While the willingness of the parties to talk is
encouraging, the Secretary-General remains gravely
concerned that the situation could deteriorate further,
with violence spreading across the country and its effects
spilling over into the region. Secretary-General Ban also
remains very concerned about the humanitarian situation
in the country. If it is not attended to, the food shortage
could leave 5.1 million people at great risk.

The Secretary-General therefore calls on the
authorities in Zimbabwe to immediately lift restrictions
on humanitarian activities. He also urges them to offer
immediate protection to people currently located at the
Ruwa transit centre, who were relocated from the
South African embassy, where they had taken refuge.

As the world mobilizes to support a peaceful
solution to the crisis and to help Zimbabwe back on the
path towards democracy, stability and development, it
is the urgent responsibility of the Government of
Zimbabwe to protect its citizens and to cease
immediately all forms of violence. The victims of the
violence experienced in the past weeks deserve justice.
Those who perpetrate crimes must be held to account.
The United Nations stands ready to play its part in
supporting such a process.
3
