Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
will begin by thanking the Secretary-General and the
Department of Political Affairs for their reports
(S/2011/693 and S/2011/704, respectively). I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Abou Moussa, for his briefing.

I would like to welcome the Secretary-General of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations and our colleagues from
the Central African Republic and South Sudan.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) is one of the
most brutal terrorist organizations on the planet. Its
leaders, including Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and
Dominic Ongwen, all under indictment by the
International Criminal Court for crimes against
humanity, continue to hold hundreds of abductees
hostage, forcing them to loot, rape and kill. There is no
ambiguity here; the LRA's continued activity is an
affront to human dignity and a stain on our collective
conscience.

The United States Congress and President Obama
have responded. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General and graciously mentioned by the
Ambassador of Gabon this morning, President Obama
announced last month that the United Nations would
deploy a small number of military personnel to the
LRA-affected region, in consultation with host
Governments, to act as advisers to regional militaries
pursuing the LRA. That deployment is in line with the
LRA Disarmament and Northern Uganda Recovery
Act, which was passed last year by our Congress with
widespread bipartisan support.
Sending American personnel in a non-combat
capacity crystallizes the United States commitment to
supporting regional partners and ending this threat. Our
advisers will work to enhance the capacity of regional
militaries to coordinate and fuse intelligence with
effective operational planning. United States forces
will not engage in direct action against the LRA, but
they will be equipped for self-defence.

The United States notes the importance of the
continued leadership and cooperation of the regional
Governments in this effort. Over recent years, regional
militaries have worked together to pursue the LRA
across a vast area of dense jungle. They have had some
success in reducing the LRA's numbers and keeping
them from regrouping.

The United States is committed to working with
the Governments of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of
South Sudan and Uganda, as well as the African Union
(AU) and the United Nations, to end the threat posed
by the Lord's Resistance Army. We hope that, with our
enhanced support, they will be able to make a final
push to bring an end to this long-standing problem.

We will be working to ensure that protection of
civilians is incorporated into operational planning. We
are encouraged to hear that once again the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) will
be taking proactive steps, as it did last year, to ensure
civilian protection over the Christmas period, given
that massacres have occurred previously at that time.

As we work together to increase military pressure
on the LRA, we also believe that there should be a
renewed push to get LRA fighters and abductees to
escape and defect. In the last month, some 30 women
and children have left the organization's ranks in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are receiving
food, medical attention and transportation assistance to
return home and reunite with their families. Several of
them are already at rehabilitation centres in Uganda,
where they are receiving support to reintegrate into
society.

MONUSCO has done excellent work in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to encourage and
facilitate LRA defections, but no organization is yet
playing a similar role across the border in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. We encourage the
United Nations to work with regional Governments and
other relevant United Nations missions to address these
gaps and develop a coordinated regional approach to
encourage LRA defections. The AU, through its
Special Envoy, can also play an important role in this
area.

The United States fully supports the important
work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) in the Central African subregion. We
commend Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Moussa for his efforts in standing up
UNOCA's operations and embarking on a very
ambitious and substantive diplomatic agenda. We
encourage UNOCA's continued efforts to enhance the
coordination of United Nations missions working in
the region and advance cooperation with regional
organizations, including ECCAS and the AU. We hope
that UNOCA will work to establish a clear structure
with focal points in all of the United Nations missions
in the LRA-affected area as well as the United Nations
Office to the African Union to help ensure better
coordination in information-sharing.

We join regional Governments in calling on the
remaining members of the LRA to disarm peacefully,
go home and take advantage of offers of reintegration
support. As President Obama said a year ago upon
signing the LRA Disarmament and Northern Uganda
Recovery Act: "We mourn those killed; we pray for
those abducted to be freed; we call on the ranks of the
LRA to disarm and surrender".

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement, which we hope will be adopted shortly.

