Mr. Vale De Almeida (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its 28 member States.

I thank the Secretary General for his report
(S/2016/753), and the Special Representative for her
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.

The following countries align themselves with this
statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; potential candidate country Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.

At the outset, I would like to convey our
condolences to the Government and the people of Haiti,
who have been affected by Hurricane Matthew. The
European Union, in solidarity with the people of Haiti,
has decided to step up its support with a contribution of
€1.5 million of emergency assistance to meet immediate
needs. That funding is in addition to the €255,000 of
humanitarian aid initially provided by the European
Union and the funds made available by our members
under the European Civil Protection Mechanism.

Following the contested outcome of the elections in
August and October 2015, the first round ofpresidential
elections was annulled. The term of office of the
interim President, which expired in June this year, was
not renewed. The country is therefore in an anomalous
institutional situation, and one that is very fragile.
The completion of the electoral process in a context
of legitimacy and transparency is the fundamental
precondition for ensuring political and institutional
stability. Concluding the process is also an urgent need
to allow Haiti to face up to the many economic, social
and environmental challenges facing the country.

As in recent years, the efforts of all to ensure
stability and security continue to be vital for the
democratic consolidation process. The European Union
remains a faithful partner of the Republic of Haiti and
continues to be determined to support the country
during this delicate stage, working with other partners.

The European Union supported the holding of
general elections in Haiti both in August and October
2015 in two ways: through a financial contribution of
€5 million to the Trust Fund managed by the United
Nations system, and by sending an election observation
mission, which was requested by the Haitian authorities
and in agreement with them. That mission, in a totally
independent manner and according to a methodology
and an established code of conduct in line with
international standards, verified the compliance of all
stages of the process with regional and international
obligations and standards for elections, as well as with
Haitian legislation.

According to the mission's observations, despite
some irregularities, there were no significant problems
with the outcomes of the first round of the presidential
elections. However, the annulment of the results of
the first round of the presidential elections and its
consequences, which in fact go against the conclusions
of the European Union election observation mission,
led the High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the
European Commission to take the decision to withdraw
that election observation mission.

Beyond the judgment that the international
community might draw on the annulment of the first
round of the presidential elections, following a process
that was not provided for under Haitian law and was
not based on any agreement, it is clear that, in any
case, the electoral process must continue and lead to
peace, inclusion, transparency and legitimacy. As soon
as possible the country must return to constitutional
normality, with a President and a Government that are
elected in transparent, inclusive and credible elections.

The European Union has taken note of the revised
electoral timetable, which was announced by the
Provisional Electoral Council, and the delay in the
balloting planned for 9 October due to the impact of
Hurricane Matthew. We call upon all political actors
in Haiti, in particular the interim President, to do
everything possible to complete the electoral cycle
under way and return to constitutional order as soon
as possible. Everyone must demonstrate responsibility
and restraint in that regard.

The European Union is a long-time supporter and
a friend of Haiti. It is also one of its main donors in
terms of emergency assistance and in development
aid. This financial support from the European Union,
however, depends on respect for democratic principles,
including the right of the people to choose their own
Government through the ballot box, and not through
street demonstrations. Political conditionality clauses
are an integral part of the Cotonou Agreement, which
links the European Union to the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States, of which Haiti is a member.
Institutional stability is essential if European aid is to
be effective and produce lasting effects that benefit
the population. It is urgent and necessary to establish
democratically elected and legitimate institutions that
can immediately address the major economic and
structural challenges the country faces.

Although the overall security situation remains

stable, it is nonetheless fragile due to tensions caused by
the electoral climate. The European Union commends
the professionalism of the Haitian National Police, which
successfully managed the recent events on its own, for
the most part. It believes that the presence of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in the country, and in particular its support in
maintaining security during elections, always bearing
in mind respect for and the protection of human rights
and the principles of sovereignty, remain important,
even now, in ensuring that the process continues and
that peace and stability prevail. Once conditions allow,
based on the Secretary-General's recommendations, we
encourage reflection on the future of MINUSTAH.

In conclusion, I would like to express the European
Union's gratitude for the significant contribution made
by MINUSTAH to stabilizing the security situation and
bolstering democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. The
European Union remains committed to supporting the
efforts of the Haitian authorities, the United Nations
and the international community to ensure a better
future for the people of Haiti.

