Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Sir, for presiding over this very important debate. Let
me begin by welcoming the Secretary-General's latest
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2008/617) and
by thanking Special Representative Eide for his
briefing and for the leadership and commitment he has
shown since his appointment in March. We commend
him and his team for all their efforts in what we know
are very challenging circumstances. We also welcome
the contribution to today's debate made by Ambassador
Tanin of Afghanistan.

Strong United Nations leadership must continue
to be at the heart of the international approach in
Afghanistan. We welcome Mr. Eide's work to
restructure and strengthen the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) so that it
can better deliver in terms of our agreed priorities. We
shall take very seriously the eight steps that he has
proposed should be completed in the coming six
months.

We look forward to agreement later this year on
an increase in resources for the UNAMA mission to
allow it to increase its crucial work on governance, on
implementing the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, on aid effectiveness, on the humanitarian
challenge and on improving United Nations and
broader international coordination. That work is central
to long-term success in Afghanistan, and UNAMA's
work in support of the Government of Afghanistan to
help prepare for elections next year is particularly
important. Broad participation is crucial, and the
United Kingdom welcomes the work now under way
on voter registration.

The focus of the international debate is often on
security. That is for very good reasons, but it is a
mistake to focus on security alone, or indeed in
isolation from issues of governance and development.
As many of those involved in Afghanistan have been
saying for some time, the insurgency cannot be
defeated by military means alone. We have heard that
several times around this table today. The military
effort will of course remain a crucial element of our
approach for some time to come, as the Special
Representative has said. But equally important are
efforts by the Afghan Government, supported by
UNAMA and others in the international community, to
deliver effective governance, encourage economic
growth and build an inclusive democratic process that
provides a voice for all those prepared to pursue their
goals through political means.

The challenge for all of us is to enable the
Afghans to deliver that vision for themselves. Progress
has been made. The Afghan National Army is 65,000
strong and continues to grow, both in number and in
professionalism. It already plays a central role
alongside international forces in containing the
insurgency. The significant progress it has made shows
that Afghanistan has the capacity to deliver once it has
the infrastructure in place.

Elsewhere, we have seen less progress,
particularly on governance and on tackling corruption.
Building a professional police force is essential if we
are to deliver the benefits of central Government to
ordinary Afghans, and we need more progress in that
area. The appointment of a new Minister of the Interior
is a welcome step, as are the other ministerial changes
announced last weekend.

All the challenges facing Afghanistan are
rendered more difficult by the pernicious influence of
narcotics. We have seen some progress this year, as the
Special Representative pointed out - a 19 per cent
decrease in overall opium production and an increase
in the number of poppy-free provinces from 13 last
year to 18 this year. We cannot be complacent,
however. The growth in production in areas of poor
security, such as Helmand, remains a real concern. The
United Kingdom volunteered to be the lead partner
country on counter-narcotics to help the Afghan
Government, and it was no coincidence that we agreed
that our forces should be deployed to Helmand, one of
the most demanding provinces in terms of restoring
security, which is an essential step to ridding the
province of narcotics production.

Concern has rightly been expressed about civilian
casualties, including in the Secretary-General's report.
As I have said before in this Chamber, any civilian
death is a death too many. That is why the international
forces in Afghanistan go to great lengths to minimize
the risk of civilian casualties, including by warning
local populations of impending operations whenever
possible. It is right, however, that we constantly
re-evaluate and, where necessary, improve our
procedures on the basis of experience. We should also
constantly bear in mind the Special Representative's
remarks about where the primary responsibility for
civilian casualties lies. It lies with the insurgency and
with those responsible for what he calls "asymmetric"
attacks - that is, attacks aimed at civilians or heedless
of civilian casualties.
The Secretary-General's report rightly highlights
the range of challenges we face in Afghanistan. We
will succeed in tackling those challenges only if we
maintain a comprehensive approach. Security cannot
come without sustained work on governance,

development and capacity-building, and vice versa.
Mr. Eide has also spoken recently of the need for the
international community to demonstrate renewed
energy and commitment to a lasting solution for
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom supports that call
and will continue to play its part in securing a stable
and prosperous future for its Afghan friends.

