Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let be start by
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month. I also thank the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Inzko, for his important report (S/2016/911, annx)
and his valuable work.

Croatia aligns itself with statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU) and I would
like to make some remarks in its national capacity.

As a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears a special responsibility towards Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
first EU neighbour, also bears a special responsibility
towards Croats as one of the constituent peoples,
whose genuine institutional equality with the other
two peoples and all citizens will enable a more
functional, viable and efficient, and thus stable,
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina are
therefore a foreign policy priority and its integration
into the European Union and NATO a strategic goal of
the Republic of Croatia. This was clearly demonstrated
by the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina was the first
country that the new Prime Minister of Croatia visited
after taking office. A stable, peaceful and prosperous
Bosnia and Herzegovina contributes to the stability of
South-East Europe as well as to that of the European
Union as a whole.

The European and Euro-Atlantic perspective of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a goal that Croatia will
continue to staunchly support. We see the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the EU and NATO as
the best catalyst for addressing internal outstanding
issues as well as a safeguard for ensuring further
democratization, the strengthening of institutions,
freedom of the media and an independent judiciary.
We welcome the September conclusions of the
Council of the EU, which tasked the Commission with
preparing an opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's
application for membership in the EU. This is an
important milestone for Bosnia and Herzegovina
because it reaffirms its commitment to the process of
European integration, including European values and
standards. This important development is the result
of the hard work and commitment of the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we commend them
for that.

Steps forward have been taken on the Reform
Agenda-related laws that have been adopted at both the
State and entity level. The credibility and sustainability
of reforms must be sustained in the interest of all
citizens, the State itself and regional stability.

The agreement on the coordination mechanism
achieved in July is of great importance for the credible
implementation of the Stabilization Association
Agreement and, later, the negotiations with the EU.
Croatia is looking forward to the finalization of the
process of the adaptation of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with a swift signing and the
provisional application of the Protocol.

We can say that the new EU approach has proved
effective and is yielding its initial results. Additionally,
it has helped Bosnia and Herzegovina step out of the
stalemate and bring the country to the next stage of its
relations with the European Union.

We have invested a great deal in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's stability and in fostering the EU agenda
through all of the EU's instruments, including through
the Special Representative and Operation Althea of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (EUFOR). It is important for the
EU to remain actively engaged in preserving safety
and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina; that is why
we support the extension of the executive mandate of
EUFOR Althea and its substantial contribution.

In order for Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully
to address all of the challenges that it will face at the
next stage of the European integration process, all
available European tools and policies should be put at
its disposal. Croatia will, for its part, make available its
expertise and know-how from our accession process.

The progress made on the European path has
not been mirrored by internal developments. On the
contrary, some of the internal political dynamics are
cause for concern. We have said it before and we will
say it again: the referendum held in Republika Srpska
runs counter to the decision of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and undermines the
stability of the country. Such activities challenge the
founding principles of the Dayton Peace Agreement
and are unconstitutional and dangerous.

Local elections, while on the whole conducted in
a peaceful and orderly way, revealed divisions and
mistrust in an environment in which it is crucial to
promote tolerance and coexistence. Moreover, the
incident that took place in Stolac involved a violent
physical assault against a representative of the Central
Election Commission. Any violence or election
irregularities should be condemned in the clearest
possible terms. We trust the local institutions to
find institutional solutions to problems as well as to
investigate and prosecute unlawful activities.

We also regret the fact that the elections in Mostar
were not held together with the local elections in the
rest of the country, on 2 October. We encourage the
finding of a solution for the implementation of the
Constitutional Court ruling on Mostar, so that its
citizens are not deprived of their right to vote.

Croatia encourages the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to implement the Sejdic' and Finci
ruling in order to move forward its European agenda
and contribute to establishing a democratic and
well-functioning society in which the equality of
all constituent peoples and citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is guaranteed and safeguarded.

Finally, the rule of law must be promoted and
protected, including the fight against corruption and
organized crime, while all outstanding deficiencies
of the judiciary must be addressed. In this regard, the
need for the depoliticization of the judiciary and for
its impartiality and independence, especially in the
prosecution of war crimes, should receive strong focus.

Bosnia and Herzegovina, a State with a
1,000-kilometre-long land border with Croatia and the
EU, remains our priority, and we shall spare no effort The meeting rose at 12.25p.m.
to help our neighbour on its path towards enhanced
stability and long-term prosperity.
