Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Building a sustainable peace in countries that have
suffered from armed conflict is one of the most
difficult challenges we face, so I thank you, Madam
Minister, for scheduling this debate. I am grateful to
those who presented briefings, and I should like to
associate myself with the remarks to be made later by
Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the European Union.

I shall shorten my intervention, Madam President,
to comply with your request at the beginning of today's
meeting.

The rule of law is an essential element in
establishing democracy, but it is not enough in itself.
The goal for countries emerging from conflict is to be
able to transform themselves into democratic States -
not only States that respect law, but States whose
citizens are bound together by common commitments
and objectives, regardless of ethnicity, religion, past
division or conflict. The minimum is coexistence
among citizens; much better are productive cooperation
and harmonious, peaceful living together.

History, if it has taught us anything, has shown us
that cycles of conflict are truly broken where political
and social measures accompany legal ones and where
the participatory and emotional elements of
reconciliation are not overlooked. Finding ways and
processes that enable people to participate in the
rebuilding of their country and to deal with those
emotions is perhaps the most difficult challenge. It
seems to the United Kingdom that, in many ways,
reconciliation is about trust: promoting it where it has
never existed and re-establishing it where it has been
lost - trust between communities on different sides of
a conflict, between groups within society or between
citizens and their Government. It is a bridge from being
in a state of conflict to reaching a shared peace, and,
where it includes the end to injustice, it can provide a
foundation for preventing future atrocities.

As others have said, there is no one blueprint for
justice and reconciliation that fits all cases; different
approaches fit different countries. Experience suggests
that a reconciliation process has the best chance of
success if it is built from the ground level. Durability is
best guaranteed by local ownership. If the people of the
conflicting parties or ethnic groups - both
perpetrators and victims - are to be encouraged to
enter that painful process, then they need to have a
common purpose to rebuild their societies. Different
models exist and have been described by others.

There are issues of sequencing. In that regard,
permit me, if I may, to borrow from some recent
comments by Lakhdar Brahimi, who said that there are
three key steps to establishing justice and the rule of
law: first, injustice needs to be ended; secondly, a fair
judicial system needs to be created; and it is right to
take the third step - of tackling past crimes - only
when those two steps have been taken. So perhaps
there is a time and a place to pursue justice and
reconciliation vigorously and a time and a place to hold
back.

The key focus of today's discussion is how best
the United Nations can help. Few would argue with the
moral authority of the United Nations, an impartial
actor with the weight of the international community
behind it. Politically, not only has the United Nations
played a key role in facilitating peace processes around
the world, but, at the country level, United Nations
country teams, Resident Coordinators and agencies
have sometimes played a more subtle convening role in
difficult situations, bringing together various
stakeholders to start a dialogue or facilitating a
planning process to bring about consensus on the way
forward for a difficult set of issues.

United Nations peacekeeping operations around
the world can provide the essential security framework
that is the catalyst for national reconciliation to
proceed - a framework for security that allows
communities to re-establish some sense of normality in
their lives, to restart economic activity and to move
more freely. And it is in development terms that the
programmes of United Nations agencies aim to
facilitate the building of basic elements of human
security: good governance, security sector reform,
participation, justice, health, education and economic
opportunities. All those processes, as we have heard,
support national reconciliation.

Given the United Nations experience of
reconciliation, how can we ensure better use of best
practices? First, I would suggest that we should
encourage the agencies to maintain - and indeed to
enhance - their excellent work. Secondly, we might
support United Nations efforts to identify and use the
network of reconciliation practitioners: United Nations
staff who have experienced reconciliation first-hand
and can put that experience to good use in a different
context. Thirdly, we should make creative use of
information systems to provide the huge benefits of
lessons learned and best practices, ensuring that
information is shared quickly and easily among the
right people so that the United Nations has the capacity
at Headquarters to mobilize and moderate such
information and best practices. And fourthly, we might
continue to encourage an integrated approach among
the various parts of the United Nations system so that
lessons on the political, peacekeeping and
developmental approaches can be shared, with no sense
of departmental boundaries.

Re-establishing justice and starting to reconcile
communities that were once in conflict will inevitably
be an imperfect process, but the United Nations can
and should play a central supporting role. It has the
right tools to make a contribution and breadth of
experience that enables it to add value where others
cannot. I hope that this debate that you have launched,
Madam President, will be the start of our consideration
of how we can better support the United Nations to be
more effective in this area, but not only here in the
Council: given the interest that all parts of the United
Nations have, that consideration should be taken
forward coherently in the General Assembly, in the
Economic and Social Council and in the executive
boards.

