Mr. Baudin (Senegal)(spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on your well-
deserved election. We in Senegal attach particular
importance to it as we know both you and, of course,
your country.

Peace, security, political stability, the democratic
rule of law and respect for fundamental human rights and
liberties are all, I believe, necessary conditions for
development. Senegal and its head of State, President
Abdou Diouf, are committed to these principles on which
we base our foreign policy choices and directions.

My delegation welcomes the high quality of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/ 1999/ 1008) and we are
delighted at the remarkable follow-up work by the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the other organs and institutions
of the United Nations on the recommendations contained
in his earlier report (S/1998/318). We welcome also the
important statement made within this forum by the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity

 

(OAU), Dr. Salim Ahmed Salim, on the situation in Africa.

It is of utmost priority that we should continue our
consideration of the potential sources of conflict in Africa
because the situation on the continent is evolving very
rapidly. In addition to the conventional types of conflict
which still persist, there are conflicts of a new type; they
are a new generation of more complex conflicts, with new
protagonists, stemming from domestic contradictions.
Examples of this latter type are: fratricidal, political
struggles between the opposition and those in power, with
the militias in between, in defiance of the democratic rules
of the game and the legally established constitutional order;
mutinies by factions of national armed forces which start
out as simple material or financial claims and mutate into
political demands; the ethnicization of political and social
life; the heightening of identity-related conflicts; and the
problems stemming from the difficulties involved in
managing armed ethnic bands, especially in refugee camps.

I must mention also the dangerous attempts by some
countries to revise their border policies and their relations
with neighbours. Revising borders calls into question the
principle that the borders inherited from the colonial period
must not be touched.

These conflicts are made even more difficult by the
huge rise in banditry, illicit trafficking in narcotics and
psychotropic substances and the uncontrolled circulation of
arms, especially small arms and light weapons, in a
continent characterized by porous borders.

Obviously the list cannot be exhaustive because there
are so many explanations of the sources of tension and
conflicts are multiple, complex and interacting. My
delegation is pleased that the Secretary-General has taken
the specificity of the African situation in his analysis and
recommendations into account. It is pleased also that the
Security Council has decided: to strengthen its support for
regional and subregional initiatives for the prevention,
management and settlement of crises in Africa; create a
support mechanism for the governments of host countries
to enable them to maintain and preserve the security and
neutrality of refugee camps; and to strengthen African
peacekeeping capabilities.

The provisions of Security Council resolution 1197
(1998), concerning the establishment within OAU of an
early warning system based on the model currently being
used by the United Nations and the strengthening of the
OAU conflict management centre, must be implemented
with all the required resources. Similarly, contributions
should be made to finance the United Nations Trust Fund
for that purpose and the OAU Peace Fund. Mechanisms
for the exchange of information between the United
Nations and OAU and between the United Nations and
subregional organizations - the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), for example - should
be considerably improved.

Even though the primary responsibility of
maintaining security and the civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps and areas always lies with the
host State, the international community is duty bound to
assist governments in this task and, above all, to bear the
bulk of the costs to African States whose financial and
logistic capacities are limited. To this end, my country
wishes to appeal to our development partners for a
considerable increase in the resources available to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), given the immensity and complexity
of the UNHCR's tasks and responsibilities. My country,
which actively participated in the adoption of the
ECOWAS Moratorium on the Import, Export and
Manufacturing of Small Arms, remains prepared to
participate in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms and to contribute to the establishment of appropriate
regional and subregional registries. In the same spirit, we
will be contributing to the success of the OAU regional
conference on small arms decided upon by the Algiers
summit.

Equal importance should be attached to post-conflict
peace-building. How many crises did we considered
resolved, only to see them re-emerge because of a lack of
vigorous support for Governments to build peace and
reconstruct what had been destroyed. If truth be told,
post-conflict management remains one of the weak points
of our joint action. It is hard to understand that countries
emerging from a conflict should be treated routinely when
it comes to assistance, financing or debt management, for
example. They ought to enjoy special treatment; this is a
fundamental prerequisite to ensure the success of efforts
at reconstruction, reintegration of ex-combatants and
national reconciliation.

I also commend the Secretary-General's proposal to
create a group composed of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the United Nations to
study special support mechanisms for countries in a post-
conflict situation, or those countries that are overwhelmed
by waves of refugees created by instability in their region.

 

It is of the utmost importance, in this framework, to take
into account the situation of child soldiers.

My delegation will have the opportunity to return to
the question of the follow-up of recommendations of an
economic and social nature in the report of the Secretary-
General when it is examined in the General Assembly.
Nonetheless, I want to emphasize the serious development
constraints facing our countries. Given the drastic decline
in official development assistance, the low level of financial
flows towards Africa - approximately 3 per cent of global
flows - the intolerable debt and debt servicing burden,
which erodes the erratic and steadily declining income from
exports, and the many obstacles to access of African
exports to world markets, it is important that the United
Nations and the international community strengthen their
support for the continent and that exceptional efforts be
made for the African countries involved in the twofold
process of economic and political reform.

Before concluding, I wish to restate sincerely my
country's gratitude to our partners and friends - France,
the United States and the United Kingdom - for their joint
initiative in supporting our peacekeeping and conflict
management efforts in Africa. Thanks to their cooperation,
and the efforts of Japan and other friendly countries in this
field, we have succeeded in training thousands of
peacekeeping troops and in improving and increasing our
logistic resources. Significant progress has been made in
this field, thanks to the commitment of African countries
and the support of our partners. Joint military manoeuvres
have been organized among the armed forces of the
countries of our subregion in order to train for possible
future crises.

The United States initiative to respond to crises in
Africa, and the tripartite initiative of France, the United
States and the United Kingdom to strengthen African
peacekeeping capacities, known by the acronym RECAMP,
have made African countries better equipped to participate
in peacekeeping operations and in crisis prevention and
management. We are continuing our work in this field, with
the support of friendly countries, and in cooperation with
the United Nations and the OAU.

As the Council knows, since its independence Senegal
has been contributing contingents to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa and elsewhere. We are
determined to continue our excellent cooperation with the
United Nations in this framework in order to ensure peace
and security in the world.

The resilience of African aspirations is such that the
international community must act quickly and well. While
we are of necessity convinced of this need, since
everyone knows the facts of the African problems, some
must move beyond the simple reflex reaction of posing
the problems, without any real will to find the proper
solutions.

I had almost finished, but some student memories
keep coming to mind. One is particularly persistent; I was
thinking about it all night and again this morning. It leads
me to remind the Council of a famous sentence by
Mirabeau, one of the great orators of the French
revolution, who said that in this world a defence can be
found for anything - except inconsistency. I hope that as
the twentieth century reaches its end we can together
reflect on that truth.

