Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his briefing on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. As usual, his
briefing was very descriptive and clearly explained the
situation on the ground. But I think the situation that he
described today is different from what we have seen in
the past. There have been some positive developments
in the country, which we very much welcome. The
transitional Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has finally been established. We sincerely
hope that there will be a fresh start in the history of the
Congolese people, and that that people will finally take
the road to stability, independence and prosperity.

We would also like to thank the Deputy High
Commissioner for Human Rights for his briefing. His
account of the human rights situation in Mambasa and
Drodro was truly shocking. Some of his
recommendations deserve further, detailed study by the
Council. Efforts to protect human rights need to be
further strengthened.

As a member of the Security Council, I
participated in the mission that visited the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I witnessed first-hand the
poverty, instability, violence and violations of human
rights. I also saw the child soldiers. Those children are
really very young. Some are not even as tall as the
weapons they carry. While visiting Bunia, we met with
officials of the interim administration and members of
non-governmental organizations present there. A
woman said something that I found unforgettable. At
the end of her statement, she pronounced two slogans.
The first was "Long live the Democratic Republic of
the Congo". That is easily understandable because, as a
resident of the country, she naturally hopes that her
country will become independent and prosperous.
However, it was her second slogan that was most
striking. She said, "Long live MONUC". Judging by
that, we can see that the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have great confidence in, and
expectations of, the United Nations and the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). That is because
MONUC has played a very good and positive role
among that long-suffering people. It can undoubtedly
provide warmth and security to people there. What that
woman said demonstrates that MONUC, by protecting
human rights in the country, has played a very positive
role. I think that her words are the best recognition of
MONUC's work. Since MONUC has played such a
positive role in the country, I would like to ask Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno to tell the Council what
more MONUC can do to protect human rights among
the people of that country.
