Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
It is both a pleasure and a source of pride for me to see
you, Sir, presiding over this important body. As you are
well aware, these sentiments are first and foremost due
to the very strong personal ties that bind us, as well as
to my delegation's confidence that, under your
presidency, the Security Council will surely carry out
useful work. That confidence is also borne out by our
knowledge of your thoroughness, competence and
sense of duty. We would also like to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Tafrov, on having presided
over the work of the Council last month with such
great skill.

It took the disaster of 11 September 2001 for the
entire world to comprehend the tragic and hideous
nature of terrorism in all its dimensions. Until that
time, this had been for all of us something that
happened to other people. The barbaric acts we
witnessed for over a decade in Algeria and those in
Nairobi, Dar-es-Salaam, Egypt and other places had
theretofore been reported as news briefs and events that
barely intruded on our tranquillity. But today, in both
our collective and individual memories, terrorism
represents a terrible reality and a real wound; so much
so that some even avoid using the term terrorism
because of its emotional resonance. What is important
is that we have decided to combat this scourge
collectively and resolutely.

The anti-terrorist effort begun last year mobilized
the entire international community, which is now
united in a spirit of survival. Not since the anti-Nazi
coalition has the world had such a keen awareness of a
common enemy. Immediately after the events of 11
September, most States strengthened their national
legislation with regard to combating terrorism. On the
multilateral level, the United Nations has taken a
decisive role in this crusade by adopting resolutions on
the question and by establishing the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Impressive resources have also been
mobilized in this effort.

Despite all those efforts, however, there is still
much to be done. The fall of the Taliban regime and the
destruction of their sanctuary in Afghanistan, as well as
the arrest of some terrorists, and their detention,
including at Guantanamo, have not yet served to
eradicate the Al Qaeda organization, which continues
to defy the world by threatening to carry out biological
terrorism. At the same time, the financial networks of
that terrorist organization have been replaced. Al
Qaeda reportedly continues to receive funds from the
personal inheritance of Osama bin Laden and from the
proceeds of his investments. That is to say nothing of
the fact that, according to United Nations experts, the
financing of terrorism continues to benefit from the
support of many financial intermediaries and Islamic
charitable organizations. The Swiss prosecutor general,
inquiring into the banking activities of terrorists in his
country, has stated that most of Al Qaeda's financial
assets have been converted into gold and diamonds and
are now beyond the reach of banks.

Like the phoenix of Greek mythology, terrorism
always rises from its ashes. Let us make no mistake:
the battle we have decided to wage will be long and
difficult. It is not something that can be carried out by
a single State or by a group of States, regardless of
their power. This is something that involves us all, and
it is for that reason that we believe that the appropriate
framework to pursue this effort and to achieve success
is the United Nations, which is the super-national
Organization par excellence with the responsibility of
guaranteeing international security. Any solitary
undertaking runs the risk of becoming an exercise in
adventurism. That indeed was the warning of the
Secretary-General when he said that

"Even the most powerful countries know that
they need to work with others, in multilateral
institutions, to achieve their aims". (A/57/PV.2)

In our view, the anti-terrorism strategy must be
based on the following three imperatives. First, it is the
duty of States that have not yet done so to bring their
national legislation into line with the needs of
combating international terrorism. For instance, in
Africa, under the aegis of the African Union, the
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism has just attained the necessary number of
ratifications to enter into force. The African Union
conference on terrorism recently held in Algiers also
served to strengthen the legal arsenal in this regard by
adopting additional protocols to that Convention.

Adapting national laws to the needs of the
moment should be aimed at enhancing the vigilance of
police and security services, including through careful
border controls. We were stunned to learn that, before
the attacks of 11 September, the main instigators had
met several times in major European cities in order to
plan their crimes, right under everyone's noses.

Secondly, it is essential to strengthen inter-State
cooperation in this regard, especially in the area of
information exchange. This is one of the most reliable
preventive measures we can take to thwart terrorist
plots. It is thanks to such cooperation that two of the
major plotters of the 11 September attacks were
neutralized in Karachi on 11 September 2002.

In this respect, the establishment by the United
Nations of the Counter-Terrorism Committee has made
it possible today to centralize the important and
valuable information transmitted by more than 175
countries. Burkina Faso, which, together with other
nations, is firmly committed to this struggle, has
already submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
its report on measures taken by my country to combat
terrorism.

We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and the
members of the Committee, for the remarkable work
that they have already done; the results are already
evident.

Finally, everything must be done to prevent the
use, by terrorists, of weapons of mass destruction.
Armed only with pocket knives, they managed to cause
the destruction of the twin towers. What would happen
if they had weapons of mass destruction?

Such are the few thoughts that today's debate
inspired. When dealing with the elusive subject of
international terrorism, no one speaker can be
exhaustive. Only by sharing ideas and bringing
together our proposals will we be able to take a
decisive step towards the eradication of international
terrorism.

