Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): My delegation would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June. We also thank you for
giving us this opportunity to address the Council on the
important issue of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR).

We wish to join other delegations in
congratulating Justice Dennis Byron on his election as
President of the ICTR. We would like to assure him of
the full support and cooperation of the Rwandan
Government as he continues to implement the
completion strategy. We would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to Judge Erik
Mose for the dedication and diligence exercised
throughout his four-year term as Tribunal President.

My delegation expresses its thanks to Judge
Byron and Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow for their
respective presentations.

I would like to note that for the first time, the
President of the Rwanda genocide survivors' umbrella
association, Ibuka, and the President of the genocide
widows' association, AVEGA, are present at this
meeting as stakeholders in the successful completion of
the ICTR mandate. The Rwandan Government and
those two associations share a common interest and
vision regarding the future of the genocide-related
judicial process after 2008 generally and, more
specifically, the question of fugitives at large, the
transfer of cases, the transfer of archives and other
residual issues.

My delegation takes note of the revised
completion strategy of the ICTR. We note that the
number of persons whose trials either have been
completed or are in progress is 60. Eight detainees are
awaiting trial, of whom three are being considered for
transfer to national jurisdictions. Eighteen indictees
remain at large, including Felicien Kabuga, Augustine
Ngirabatware and others. We once again appeal to the
Council to take urgent measures to ensure that those
indictees do not evade justice.

The completion strategy is not an exit strategy for
the commitment of the international community to
ensure that those fugitives are brought to justice, either
by the Tribunal before the end of 2008 or in national
jurisdictions after 2008. There is fairly good
information about the whereabouts of those fugitives,
but there is still little progress in arresting them. We
therefore urge the Council to take the necessary
measures to ensure that all States cooperate in
apprehending those fugitives and handing them over
for trial. States that fail to do so must be held
accountable by the Council. We urge the Tribunal to be
more transparent in naming those States that are not
sufficiently cooperative in this area.

Rwanda welcomes the initiative of the ICTR
Prosecutor regarding the transfer of cases to national
jurisdictions, principally to Rwanda. The Rwanda
Government and the Prosecutor have made remarkable
progress with respect to the transfer of cases. The
Rwanda Government is committed to continuing those
preparations. For example, organic law No. 11/2007
has been promulgated, to govern all legal matters
pertaining to the referral of cases to Rwanda. Other
arrangements have been made with a view to ensuring
that all the requirements set forth under rule 11 bis are
met. Consequently, the first request for referral of a
case to Rwanda, namely, that of Fulgence Kayishema,
was made recently. We are pleased that our partnership
with the Office of the Prosecutor has enabled us to
register significant progress in these areas.

It is the position of the Rwanda Government that,
to the extent possible, pending cases must be
transferred to Rwanda's national jurisdiction. That
position is founded on the following grounds: first,
justice must be seen to be done within the territory
where crimes were committed; secondly, it is more
efficient and effective to hold trials in Rwanda, as
evidence and witnesses are mostly to be found in
Rwanda; thirdly, on the basis of the principle of
sovereign equality, Rwanda having cooperated with the
ICTR as an international judicial institution should not
be subordinated to any other national system; and,
fourthly, the transfer of cases would complement and
reinforce Government policies towards reconciliation,
which is central to the mandate of the ICTR.

Rwanda expects the same support and degree of
cooperation from States as that extended to the ICTR
in its pursuit of fugitives. We would recommend that,
as the Tribunal mandate comes to an end, the Security
Council adopt a resolution that would obligate States to
fully cooperate with Rwanda's national jurisdiction in
tracking down and eventually prosecuting fugitives
who are still at large.

However, my delegation was surprised to learn at
this meeting through the statements made by Judge
Byron and Prosecutor Jallow that there are plans under
way to refer cases and send convicts to France; I say
this despite the positive statement by the representative
of France. My Government has serious concerns about
this - principally because well-known fugitives at
large continue to live in that country with impunity. We
intend to raise this issue with the appropriate
authorities at the highest level.
By way of preparation, and in partnership with
the ICTR Office of the Prosecutor, Rwanda has, among
other things, undertaking the following steps.

First, we have enacted a law to govern the
referral of cases from the ICTR to Rwandan courts.
That law abolishes the death penalty and sufficiently
addresses procedural and substantive aspects of
prospective trials, as well as monitoring mechanisms. It
also establishes a legal-aid fund for indigent accused
and a witness protection mechanism - to which we
hope that the international community will contribute,
as it has done as regards the ICTR.

Secondly, although there has been significant
development of the country's justice sector, a
comprehensive capacity-building plan is under way for
longer-term purposes. In that regard, we wish to
recognize the support from the United States
Government through the Office of the Ambassador-at-
Large for War Crimes issues, as well as from the
Governments of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Germany, Belgium and some other members of the
European Union. We take this opportunity to urge the
international community to actively participate in these
capacity-building efforts. This becomes even more
important in the light of the completion of the ICTR's
mandate and Rwanda's central role in tracking and
bringing to justice genocide fugitives in the years to
come. Rwanda will remain open and receptive to
positive input in that process. We also appreciate the
ICTR's initiatives in the area of capacity-building, as
set out in the report of the President of the Tribunal.

Of equal importance is the question of the
transfer of convicts to serve sentences in Rwanda. The
execution of sentences is vital in criminal justice
processes. Administrative bureaucracy that continues
to delay decisions on this matter is causing substantial
damage to the ICTR process. We urge those concerned
to take urgent steps to remedy that situation. Rwanda
believes that ICTR convicts must serve their sentences
in Rwanda, where they committed the crimes and
where they should be seen serving their sentences.

With regard to those who have been acquitted by
the ICTR, it is the policy of our country to welcome
home every Rwandan who happened to be abroad for
any reason. The doors remain open to those who have
been acquitted by the ICTR. My country is therefore
not responsible for the difficulties that the Tribunal is
experiencing, which the President mentioned.
As we continue to consider the legacy of the
Tribunal on international justice in general, but more
specifically its effects on Rwanda, we believe that the
completion strategy should incorporate the transfer of
all court documents and materials to Rwanda. We are
aware of the interest expressed by another State in
acquiring ICTR judicial archives. We wish to
emphasize that those records constitute an important
part of our country's recent history and that they are of
critical importance to our reconciliation and civic
policies. That overrides any desire to acquire those
archives simply for research or similar purposes. As
decision is reached on this issue, we hope that there
will be no prejudice against Rwanda on the pretext of
its limited material means.

Rwanda believes that cooperation and partnership
with the Government should be strengthened during the
remaining part of the ICTR mandate. This should not
only cover administrative issues but should also entail
joint planning in the areas of legacy and residual
issues, in which Rwanda is the logical partner.

We would like to conclude by expressing our
profound appreciation to the international community
for its continued support of the Tribunal through both
assessed and voluntary contributions. As we enter the
last leg, we urge the Council to continue its
commitment to ensuring that the Tribunal has the
adequate resources to conduct its work efficiently and
effectively. We would also like to thank the Tribunal's
President and Prosecutor and their respective teams for
their work in ensuring the implementation of the
completion strategy.

