The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
thank Mr. Von Amsberg for his briefing and for all the
commitment shown by the World Bank.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for joining us and for his presentation.
Likewise, I would like to highlight the statements
made by the former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Rwanda,
Ambassador Eugene-Richard Gasana, by the current
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador Abulkalam
Abdul Momen, and by Mr. Joachim von Amsberg,
Vice-President for Operations Policy and Country
Services of the World Bank.

The 2005 World Summit reached a milestone
when we took on a commitment to give impetus to
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations. Within
the Organization, the Commission has been given
the role of proposing and advising on strategies for
post-conflict recovery and of bringing together all the
agents involved in resource mobilization. Colombia
considers peacebuilding processes to be of vital
importance. Peacebuilding constitutes a fundamental
stage if countries are to overcome the root causes of a
conflict. We hope that this discussion will contribute to
strengthening the Commission towards that end.

We know from experience that there is no
substitute for strengthening national institutions and
that sustainable results are those supported by national
ownership. The generation of local and national capacity
and ownership over processes, strategies and policies
are indispensable conditions for avoiding a relapse into
conflict.

A successful peacebuilding process is the first step
towards leaving behind past conflict and confrontation
and laying a solid and lasting foundation for a promising
future for the population. The main responsibility for
successful peacebuilding belongs to Governments and
relevant national agents, including civil society.

From the Commission's report (S/2012/70), it is
clear that the challenges presented by peacebuilding in
post-conflict situations demand an ongoing learning
process, bearing in mind that no situations are
identical and no formulas can be universally applied.
Six years after the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the fundamental notion of its mandate
is still novel for an international community used to
thinking almost exclusively in terms of conflicts and
their resolution. For the Security Council, it is also
novel to move from a paradigm centred on maintaining
international peace and security, in application of
Chapter VII of the Charter, towards a vision focused
on strengthening national capacity and promoting
conditions for sustainable development.

Experience has shown the United Nations that
peacekeeping tasks cannotbe thought ofas separate from
post-conflict approaches. The structural strengthening
of institutions and of the architecture that allows
States to function encompasses both peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. The actions of peacekeepers clearly can
set solid foundations for early peacebuilding.

Of foremost importance is strengthening national
capacities and creating the conditions for countries
to regain their full independence and sovereignty,
generate development and promote the welfare of their
populations. Regional and subregional organizations,
more closely acquainted with the challenges faced by a
country going through the rebuilding process, play an
important role in that process through their vision and
leadership. In that regard, it is important to highlight the
role of international financial institutions, such as the
World Bank, and of regional banks similarly working
for recovery and reconciliation and building the social,
economic and financial structures of countries in such
transition.

The Commission has the potential to create
mechanisms and modalities to identify knowledge and
lessons learned in matters of technical assistance, and
thus to promote South-South cooperation. Likewise, it
can help States on its agenda to strengthen their national
capacities by coordinating the activities of donors and
encouraging transparency and accountability.

We commend the configurations for each country
on the Commission's agenda for applying flexible and
realistic criteria. Such criteria allow for work on the
ground within available capacities and provide existing
institutions the time and opportunity to achieve their
own results. The Commission and its configurations
require the commitment and active participation of
all their members. It is important to establish specific
objectives through which genuine progress and political
support can be achieved.

In that context, visits by the Chairs of the
configurations are valuable tools, not only in lending
political support to countries on the agenda but
also as a channel for dialogue between the various
national actors and the United Nations system. We
therefore believe that dialogue between the General
Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission must be
maintained and deepened. We take note of the channel
of communication established through the report of
the Chairperson of the Commission to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. In that spirit,
Colombia will hold an interactive dialogue with the
Security Council, the Commission and the countries
on its agenda in order to provide an opportunity to
exchange opinions in a frank and dynamic manner,
jointly analyse expectations and achievements, and
establish realistic objectives.

Deepening peacebuilding means modifying
traditional attitudes and adjusting to countries
and regions that are ever more autonomous in the
international system. That shift in balances of power
calls for dialogue and political solutions to issues that
have traditionally been addressed through sanctions
or confrontation. Nations like ours that understand
the difficulty of achieving lasting peace know that,
despite the obstacles and challenges, we must believe
in the possibility of peace and development for
nations affected by conflicts. We know that the path of
peacebuilding road is not an easy one.

Given its experience and the challenges it has
overcome, and aware that there are still more to
surmount, Colombia believes that we must focus on
bringing people hope and offering them a chance for
a decent life, moving beyond the circumstances of the
past. That can be done through public policies providing,
inter alia, for reparation for victims and creating
effective mechanisms to promote social and economic
development to the benefit of the most vulnerable and
affected population. We believe that lasting peace can
be achieved through a balance of policies that provide
for reparations and that generate sustainable welfare and
prosperity in the long term. We must commit ourselves
to finding policies that promote consensus, heal the
wounds of the past and allow societies - especially
younger generations - to rebuild their countries, create
opportunities and work towards reconciliation, security
and peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

