Guatemala would like to express its gratitude to the Estonian delegation for convening, in its capacity as President of the Security Council for the month of May, today's open high-level Security Council video-teleconference on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the participation of Her Excellency Mrs. Kersti Kaljulaid, President of the Republic of Estonia, in this meeting and thank her for her statement. As shown in the annual report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366), the world is living at ajuncture characterized by a threat to peace in which tens of thousands of innocent civilians continue to suffer the horrifying short- and long-term consequences of armed conflict. Accordingly, Guatemala emphasizes the importance of preventing conflict and addressing its root causes, including by strengthening the rule of law, good governance and the respect for and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms. These are the most pertinent means with which to protect civilians. As a country contributing troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations, Guatemala takes this opportunity to recall that the primary responsibility for the protection of civilians rests on the host countries that receive the support of the international community through United Nations peacekeeping operations. In this regard, it is crucial to continue strengthening cooperation between United Nations peacekeeping operations, where mandated, and the national authorities to support their respective efforts, taking into account the importance of national ownership as a key principle. Guatemala reiterates that the protection-of-civilians mandate in United Nations peacekeeping operations should be implemented as a whole-of- mission objective. This requires all relevant stakeholders, including civilian, police and military components, working in coordination with national authorities, to adopt a comprehensive and integrated approach. Considering that armed conflicts are being waged in urban centres using weapon systems originally designed for open battlefields, my delegation calls upon all States to fulfil their commitment to the application of international humanitarian law in armed conflicts. Experience has shown us that the use of explosive weapons in populated areas (EWIPA) causes serious damage to civilians and civilian objects and has an overall impact on services essential for civilians' survival. The use of EWIPA is an urgent matter that compels the international community to adopt measures towards the adoption of a framework for the protection and safety of people who suffer the consequences of the use of weapons in that context. The use of such weapons in this context causes death, injury and trauma, damages and destroys essential infrastructure and critical services, drives involuntary displacement, leaves in place explosive remnants of war that pose a long-term threat, disrupts social coexistence and economic activities, and affects overall human security. Furthermore, Guatemala reiterates its firm support for protecting medical facilities and workers and for preventing attacks on education, including violence against students, educational facilities and personnel. Attacks and threats of attack can cause severe and long-lasting harm to individuals and societies. We stress that education can help to protect children and youth from death, injury and exploitation, alleviate the psychological impact of armed conflict by offering a sense of normalcy and stability, and provide links to other vital services. From Guatemala's perspective and as a follow-up to the 2020 session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, protection-of-civilians mandates must be seen as the responsibility of all in-mission stakeholders, which is contingent upon several critical factors, including well-defined, realistic and achievable objectives; political will, leadership, performance and accountability at all levels, from troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs) to civilians and the Secretariat; adequate resources, mobility assets and well-trained, prepared and appropriately equipped military, police and civilian personnel; the capacity to assess threats to civilians; and policy, planning and operational guidelines and training. Guatemala takes this opportunity to reiterate its position that caveats have a negative impact on the implementation of mandates and operational effectiveness and increase risks to the successful implementation of protect-of-civilians mandates on the ground. We stress the importance of avoiding all caveats that might have a negative impact on the protection-of-civilians mandate. In this regard, the Secretariat and TCCs/PCCs must strive to redouble all efforts aimed at identifying and clearly communicating any caveats that may have a negative impact on protection-of- civilians mandates. At the same time, in Guatemala's view, it is key that strategic communications be developed, in coordination with national authorities and other relevant stakeholders, on a mission's protection-of-civilians mandate and related operational capabilities and resources, with the aim of gathering relevant data from the ground and disseminating accurate information so that the expectations and concerns of local populations may be managed in a timely manner. It has been 20 years since the Security Council adopted its first protection- of-civilians mandate, and experience has shown that United Nations peacekeeping operations have a relevant role play on the issue. However, today, peacekeepers are being asked to do more with less. While this is a reality we need to face, it is also a reality that we need to change. Peacekeepers put their lives at risk in the most dangerous circumstances for the noble goal of achieving peace. Guatemala has a long- standing tradition of contributing to peace and security through its participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Today, Guatemala renews its commitment to providing our best-trained and most equipped special forces, with the objective of fulfilling its mandate to protect civilians and their lives, without caveats. Recalling the aforementioned annual report of the Secretary-General, Guatemala wishes to underline the emerging risks with respect to the protection of civilians. The threats caused by the malicious use of digital technologies and the implications of developments in the area of lethal autonomous weapons systems must not be overlooked and should continue to be discussed in multilateral forums Finally, Guatemala reiterates that the best way to protect civilians from armed conflict is through prevention. Currently, we are tackling the global health emergency presented by the coronavirus-disease pandemic, and the efforts aimed at mitigating and controlling this disease should not be undermined by conflict. For this reason, we encourage all relevant parties in conflict to respond to the Secretary- General's call for a global ceasefire in order to focus all efforts on the protection of humankind as a whole from this deadly disease.
