Mr. Derbez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me sincerely to congratulate the
delegation of France for the pertinent way in which it
has conducted the work of the Security Council and to
express my deep appreciation for having you, Sir, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, preside over the
Security Council at this important meeting.

My country extends a greeting to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. Under his leadership, the United
Nations is fulfilling with vision and wisdom its
commitment to keeping the peace. This meeting has a
special meaning, for here we renew our purpose to go
further in our multilateral effort to fight terrorism. I
should also like to congratulate Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, on his
tireless efforts over the past months. In addition, I
welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
Permanent Representatives of the States members of
the Security Council.

The tragic events that occurred on the territory of
the United States on 11 September 2001 revealed the
immense destructive capacity of international terrorism
and drew our attention to the grave threat that such acts
pose to world peace and security. The Security
Council's decisive and immediate action and the
creation of a Committee charged with monitoring
measures adopted by States in implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) are innovative initiatives to
fight terrorism.

The impetus that the entire community of nations
is giving to such efforts will enable us to strengthen the
legal framework necessary for confronting this grave
evil. In parallel, it provides an incentive for
international cooperation to tighten the noose around
those who use terrorism to destabilize and to spread
uncertainty in our world.

However, the challenge posed by this threat is
enormous and especially complex. That has been
demonstrated by the grave terrorist attacks perpetrated
recently in places such as Indonesia, the Russian
Federation and the Republic of Kenya. I take this
opportunity to reaffirm Mexico's solidarity with the
Governments and the peoples that have been victims of
terrorism as well as Mexico's confidence in good
policy and good diplomacy to eradicate this pernicious
phenomenon.

Today, the urgency of strengthening the
international community's efforts to combat and
eradicate this scourge - and to prevent this
phenomenon from jeopardizing peaceful coexistence
among nations - is more evident than ever before.
Mexico condemns all acts or manifestations of
terrorism and rejects any argument that seeks to justify
it.

The international community faces a unique
challenge in such threats. In order to act successfully, it
must proceed from three principles: first, the
establishment of an international order based on
universally recognized rules and norms - in other
words, the building of a framework of certainty that
responds to the wishes and needs of the international
community; secondly, the continuous strengthening of
international cooperation for the resolution of global
problems; and finally, the primary role of the United
Nations as the forum that the community of nations has
established to channel its action in facing global
challenges.

The fight against terrorism must fully respect the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
international law, including the protection of human
rights. That is why Mexico especially welcomes the
initiative to convene this ministerial meeting. Today's
gathering attests to the importance we attach to acting
effectively and with justice in the fight against
terrorism. It should provide an opportunity not only to
reaffirm existing commitments but also to reflect with
imagination, creativity and a lofty sense of
responsibility on the actions that we must undertake in
the future.

As a member of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Mexico has devoted special attention to
proposing formulas that would ensure full compliance
by all States with the international obligations required
by the fight against terrorism. Mexico wishes to
emphasize that conflict prevention and the peaceful
settlement of disputes are essential premises in our
effort to eradicate terrorism. The international
community has the responsibility to foresee and create
the necessary space for negotiation in order to avoid
conflict situations, which are fertile ground for the
growth and proliferation of terrorism.

For that reason, we recognize that the
forthcoming meeting, on 7 March, between the
Security Council Committee and various international
and regional organizations will be an important step
towards improving specific strategies and cooperation
agreements. That effort will have special significance
for strengthening cooperation between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and regional and subregional
organizations with responsibility in this area, within
the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

In various international forums, Mexico has
participated in and supported initiatives to prevent and
combat terrorism. As of January this year, it has
assumed one of the vice-chairmanships of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. In the International Atomic
Energy Agency, we have actively promoted an early
conclusion of the protocol to the Vienna Convention on
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material as an
effective mechanism to prevent nuclear materials or
facilities from being used for terrorist ends.

In the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development, Mexico has supported the adoption
of recommendations to combat the financing of
terrorism, which complement the work of the Financial
Action Task Force on Money Laundering against
money laundering. Currently, Mexico is working to
implement those recommendations.

At the same time, Mexico has been taking
measures to strengthen its internal legal framework for
combating terrorism. That is an ongoing and
inescapable task, and both the executive branch and the
Mexican Congress are working on initiatives to
strengthen our laws for combating terrorism. Recently,
the Senate of the Republic approved the ratification of
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and Mexico's accession to the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings. I am pleased to announce that,
shortly, I shall have the privilege of depositing the
relevant instruments on those two Conventions with the
Legal Counsel of the United Nations, in fulfilment of
Mexico's responsibilities with regard to the fight
against terrorism.

We are convinced that the effective fulfilment of
international obligations in good faith and the
strengthening of global efforts to resolve conflicts are
the best way to ensure the eradication of terrorism.
Through our work in this and other meetings, we shall
help to ensure that the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee can cooperate with all
States in such tasks and ensure their success. The fight
against terrorism is a battle that mankind cannot afford
to lose.

