Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We agree with the
representative of Uruguay on the issue of making the
discussions in the Security Council more transparent to
the broader membership, and that is why we have asked
for the floor today.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is grateful
for the briefing of Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
to whom we pay tribute. We also commend him for his
excellent work as an intermediary and for supporting the
efforts carried out by the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to bolster national security and
stability.

We also take this opportunity to thank the Ambassador
of Egypt for his briefing.

We are closely following the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
national dialogue that started in September, launched
by the initiative of Joseph Kabila's Government, with
the main political stakeholders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That dialogue, in the context of
the current political, economic and security reality in
that country, should aim to establish a road map that,
in consideration of costitutional provisions, will enable
consensus to break the deadlock with regard to the
upcoming electoral process.

In that regard, we regret that the increase in political
tensions has led to violent protests in recent weeks by
opposition members attempting to boycott the national
dialogue initiative. To that end, we urge all the country's
political actors to abstain from acting in a way that
could promote violence. In that connection, we believe
that an ongoing, inclusive, constructive dialogue is the
only way to jump-start the stalled electoral process.

The Security Council should send a message of
solidarity to the Support Group for the Facilitation of
the National Dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, led by the African Union-appointed Facilitator
and former Prime Minister of Togo, Mr. Edem Kodjo,
who has the support of the Group, made up of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Southern African Development Community, the
European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the United Nations.

We believe that the facilitation of political dialogue
is essential to maintaining and consolidating governance
an stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As such, it should enjoy the backing ofthe international
community, as it relates to the sovereignty and political
independence of that country. In that regard, we welcome
the fact that MONUSCO continues to provide technical
and logistical support to the Independent National
Electoral commission in reviewing and updating the
voter rolls and in encouraging financial contributions
to the United Nations Development Programme
Administrative Fund to facilitate the election cycle in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We reiterate our concern about the violence
sparked by rebel groups, both Congolese and foreign,
that operate in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which exacerbates the humanitarian situation in the
east of the country. Such actions have contributed to the
increase in the number ofinternally displaced persons,
clashes between communities and a heightened lack of
security.

We value the ongoing work of MONUSCO in
supporting the the implementation of the national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, as well as on the repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration of ex-combattants. In that regard,
the measures enacted over the past decade by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and better financing for national social assistance
programmes to help ex-combattants during their
reintegration are essential to promoting disarmament,
the protection of civilians and human rights.

Finally, we are convinced that the consolidation
of the presence and authority of the Congolese State,
together with renewed trust in the framework of
strategic dialogue with MONUSCO, continue to be
vital elements to overcoming armed violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that process,
the sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must
be ensured, in keeping with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

