Mr. Karokhail: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to address the Security
Council about the situation in Afghanistan, especially
the impact of insecurity on local humanitarian
workers - a risk they share with the vulnerable
communities they assist.

As the Council knows, the conflict in
Afghanistan is growing more intense. The recent
spike in violence - such as a car bomb in south-
eastern Afghanistan that killed at least 89 civilians
in July - provides little confidence that the security
situation will improve any time soon. The year 2013
saw a 14 per cent increase in civilian casualties over
the previous year, the highest number of civilian deaths
and injuries since 2001. That presents a complex reality
for Afghan civilians, as they are increasingly targeted
directly or caught in the cross-fire. At risk too are
humanitarian and development workers, who stand on
the front line with the vulnerable communities they
assist. Afghanistan has been called the world's most
dangerous place for aid workers.

In this briefing, I wish to highlight four key
points: the impact of Violence on Afghan aid workers,
the transfer of risk to local staff from international
organizations, the need to better protect local staff, and
what can be done to improve the situation.
First, Afghan humanitarian workers bear the
brunt of violence, regardless of whom they work for.
Afghanistan has seen the highest number of casualties
among humanitarian workers in the world, almost four
times more than neighbouring Pakistan. Since 2001,
895 aid workers have been attacked, including 325
killed, 253 wounded and 317 kidnapped. Last year was
the most violent year to date for humanitarian workers.

Those headline figures, however, say little about
who is affected. For the most part, Afghan nationals
have borne the brunt of insecurity. Afghan aid workers
account for 88 per cent of those killed, 89 per cent of
those wounded and 89 per cent of those kidnapped.
And that does not tell the whole story: many local
organizations do not report attacks on their staff, thus the
real numbers are likely to be much higher. For example,
in 2008 four of my organization's staff were kidnapped
in Paktika province, in Afghanistan's contested south-
east, and another staff member was killed negotiating
their release. We did not make the incident public,
out of respect for the wishes of the families to keep
the incident private. Other local organizations have
confirmed similar practices. Statistics tell us only part
of the story about violence against local humanitarian
workers on the front line in Afghanistan.

Secondly, Afghan humanitarian workers suffer
heavy casualties in part because international
organizations are using local staff and local
organizations to reduce their own security risk. Attacks
on aid workers disproportionately affect national
staff. For example, 85 per cent of United Nations
staff involved in security incidents are Afghans; for
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
it is 76 per cent. That signals that there are different
values for local humanitarian workers in Afghanistan,
especially those working for the United Nations.

Furthermore, the security arrangements of
international NGOs and the United Nations often
make local humanitarian organizations less secure. As
security measures applied to protect international staff
are tightened and their mobility is restricted, the risk
to national staff is increased. Local staff take on more
responsibility for accessing dangerous areas while
international staff remain in compounds.

Communities and, by association, the insurgency
have great difficulty in distinguishing among different
organizations working on the ground. They associate
aid organizations with the international presence of
the International Security Assistance Force troops and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and View all of them as a legitimate target. The fact
that offices of many aid organizations, including the
United Nations, increasingly resemble military bunkers
with armed guards, and that usually Afghan police are
used for field escorts, adversely impacts the security of
local staff and organizations for which they work. The
perception of humanitarian organizations as neutral or
impartial in Afghanistan has greatly diminished both
for national and international organizations. That has
proven very costly in terms of Afghan lives.

Thirdly, the protection of Afghan humanitarian
staff is a complex issue that is not adequately addressed.
Afghans are expected to take greater risks than their
international counterparts in most organizations, simply
because their nationality is assumed to give them some
protection. That is no longer the case in Afghanistan.
Just because organizations are local does not mean
that they are not vulnerable. The responsibility for
humanitarian response continues to be pushed onto the
vulnerable communities we seek to assist.

Local humanitarian workers rarely receive the same
security arrangements as their international colleagues.
That inequality exploits the reliance of many Afghans
on employment opportunities within the humanitarian
sector, and many have been forced to accept dangerous
assignments simply to feed their families.

While the value of life is hard to measure, it is
difficult to be told by an international funder - as my
organization was in 2008 - that the possible death
of our staff is not budgeted for. That is especially the
case when international organizations subcontract to
local organizations to decrease the risk to their own
international staff. The implicit message that the lives
of Afghan staff are not only worth less but are also
expendable is difficult to stomach.

We all know that the future will hold more violence
in Afghanistan. The conflict is increasingly complex,
with aid workers having to deal with a patchwork of
insurgents, localized armed groups and criminal gangs.
International organizations and NGOs will continue to
see their operating space reduced, and the burden to
deliver assistance will continue to shift to Afghans.

I wish to conclude by suggesting what the United
Nations and the Security Council could do to improve
the protection of local humanitarian workers.

First, protection and equality start with monitoring
the risk, not just for international but also for local staff
and aid organizations.

Secondly, there is a need to remove the artificial
hierarchy between international and local staff in
protracted situations such as that in Afghanistan.
Rather than using funds to create a bunkerization of
international aid agencies, the assistance community
could increase its partnership with national
organizations. That, however, should not mean
transferring all the risk or responsibility to local
organizations. It should also improve their protection.

Thirdly, access needs to be negotiated not on an ad
hoc basis, but collectively. The United Nations should
take the lead in that regard. The time has come to openly
speak to all parties in the conflict and negotiate clear
access principles. Despite several initiatives to discuss
access - including an NGO-led effort supported by the
Swiss Government, in which my organization is also
involved - actual negotiations are done individually
and on an ad hoc basis. There is an urgent need to develop
uniform principles for transparent and open access
negotiations, regardless whether the organizations are
local or international.

Fourthly, the Security Council must bring to
account the perpetrators who commit crimes against
aid workers.

Afghan organizations understand that they will
increasingly be asked to provide assistance where
international organizations no longer can. Many stand
ready to shoulder that burden. But the international
community must do more to protect them and enable
them to protect themselves. That includes capacity-
building, empowering them to provide assistance to all
in need and providing adequate funding mechanisms
that allow them to mitigate the risks. We can no longer
maintain the status quo, where local aid workers put
their lives on the line in order to get the job done.

Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to share
the Views of local organizations with the Council on
this very important matter.

