Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I thank
President Mbeki, Chair of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, and Mr. Haile Menkerios,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
their informative briefings. We welcome the
participation of the representatives of the Sudan and
Southern Sudan, and appreciate their input to today's
meeting.

We welcome the agreement between the parties
on temporary arrangements for the administration and
security of the Abyei area. We believe that this is an
encouraging development and that it sends a positive
signal with regard to ongoing activities and
negotiations on outstanding issues.

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports continued
negotiation between the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
urges them to engage constructively in negotiations so
as to reach agreement on the outstanding issues. Every
single one of those issues, if not resolved, has the
potential not only to affect relations between the two
States but also to undermine peace and stability.

While once again welcoming today's information,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned about the
situation in Abyei. It is critical that all military
elements be withdrawn from this area as an important
element for bringing about peace. The future status of
Abyei must be resolved by negotiations between the
parties, in accordance with the CPA. We condemn all
unilateral actions undertaken with a view to creating
facts on the ground that would prejudice the outcome
of negotiations.

We are also concerned about the situation in
Southern Kordofan State and continuing tensions in
Blue Nile. It is essential for the parties to continue
negotiations in order to agree on political and security
arrangements for Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
States. Meanwhile, both parties must work closely
together to reduce tensions and promote calm in those
regions.

It is vital that humanitarian access be provided in
order to assist the populations affected and that
conditions conducive to the safe return of displaced
persons be established.

Bearing in mind the security situation and the
issue of the future management of the border between
the North and the South, it is vital to establish a
mechanism that provides effective tools for preventing
or mitigating conflicts on either side of the border after
9 July. We deem it important for the United Nations to
maintain its presence in Abyei and Southern Kordofan
and to continue providing assistance to the parties in
border management after 9 July. In that regard, we call
on the parties to reach an agreement that includes a
continuing United Nations presence as a central
element for stability and future relations between the
parties.

We fully support the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and of Special
Representative Menkerios to ease tensions on the
ground and provide a secure environment for the
civilian population. We strongly condemn all attacks
on UNMIS and call on the parties to respect the
Mission's mandate and freedom of movement. It is
essential that UNMIS continue to be able to carry out
its mandate to protect civilians under Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter.

Finally, the nature of future relations between the
two countries will depend directly on the resolution of
the outstanding CPA issues. In that regard, we call on
the parties to the CPA to continue negotiations to reach
an agreement on the status of Abyei, as well as other
remaining CPA and post-CPA issues, and to lay a
foundation for friendly and dynamic relations between
the two States that will emerge after 9 July.

