Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to welcome to this important meeting the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and to thank him
for his opening remarks, which were, as usual, most
lucid. I wish also to welcome the high-level delegation
of Guinea-Bissau led by the Vice-Prime Minister, His
Excellency Mr. Faustino Imbali, as well as Mr. Callisto
Madavo, Vice-President of the World Bank, Africa
Region.

I must not fail also to thank the delegation of the
Netherlands which, throughout its presidency, and
building on the report (S/2000/809) of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations chaired by
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, has involved the Council in a
most useful consideration of how to deal with crisis
situations. Today's meeting, on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau, is consistent with that approach.

Both the Vice-Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau
and Mr. Madavo admirably described the highly
precarious situation, to which I shall refer solely to
express my delegation's satisfaction at the political
strides made and to censure the former military junta
for its irresponsible actions taken, inter alia, through
the events of last week. Mali is delighted also at the
improvement in Guinea-Bissau's relations with Senegal
and with Guinea.
Let me focus now on problems with regard to
post-conflict peace-building in Guinea-Bissau. Here,
Ihave three comments to make. The first bears on the
domestic and external context for Guinea-Bissau. In
the domestic sphere, it is clear that a legitimate,
democratic regime is in place, but is unable to
implement its policies. The determination of the people
to bring about change, as reflected in President Kumba
Yala's decisive victory, is powerful, which defines the
short-term and medium-term post-election policies of
the new Guinea-Bissau authorities. It is key, first and
foremost, to strengthen the spirit of national
reconciliation, consolidate the rule of law, ensure the
sound management of public affairs, restructure the
economy, restructure the armed forces, implement a
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and combat the illicit circulation of light
weapons.
Furthermore, on the international level, Guinea-
Bissau must continue to improve relations with
neighbouring States and to revive cooperation with the
international community at large.

My second comment proceeds from what I have
just said, and concerns the need to support the
reconstruction of Guinea-Bissau. In the view of my
delegation, two measures could prove useful here. The
first would be to adopt an integrated joint approach
involving the United Nations system and the
international financial institutions, including the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Earlier,
Mr. Madavo made encouraging commitments along
those lines. Such synergy is essential as we pursue the
process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and the proper unfolding of the peace
process in Guinea-Bissau. In the same vein, more
closely concerted action by bilateral and multilateral
partners would also help consolidate peace in Guinea-
Bissau. In that regard, the round table to be held at
Geneva in February 2001 will be a test.

I must also stress the adverse effect of
conditionalities, of the debt burden and of unfulfilled
pledges for assistance to the economic and social
reconstruction of Guinea-Bissau, and hence to peace-
building. Here, we call upon the donor community to
make substantial contributions to the three-year
programme scheduled to begin next year.

My third comment relates to efforts by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and by the United Nations to build peace
in Guinea-Bissau. Their activities in that regard have
been most complementary, which has made it possible
to achieve some good results; now, those results must
be consolidated. For its part, ECOWAS will continue to
play its full part in this enterprise. We were pleased at
the establishment of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, and we hail the very
active role played by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation fully supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of this
meeting because it fully reflects our concerns.

