The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2397 (2017). We would like to express our
great appreciation to the leadership of the United
States, which made this possible. We also thank all
other members of the Council for their support.
At the ministerial meeting held on 15 December,
over which Foreign Minister Kono presided (see S/PV.8137), the Security Council made it clear to the
world that the international community would never
accept a nuclear-armed North Korea. Today, by adopting
resolution 2397 (2017), the Security Council sends a
clear signal to North Korea that the continuation of its
nuclear and missile development can never be tolerated,
including the third ballistic missile launch - the
longest to date, with a range of an intercontinental
ballistic missile - on 29 November.

Resolution 2397 (2017) will further strengthen the
sanctions measures against North Korea, which were
already at an unprecedented level. The new impactful
measures include the reduction of the refined petroleum
cap by 89 per cent since January this year, commitment
to future oil reductions in case of North Korea's further
provocations, repatriation of all North Korean workers
within 24 months and additional restrictions of export
and import with North Korea.

Today's resolution exemplifies the serious,
collective will of the international community that we
will continue to put maximum pressure on North Korea
until it shows seriousness and takes concrete actions
toward the goal of denuclearization. In this regard,
operative paragraph 28 of the resolution clearly states
that the Council

"shall keep the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's actions under continuous review and is
prepared to strengthen, modify, suspend or lift the
measures as maybe needed in light ofthe Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's compliance".

Operative paragraph 28 also clearly states that

"if the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
conducts a further nuclear test or a launch of
a ballistic missile system capable of reaching
intercontinental ranges or contributing to the
development of a ballistic missile system capable
of such ranges, then the Security Council will take
action to restrict further the export to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea of petroleum".

Let me reiterate again that North Korea can make a
choice towards a peaceful, diplomatic solution. If North
Korea wants peace and security, it needs to demonstrate
its sincere commitment and concrete measures for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, comply fully
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and Joint
Statement of the six-Party Talks, and come back to the
table for meaningful dialogue.
In order to make North Korea realize the
determination of the international community to
achieve the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
all members of the United Nations must renew their
commitment to fully implementing the existing Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2371 (2017)
and 2375 92017), and the resolution just adopted today.
Japan looks forward to continuing to work closely with
relevant partners and all other Member States to reach
a comprehensive solution to the problems related to
North Korea.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.

