Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): In advocating
for a peaceful solution to the question of Kosovo,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
that resolution 1244 (1999) remains the applicable
international legal basis for the achievement of a
holistic solution to the dispute, within the framework
of political negotiation. In that regard, we call for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia to be
upheld, in strict compliance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
support of the United Nations, particularly through
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), so as to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights remains crucial for
fulfilling the commitments entered into. That work has
been complemented by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).

However, we express our concern in the light
of the scant progress made in terms of the European
Union-facilitated talks concerning the process of
implementing of the 19 April 2013 First Agreement on
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations.
In that regard, we urge parties to redouble their efforts
in the quest for a political, peaceful, fair and lasting
solution, within the framework of international law
and in compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Brussels Agreements.

Although the report (S/2016/901) indicates that the
security situation has remained stable over the past few
months, we regret the acts of violence perpetrated by
certain political actors as well as the difficulties faced
by Serbs seeking to exercise their right of return. In that
connection, we believe it is vitally important that full
respect for the human rights of displaced persons and
minorities be promoted, as well as ensuring that they
can return to their places of origin, in order to ensure
that those citizens can fully enjoy all of their human
rights without discrimination.

However, we are concerned by the fact that acts
of violence are still being perpetrated, targeting
Kosovo Serb civilians in certain areas. We therefore
call on parties to take relevant measures to overcome
the situation and prevent persecution and hostilities
based on ethnic or religious grounds. Moreover,
we are alarmed by the fact that the sale of business
and properties in Kosovo undermines the rights of
Kosovo Serb minorities and has become an additional
controversial element that is impeding the return of
displaced persons to their home communities. It is
worth pointing out that the Association/Community of
Serb-majority municipalities in northern Kosovo has
not yet been established. We therefore urge the parties
to intensify their efforts in that regard, as was agreed in
Brussels at the highest level.

The issue of clarifying the situation of people who
went missing during the war is still a high-priority
issue. In that regard, we urge interested parties to
intensify their joint efforts on that matter. We welcome
the decision to establish an analysis team to support the
sub-working group on forensic issues.

In terms of cultural and religious heritage, we
underscore the need for the parties to work together to
deliver effective protection for the important heritage
of the different Kosovo communities, which will
allow all people to participate in cultural life without
discrimination and to be able to access and enjoy their
cultural heritage.

In terms of the fight against impunity, we would
like to highlight the headway made towards ratifying
the agreement with the Government of the Netherlands,
as well as the fact that the agreement is now in the
final phase of the review process. It should serve to
streamline the work of the Specialist Chambers in
investigating the allegations of war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed in the armed conflict
in Kosovo. The application ofjustice in these cases in
the framework of due process will certainly contribute
to reconciliation and peace among all parties.

With regard to the fight against terrorism, we
commend the efforts undertaken to combat this
scourge, such as the sentences handed down to some
citizens accused of joining or trying to join Da'esh.
Our country supports measures to prevent and combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, which
must be accompanied by effective strategies to address
such issues as marginalization, poverty, violence
and intolerant ideologies, with a view to preventing
radicalization and with a special focus on young people.
Efforts must also be made to effectively implement
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
prohibiting the financing, training and transfer of arms
to the aforementioned terrorist groups.

In conclusion, we reiterate that dialogue and
cooperation between the parties are the only way for
countries to shake off the vestiges of violence and
thereby achieve peace and stability. Now more than
ever, it is essential that the parties continue to meet and
ttalk at all levels, in full compliance with resolution
1244 (1999) and the Brussels agreements of 2013.

