Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): This is
an emotional moment for me, taking leave of my
colleagues at this last public meeting in which I will
have had the honour of having taken part.

Our Council has become somewhat a family for
the 15 members who make it up. I think we probably
spend more time together than we do with our real
families. Our days and sometimes our nights are
devoted to this life in common. I think that this work
together helps us understand each other better, what we
think in our deepest thoughts. This explains why the
Council in recent months and years has made great
progress in terms of credibility and effectiveness in its
work. The results achieved with regard to Iraq are a
particularly striking example of this. This strengthens
the credibility and authority not just of the Council, but
that of the United Nations. The Secretary-General's
initiative on Cyprus, which we supported, is another
example.

I would like to say a word about Africa, which is
what takes up most of our time together. For me it was
an honour to lead the Security Council mission to the
Great Lakes region. I think that the fragile progress
made is a source of particular satisfaction for all
Council members. We should never forget that it is in
Africa that the most deadly conflicts continue. In the
Great Lakes region alone, in four years there have been
three million dead. Therefore I think that our duty is to
continue tirelessly our efforts, because if the Security
Council does not put all its energy in the African crisis,
no one will do it in its place.

I will conclude my stay with you with the Middle
East. Perhaps this is the most frustrating issue for
members of the Council, the one on which we might
express the most regret. Nevertheless, here again, I
believe there are positive signs. The very fact that we
are having a regular meeting at the initiative of Syria,
following a proposal by Tunisia, is in itself a small
encouraging sign. In the past we had to fight for weeks
to simply have a briefing, but now it is something that
seems quite natural. Be it with the Secretary-General or
Sir Kieran Prendergast, or Terje Roed-Larson when he
is in New York, we have an opportunity to take stock
of the situation.

More generally, I think that the Quartet embodies
the common will of the international community to
fully play its role. Through resolution 1397 (2002), our
Council plotted the way, that of two States living in
peace, side by side, within secure and recognized
boundaries. I believe our Council has to give its full
support to the efforts of the Quartet. The road map that
Sir Kieran referred to and which is to be adopted next
month should receive the Council's support. We shall
go back to this during our consultations. But on the
case of the Middle East, it is clear that the Security
Council must be able to play its full role.

I want to conclude by saying that I shall take with
me to Washington not just the most friendly memories
of our years of cooperation, but also the values that are
incarnated in the United Nations Charter. As I said
during the luncheon that the Ambassador of China
organized for the Secretary-General a few days ago, if I
had not been faithful to these United Nations values, I
would be in material breach of my convictions.

Thanks to all of you, and it is only "an revoir",
because I will be able to come back again to New York.

