The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Misic'
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 4 August 1995 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Croatia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be issued as document S/ 1995/647.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the
resumption of hostilities in and around the Republic of
Croatia. The Council recalls the statement of its
President of 3 August 1995. It strongly deplores the
decision by the Croatian Government to launch a
broad military offensive, thereby unacceptably
escalating the conflict, with the risk of further
consequent attacks by whatever party, and demands
that all military action cease immediately and that
there be full compliance with all Council resolutions
including resolution 994 (1995).

"The Security Council condemns any shelling of
civilian targets. It demands that no military action be
taken against civilians and that their human rights be
fully respected. It reminds the parties of their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
and reiterates that those who commit violations of
international humanitarian law will be held
individually responsible in respect of such acts. The
Council calls on the parties to cooperate fully with
UNCRO, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the International Committee of the
Red Cross in ensuring access and protection to the
local civilian population as appropriate.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
attacks by Croatian Government forces on personnel
of the United Nations peace-keeping forces which
have resulted in casualties, including the death of
one member of the peace-keeping forces. It demands
that such attacks cease immediately and that all
detained personnel be released. It also reminds the
parties, and in particular the Croatian Government,
that they have an obligation to respect United
Nations personnel, to ensure their safety and
freedom of movement at all times and to enable
UNCRO to fulfil its mandate in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Council
expresses condolences to the Government of
Denmark and to the family of the member of the
United Nations peace-keeping forces who lost his
life.

"The Security Council deeply regrets the
breakdown of the talks which began in Geneva on
3 August 1995. It calls upon the Croatian
Government to return to the talks. It reiterates that
there can be no military solution to the conflict in
Croatia. It reaffirms its call for an unreserved
commitment to the search for a negotiated settlement
and to resumption of talks on the basis of the Draft
Agreement drawn up by the Co-Chairman of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference

on the Former Yugoslavia.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter, and will consider any further measures that
may be necessary."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12 midnight.

