Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan
for briefing us today on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I
commend his leadership of this important committee.

While I appreciate the efforts that the relevant
parties have made to reach agreement on the language
of the report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2013/331, annex), I am disappointed by the lack of consensus. I
also expect future briefings to be held within the time
frame mandated by the relevant Council resolutions. At
the previous briefing, in early March (see S/PV.6930),
my delegation joined others in raising concerns about
the issues addressed in today's report. It is regrettable,
however, that we have not seen much progress in the
past four months.

First, with regard to Iran's ballistic missile launches
in July of last year, we see no reason to question the
Panel's conclusion that such launches constitute a
violation of resolution 1929 (2010). Moreover, Iran has
not responded to the Committee's letter on the matter.
It is unfortunate, however, that the Committee failed to
reach an agreement on such an important and clear-cut
issue. Already a year has passed since the violation. It
is time that the Committee considered taking follow-up
action, including issuing an implementation assistance
notice.

Secondly, Iran has also not replied to the letter sent
on 21 May regarding the Panel's incident report on the
illicit transfer of arms to Yemen. We recall that Iran sent
a letter to the Council in February stating that it was
prepared to cooperate fully and provide the information
necessary to investigate the case. Iran's silence does
little to demonstrate its willingness to build trust with
the international community.
Thirdly, the provision of military assistance in the
Gaza Strip is another grave concern. It would certainly
contribute to undermining regional stability. We should
continue to pay attention to these matters and remain
vigilant.

We welcome the Panel's final report as a useful
review of the efforts to impede Iran's nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. However, the incidents
and developments it describes indicate that we still have
a long way to go. In particular, we are concerned that Iran
continues to pursue prohibited activities by procuring
items abroad and using complex methods to evade
sanctions, such as front companies, intermediaries and
false documentation. The final report will help Member
States recognize and address the vulnerabilities that
Iran might exploit. The Panel's recommendations
are prudent, and include proportionate measures.
The recommendations should be implemented by the
Committee in due time.

We believe that the Committee's open briefing,
held on 24 June, was successful and will be useful for
facilitating Member States' implementation efforts. We
hope to have such events on a more regular basis.

The five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany have made tireless efforts to
engage Iran on its nuclear programme and open the
window to peaceful negotiations. We hope that Iran
will respond more constructively to the proposal. It
cannot remain on the table indefinitely.

The IAEA's talks with Iran are going around in
circles. We urge the Iranian Government to engage
and cooperate with the IAEA without further delay
regarding the possible military dimensions of its nuclear
programme, the expansion of its enrichment capacity
and the activities undermining the IAEA's capacity for
effective verification at the Parchin site.

Iran must comply with all relevant Security Council
and IAEA resolutions. Iran should make extraordinary
efforts to regain the lost confidence of the international
community in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme.

