The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Mauritius.

The important statement made this morning by
the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia,
The Honourable John Howard, shows the interest
which East Timor's neighbour takes in its future. Let
me, on behalf of my Government and on my personal
behalf, congratulate Mr. Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, and the people of
East Timor for the considerable progress achieved on
the path to independence. We wish to assure him of our
full cooperation.

I join other delegations also in thanking
Mr. Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for the comprehensive briefing he
gave this morning.

I would also like to express my profound
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his valuable
report.

My delegation echoes the appreciation and
satisfaction expressed by other delegations for the
positive developments in East Timor. We commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
outstanding leadership. His exemplary efforts and
excellent work deserve all our gratitude and praise. We
also extend our gratitude to the entire staff of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for preparing the newly born State
for a peaceful and smooth transition to independence.

The United Nations justly deserves all the merit
for conducting a successful operation in East Timor
and to take credit for this historic success. The painful
past is gone and the people of East Timor must derive
immense satisfaction from the thought that their quest
for self-determination was legitimate and
unquestionable. We must now look to the future with
hope and determination that East Timor will emerge as
a full-fledged nation ready to assume its rightful place
in the international community and to chart a way for
the welfare, development and prosperity of all the
people of East Timor. Mauritius has been closely
associated with the liberation struggle of the East
Timorese people and it is with a great sense of
satisfaction that we welcome the successful outcome of
that struggle. As a small island State, we are happy that
another island State of similar size will be joining the
United Nations family.
My delegation is pleased to learn that the
Assembly is in the process of reviewing the draft
constitution, which will lead the island to a unitary
democratic State based on the rule of law, the principle
of separation of powers and all the institutions that
foster an accountable and responsible Government. We
are happy to note that the Timorization process in the
economic and administrative sectors is also on the right
track.

Like other members, Mauritius fully supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General on the
renewal of UNTAET's mandate until 20 May 2002. In
view of the success achieved so far, there is no scope
or room for any mistake. It is the duty of the United
Nations to ensure that everything is done to complete
the process in time. Nothing should jeopardize this
process. If we are to consolidate our gains and realize
the legitimate aspirations of the East Timorese to
attaining statehood, we must ensure that the transition
is seamless, smooth and obstacle-free.

At this juncture, East Timor needs assistance at
all levels in order to instil confidence in the people and
to encourage them to forge ahead in shaping the
destiny of their own country in accordance with their
culture, tradition and political history. It is therefore
essential that international assistance to East Timor
revert to a normal development level as soon as
feasible.

The United Nations, with the help of UNTAET,
has given birth to a nation. The international
community should now continue nurturing it and
prepare the small island nation to operate as a viable
State. This is the crucial phase in the political history
of any country, especially a newborn one. We must
therefore ensure the success of the new State by
maintaining security and by building a sustainable
administrative and economic base, as mentioned in
paragraph 98 of the Secretary-General's report. It is
extremely important that East Timor continue to
benefit for some time to come, especially after its
independence, from United Nations assistance in the
form of civilian expertise in various fields of
administration and other sectors.

We are happy to learn that the presidential
election is scheduled for 14 April. We hope that the
maturity shown in the election last August will
continue to prevail and that democracy will be given
another positive push forward in East Timor.

It is undeniable that peace and stability hinge on
the level of security in any State. The risk of both
political and criminally driven violence should at all
costs be avoided. It is therefore important for
competent and adequate police units and law
enforcement officers to establish and maintain law and
order. We note with satisfaction that training
programmes for civilian police, as well as for the East
Timor Defence Force, are being accelerated.

My delegation also appreciates the fact that the
rate of refugee returns has increased and that nearly
7,000 refugees returned to East Timor over the past
period, bringing the total returns to 192,000. We hope
that those remaining in the camps of West Timor will
soon join their fellow brothers and sisters in
independent East Timor. We believe that the voluntary
returnees need necessary assistance and support for
rehabilitation and should be given the opportunity to
serve their country in any appropriate capacity. We call
on the international agencies and bilateral donors to
continue supporting the rehabilitation programme in a
sustained manner.

The significant and historical achievement in East
Timor would not have been possible without the
unflinching support of the Government of Indonesia.
We highly commend the consistent and continuous
dialogues between Indonesia and UNTAET/East Timor,
paving the way to peaceful coexistence. We applaud
the initiatives of the Indonesian Government to hold
talks at the ministerial level with UNTAET/East Timor,
aimed at providing an appropriate forum to reassess
and build upon the progress achieved and to explore
ways and means of resolving any outstanding matters.

We note the issue of the presidential decree of 12
January regarding the appointment of 18 judges to the
Ad Hoc Human Rights Court and the recent talks held
between Indonesian and East Timorese justice officials
with a view to promoting legal and judicial cooperation
between the two sides. We welcome the ongoing
discussions at the level of the Joint Border Committee
on the question of the Tactical Coordination Line. We
hope that this issue will be addressed as soon as
possible to the satisfaction of both parties.

My delegation welcomes the formal setting up of
the East Timorese Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation last Monday. Like the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in South Africa, this
Commission will serve as an important forum for
undoing the wrongs and paving the way for a clean
Administration. We welcome the appointment of seven
Timorese commissioners and we wish them all the best
in their new responsibilities. We are grateful to the
multilateral and bilateral donors for their pledges and
we encourage them to continue supporting the
Commission.

The moment has come for the Security Council to
send an unequivocal signal to the people of East Timor
and to the international community that a rightly sized,
strong and continued presence of the United Nations
will have to be maintained for a period of two years
from the date of independence to ensure the stability of
East Timor. In this regard, we endorse the plan for a
successor mission providing for a continued and
appropriately reduced United Nations peacekeeping
mission in the post-independence era. The mandate
outlined in the annex to the report is pragmatic and
realistic.

There is no doubt that East Timor will emerge as
a strong, viable and prosperous nation with the
assistance of the international community, and that it
will stand ready to shoulder its responsibilities on its
own after the departure of the successor mission.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, Senior
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of East
Timor.

