Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his briefing. We
appreciate his dedicated work in Afghanistan as Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador Tanin for his
remarks.

Afghanistan is facing a critical moment on its path
towards democracy and stability. The Afghan people
showed their courage and determination to have a
peaceful, democratic transition of leadership in the two
rounds of presidential elections.

However, the prolonged electoral process continues
to affect the political and economic uncertainty of
Afghanistan and the efforts to tackle the multitude
of challenges it faces. The full audit of the vote was
completed by the Afghan Independent Election
Commission, supported by UNAMA and global
electoral observers. As we anticipate its final results
shortly, it is imperative that the two candidates abide
by the result of the audit. At the same time, we urge the
two presidential candidates to conclude an agreement
regarding the formation of a Government of national
unity in accordance with their commitments of 12 July
and the communique of 8 August. Both parties should
assume the responsibility to respect the Afghan
people's desire for a peaceful and prosperous future
and address the many challenges ahead of the nation.
Any acts of incitement and violence during this final
phase of the election process and the establishment ofa
new Government must not be tolerated.

With regard to the security situation in Afghanistan,
we remain deeply concerned about deliberately
targeted attacks against civilians and United Nations
staff. UNAMA's mid-year report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict indicates a 24 per cent
increase in civilian casualties during the first half of
2014 as compared to the same period in 2013. We also
note the worrying trend that engagements on the ground
involving small arms and rockets are increasingly
becoming the leading cause of civilian casualties.

Lastly, with the drawdown of the International
Security Assistance Force from Afghanistan at the
end of 2014, continuous and substantial international
assistance is needed to support not only the Afghan
security forces but also other significant national
institutions. We note that NATO leaders renewed their
financial commitment to support the Afghan security
forces until the end of 2017 at the Summit held in Wales,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
It is critical for the Afghan Government to sign the
necessary security arrangements for the establishment
of a new mission to train and assist the Afghan forces.

In terms of the implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, we recognize the Afghan
Government's efforts to combat the illicit economy and
corruption by enacting the laws on combatting money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism. We call for
their full implementation at the earliest possible date.

The stability of Afghanistan is in the shared interest
of the international community. We support a peaceful
and smooth transition in Afghanistan based on a
government of national unity, with genuine partnership
and inclusiveness. The Afghan people's aspirations for
peace and prosperity, demonstrated during the electoral
process, must be respected.

