Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): Like speakers
before me, I too would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for his briefing, and to express my
delegation's appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
interim report, which we have before us.

We are indeed pleased with the significant progress in
the peace process in Tajikistan. To put it briefly, the Tajik
peace process is increasingly being recognized as one of the
success stories that this Organization is associated with. The
United Nations has played a crucial role in that process
through the deployment of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and the active
involvement of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative. The constructive role of the Contact Group
of Guarantor States and International Organizations, which
includes the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, is similarly instrumental to that success. We
commend them all for their efforts. But most importantly,
all parties in Tajikistan - the Government, other political
forces and the people alike - must be congratulated on
their commitment and determination to achieve peace and
promote national reconciliation after the devastating civil
war in that country.

The holding of the first multi-party parliamentary
elections last month, in an atmosphere free of violence,
was another important step forward towards establishing
lasting peace and stability in Tajikistan. That election,
despite the noted shortcomings, was crucial as the
beginning of democratic development in the country. By
the same token, it will be crucial for similar differences
to be addressed and avoided in the future.

We agree with the Secretary-General's observation
in his report that there are still too many men under arms,
and we fully support the efforts to encourage them to
return to civilian life.

We strongly urge the Government and all political
forces in Tajikistan to strengthen and consolidate the
achievements that have been made so far, and to continue
such efforts beyond the transition period envisaged in the
General Agreement so that the peace process will be
irreversible.

At the same time, we also believe that the
international community, and particularly the United
Nations, should remain engaged in Tajikistan, especially
in providing comprehensive assistance for the social,
economic and democratic reforms. In this regard, we look
forward to details of the Secretary-General's proposal on
the possible role of the Organization following the closure
of the present United Nations peacekeeping Mission,
UNMOT, in May.

In conclusion, we also wish to express our support
for the draft presidential statement on Tajikistan that is
before us. In this regard, we wish to thank the Russian
delegation for its initiative.

