Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me start by
congratulating you, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We look
forward to working under your guidance this month.

We also thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation for having guided us last month.

We welcome Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta to
the Security Council. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report and extend our appreciation to Mr. Atul
Khare, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste, the entire United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) team, and
the United Nations country team for their efforts in
assisting Timor-Leste.

We are indeed honoured and humbled to be
selected as the lead country in the Security Council on
the issue of Timor-Leste, and wish to express our
appreciation to the delegation of Japan for the excellent
manner in which it performed that role last year.
The people of Timor-Leste expect and deserve the
support of the international community. For its part, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1704 (2006),
which established UNMIT. The resolution remains an
important framework through which the international
community has expressed its commitment to the people
of Timor-Leste.

However, the regrettable incidents of April
through May 2006, which led to violence and political
instability, demonstrated how fragile the situation
remains. Thankfully, the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste have taken significant strides in the
political and economic spheres since then.

Now it is up to the international community to
demonstrate a long-term commitment to assisting
Timor-Leste in strengthening its institutions and
deepening its young democracy. The world cannot
afford to lose sight of the challenges still facing that
country.

The United Nations must continue to consult with
the Timorese Government about its role and
involvement. Already, UNMIT has proven to be
capable in carrying out its tasks in a responsible,
effective and efficient manner. We believe that UNMIT
needs to be strengthened and given an extension of its
mandate. That extension will allow UNMIT a
reasonable period to develop a framework for long-
term stability and development.

The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
have agreed to both the presidential and the
parliamentary elections, to be held in April and June,
respectively. These will be the first-ever elections
conducted by the Timorese people themselves, with the
support of the international community. The elections
will provide Timor-Leste with yet another positive
milestone in the country's efforts to consolidate its
democracy. The fact that the election law requires that
one of every four candidates be a woman will address
the gender balance in the new Timor-Leste
Government right from the start.

But the holding of elections is not in itself a
complete answer to all of Timor-Leste's problems. We
wish also to urge all the political parties in Timor-Leste
to adhere to the principles of non-violence and to
utilize the democratic and legal process in preparation
for the upcoming elections, so as to ensure that those
elections are declared free and fair.
For its part, UNMIT will be expected to provide
support and assistance to the Timorese authorities as
they conduct their first election. In particular, the
electoral process will require skills and expertise of an
administrative, technical and logistical nature that may
not be easily available within Timor-Leste. The
Secretary-General has already made a request, which is
fully supported by my delegation, calling for an
increase in the United Nations police contingent to
help strengthen UNMIT's capacity to address security
challenges during the electoral and immediate post-
electoral period. We were pleased to learn from the
Prime Minister that Portugal is ready to assist with that
request.

Furthermore, the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste need firm assurances that the international
community is committed to staying with them beyond
the last election to be held. Once again, the Secretary-
General has recommended in his report (S/2007/50)
that the mandate of UNMIT be extended for
12 months, and my delegation fully supports that
recommendation. The Prime Minister has called that
recommendation and its implementation a first
instalment towards lasting success for a State that is
only five years old. We could not agree more.

The overall situation in Timor-Leste has
improved, even though security conditions remain
volatile. The Government and the people of Timor-
Leste must redouble their efforts aimed at promoting
and consolidating stability in their country. South
Africa supports any steps towards consolidating
stability, promoting democratic governance and
political dialogue and fostering social cohesion. The
Dialogue Commission, launched last November by
President Gusmao, has helped to introduce a spirit of
reconciliation in the country. But, as I said, the
challenges facing Timor-Leste extend beyond political
and security factors.

The country of Timor-Leste continues to be mired
in poverty and underdevelopment. One in five people
in Timor-Leste live on less than one dollar a day. The
majority of the Timorese population, especially the
young people, face unemployment and a general lack
of opportunities. Thousands of people remain
internally displaced and live in camps, following the
political crisis of the past year. The Government of
Timor-Leste has instituted a number of programmes to
address those challenges, including public works
projects in different parts of the country of Timor-
Leste. However, those projects have not been enough
by themselves to address the deeper needs of the
country.

Several neighbouring countries - such as
Australia, Indonesia, New Zealand and the members of
the group of small islands of the Pacific - continue to
provide the necessary assistance for Timor-Leste's
long-term development. The decision by the
Government of Indonesia to promote and support
Timor-Leste for membership of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and the signing by Timor-
Leste of the initial accession memorandum are critical
for the strengthening of relations between those two
friendly nations. An official visit to Indonesia last
December by President Gusmao not only strengthened
cross-border cooperation between the two countries; it
also helped attract Indonesian business investments to
Timor-Leste. In addition, a Consolidated Appeal
project for Timor-Leste was launched on 17 January
2007 to respond to remaining humanitarian needs for a
period of six months. The Government of Timor-Leste
presented donors with a "compact" that set priorities
and refocused the national development plan to address
the eradication of poverty and related socio-economic
needs. The compact also places focus on the security
challenges facing the country. We would hope that the
international donor community will continue to
contribute generously to the development programmes
presented by the Government of Timor-Leste. Any
signs of a better life for the people of Timor-Leste will
help to create a better security and political
environment, which is necessary for the holding of the
important upcoming elections.

We welcome the signing, on 26 January 2007, of
the memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Timor-Leste, the United Nations and
the Government of Australia, which established a
Trilateral Coordination Forum to enhance security
activities. We are optimistic that such a forum will add
value to the role played by the international community
in assisting Timor-Leste to achieve long-term peace
and stability, including the much-needed security-
sector reform and the strengthening of the justice
system.

In conclusion, we reiterate our position that the
long-term commitment of the international community
to Timor-Leste remains essential. UNMIT and the
country team continue to work in a complementary
manner, with UNMIT focusing on the immediate
security needs and the United Nations country team
addressing medium- and long-term development needs,
including addressing the humanitarian situation. My
delegation has no doubt that the Security Council will
continue to have great confidence in, and attach high
priority to, the people of Timor-Leste. The Prime
Minister has said that Timor-Leste is not the centre of
the universe. But it is a centre of our best efforts in
helping the Timorese people achieve the better life they
deserve. Let me assure the Prime Minister that, as far
as we in South Africa are concerned, Timor-Leste is
indeed the centre of the world.

