Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate the People's Republic of China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate on the extremely
important topic of countering terrorism. I would also
like to commend Angola for its wise and successful
leadership of the Council last month.

Iraq firmly condemns all acts of terrorism and
barbarism committed by the transnational terrorist
group Da'esh and by groups affiliated with Al-Qaida.
We would also like to state that the threat posed by such
terrorist groups does not simply affect the security of
the people and the Government of Iraq but is rather a
threat to international peace and security as a whole
and to all the other peoples of our region, without
discrimination. The recent such attacks, in Brussels,
serve only to underscore the fact that the danger of
terrorism is never far away from any of us.

Strengthening mechanisms for countering the
financing of terrorism is a key element in limiting
the funding for groups such as Da'esh and others that
cooperate with it. Those mechanisms currently in place
are not capable of putting an end to such financial
transactions, particularly the illicit trade in oil and
petroleum-derived commodities, which is the pillar
of terrorist activities in Iraq and Syria and one that

is conducted on routes well-known to all in crossing
the borders of Syria and Iraq, in direct or indirect
cooperation with Da'esh. We hope that the Security
Council will not confine its efforts to condemning
such direct and indirect commercial transactions,
particularly those in oil, petroleum products, arms and
archeological artifacts, carried out by certain States or
their citizens in cooperation with Da'esh.

Beyond that, the Council should consider such
commercial links to terrorists not just as a means of
assistance or support to terrorism, but as a threat in
themselves to international peace and security. Such
States should be stopped and dissuaded, including
those that deliberately ignore the Security Council's
resolutions relating to Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and continue to do business financially
and militarily with Da'esh groups, which serves only
to improve the capacity of those groups to recruit and
incite people to terrorist activities at any time and in
any territory or country they choose, as we have seen
recently in Baghdad, Brussels and Tunis. That means
that such individuals and societies that have dealings
with Da'esh should be put on sanctions lists, and that
States must be required to detain them and bring them
to justice, in accordance with international instruments
and legislation.

The terrorist entity Da'esh exploits the regions
under its control in Iraq and Syria in order to fight and to
engage in smuggling and trafficking in highly valuable
cultural relics so as to finance its terrorist activities
and recruit foreign terrorist fighters. It depends on a
network of mediators and middlemen in neighbouring
countries - Turkey and Syria in particular - who
facilitate and streamline the transport of those cultural
relics and of petroleum, gas and related products to
the markets of Europe and elsewhere. We must closely
monitor those middlemen and networks.

We hope that the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999),1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities will
pursue its activities to identify the ways and means
whereby petroleum and related products are, inter alia,
smuggled across borders and used to finish Da'esh
and the Al-Nusra Front. Its work is very important
in determining how the petroleum is trafficked and
traded, particularly in border regions and settings that
lack air coverage and monitoring.
We call on the Security Council to consider
establishing an international legal mechanism, on the
basis of a legally binding agreement or resolution, to
prosecute and try foreign terrorist fighters and ensure
that the responsibility for apprehending and bringing
them to trial for the crimes committed in Iraq falls to
the country of which they are nationals. In some cases,
those crimes may include genocide and other serious
violations, in particular given Da'esh's activities in
the Turkmen region of the Kirkuk governorate in Iraq,
where it has fired missiles loaded with mustard gas at
the minority population. We have submitted a report
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons containing all the relevant information on
these incidents.

