The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and with the consent of the Council, I
shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
invitations to the representatives of Brazil, Canada,
Egypt, Georgia, Greece, Indonesia, Japan and South
Africa to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sardenberg
(Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Adamia (Georgia),
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia),
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan) and Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Jan Kavan, President of the
General Assembly.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kavan to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Gert Rosenthal, President of the Economic and
Social Council.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Rosenthal to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to highlight the participation at this
meeting of the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Ian Kavan; the President of the Economic and
Social Council, Mr. Gert Rosenthal; and the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to whom we extend a warm
welcome; I also highlight the presence of States not
members of the Security Council.

This is a defining moment for the Organization.
The international situation presents challenges of a
very diverse nature, making the presence of the United
Nations imperative. Its values, its principles and its
institutional strength make it the ideal forum for
confronting global challenges related to the threats of
malnutrition, the spread of endemic diseases, the
destruction of the environment and, very urgently,
constant disruptions of the peace. For that reason, the
presidency is grateful that, at this very important
moment for the Organization, the organs of the United
Nations are meeting here to consider together the role
that the United Nations should play in post-conflict
situations.

Today, we must demonstrate unity of purpose and
objectives in facing the new challenges to the
international community. We have chosen the theme of
"the United Nations after conflicts" because it reflects
the excellent work that the Organization has been doing
over the years, not only in conflict prevention but in
restoring security conditions, the rule of law, the
protection of human rights, institution-building and the
restoration of socio-economic conditions in States that
have emerged from conflict.

This is a time when we must guarantee the
primary responsibility of the United Nations as a whole
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We hope that, as a result of this exercise, we shall be
able to move forward with specific proposals and ideas
as to the best way in which the United Nations can and
should work on behalf of countries emerging from
armed conflict.

The recent successful United Nations experiences
in the work of rebuilding, in Afghanistan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Kosovo and Timor-Leste, show us the
importance that the international community attaches
to working in its various components on the basis of
cooperation. Here, in their capacities for
complementarity and planning, United Nations bodies
should demonstrate their ability to cooperate and to
work together.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to take
the floor.


