Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman and High Commissioner Al
Hussein for the sobering briefings that they have just
given us. I agree with them that this debate is a sad but
fitting way to mark international Human Rights Day.
It has to be right that we focus on what is probably the
worst human rights situation in the world.

As the recent report of the Special Rapporteur
makes clear, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
remains an unnecessary and unending human rights
tragedy. Today we have heard yet more horrifying
accounts; we heard many times of summary executions,
arbitrary detentions, abductions and disappearances,
all this against a backdrop of secrecy and of fear.
This is the work of a totalitarian State with no parallel
anywhere elsewhere in the world today. It is a State that
deliberately starves its people; it is a State that punishes
relatives for the alleged crimes of their family; it is a
State that instrumentalizes forced labour, prison camps,
torture and rape. Such flagrant human rights violations
cannot go unchallenged by the Council.

Let me be clear: we are not here today to score
political points. We are here because a stream of factual
reports concerning systematic human rights violations
in a country cannot be ignored. The failure of States
to respect the principles set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights should concern everyone
in the Chamber. Without human rights, participatory
Government and the rule of law, peace and security are
at risk. That can be seen clearly through the focus of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on military
and nuclear programmes at the expenses of its people's
welfare, and through its prioritization of spending on
weapons development and its nuclear programme at
a time of mass starvation. We cannot consider either
human rights or peace and security in isolation. And
concern for the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea goes far beyond the Council, as I
think the audience here demonstrates today. Over 100
countries expressed their concern through the adoption
last month by the Third Committee of a draft resolution
on the subject. That was not a conspiracy, nor was it
propaganda. It reflected a shared belief from all parts
of the world that we all want North Koreans to have the
human rights that we all want and demand for ourselves.

It has been nearly a year since we last met to
discus the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (see S/PV.7353). Given the absence of any tangible progress,
many of us will be looking today and asking what more
we can do to improve the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Yes, we can
point to the opening of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul. That
is a welcome move, sadly attacked, as aides have just
reminded us, by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea itself. We can speak of our encouragement to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea that it engage
in the Universal Periodic Review last year; that was
a good thing. But nothing can mask the fact that the
onus to change the situation on the ground rests with
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea itself. It
is in its power to improve the lives of its citizens in a
meaningful way.

Pyongyang is likely to disregard, dispute and
deny the facts that have just been set out to us in the
Council. It has said that it does not have a human rights
problem, that people are treated fairly and that there
is accountability for all. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has claimed that it is willing to host
inward visits on that issue. Therefore, if the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea really has nothing to hide,
it should not fear transparency. We look forward to
proper access for international observers, including
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, to increase
our understanding of the human rights situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We look
forward to hearing from the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea how it will implement the Universal
Periodic Review recommendations that it has claimed
to accept.

Until we see the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea take steps to address the shocking crimes
detailed in so many reports, the Council should bear
witness to the shocking reality there. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea needs to know that the
world is watching. If the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea will not enable or ensure accountability, the
international community must be ready to do so. The
United Kingdom fully supports the call for the Council
to consider how it can best ensure accountability,
including through considering a referral to the
International Criminal Court.

One bilateral reflection, this week marked the
fifteenth year of diplomatic relations between the
United Kingdom and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. We have built links in education, culture
and sport. We have done so because we firmly believe
that persistent, patient dialogue is the best way to help
the citizens of that country in the long term. We will
continue to use that dialogue, as well as this forum, to
stress the need for concrete action by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to improve its human
rights situation and ensure accountability. Until those
steps are taken, until the authorities of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea treat their obligations to
their people seriously, we have no option but to remain
seized of the matter.

We grow increasingly concerned about stability and
security on the Korean peninsula and what that means
for all of us, most of all for the citizens of a country
whose regime will allow them no voice in this debate at
all and has been trying its level best to ensure that they
do not hear it.

