Mr. Duale (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting us to participate in this very important
meeting and briefing on piracy in Somalia. I also very

much wish to thank the members of the Security
Council for being steadfast in their efforts to find
viable solutions to the problems of piracy in Somalia.
Special thanks are also due to Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on Legal Issues
related to Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, for his very
comprehensive briefing. I hope as soon as I receive the
report to be able to study his very important proposals
and options, which are, as far as I can foresee, very
viable and to-the-point, and require nothing more than
immediate action, as he has said.

We also thank Mr. Stephen Mathias, Assistant
Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, who has also
supported the proposals of options for jurisdiction,
both international - that is, outside Somalia - and
within Somali territories.

The problem has been with us for a very long
time, and every time the Secretary-General issues a
report - such as his most recent very comprehensive
report on piracy (S/2010/394) - unfortunately funds
do not materialize. The funds required to be able to
take the actions that Mr. Lang has proposed are very
minor compared to what has been spent on the high
seas and considering the problems that piracy creates
not only internationally but also for the Somali people
and Somali communities, as was also highlighted by
Mr. Lang.

What remains to be done now, really, is to take
action - and quickly - both on the legal aspects of
the problem and on concrete steps to support and
enable regional authorities and the Transitional Federal
Government to police and monitor all the coastal areas
where piracy originates, so that pirates can be caught
there, with good policing, before they go onto the high
seas. Without exaggeration, we know that since March
2010 more than 30 vessels have been taken. The
number of hostages is 699; if we include the hostages
taken in 2009, the number is at least 1,000, if not more.

That creates a humanitarian situation for all those
involved, including the families of those unlawfully
detained by the pirates. On both the humanitarian and
security fronts, action should be taken as quickly as
possible, not only by the members of the Security
Council but also by the international community. I
hope that the Security Council will deeply look into
this problem and take every appropriate action in
support of the report of the Secretary-General and the
reports of Mr. Lang and Mr. Mathias.

