Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council. Before I start my remarks, I would
like to greet Foreign Minister Jose Luis Guterres. It is
an enormous pleasure to see him here again in this

building and especially in the Council. I would also
like to thank Mr. Ian Martin for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report on the situation in Timor-
Leste (S/2006/628) and his recommendations for a new
United Nations mission. I also take this opportunity to
commend the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Hasegawa, and his staff for their work in
Timor-Leste.

Portugal concurs with the statement which the
representative of Finland has made on behalf of the
European Union. But in my national capacity, I would
like to add the following.

Regarding the ongoing discussions on the
mandate and the composition of a new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste, the Portuguese position is
consistent with three main elements. First, we respect
the sovereign will and the political independence of
Timor-Leste. In this regard, Prime Minister Ramos-
Horta sent a letter (S/2006/620, annex) to the President
of the Security Council on 4 August 2006, which
clearly sets out the expectations of Timor-Leste
concerning the need for the establishment of a United
Nations multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping
mission.

Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General's
thorough assessment and the recommendations
contained in the report. We praise the Secretariat's
professionalism, which we have come to know very
well since the days when we were negotiating the self-
determination of Timor-Leste.

Thirdly, our own assessment is based on our deep
bilateral commitment towards Timor-Leste, and
especially on the fact that Portugal remains, by far, the
largest donor to Timor-Leste, with cooperation
programmes in many areas including justice,
education, health, social protection, police, armed
forces, customs, finances, and so on.

Although the situation has been stabilized
overall, we still face the very serious security and
humanitarian repercussions of the crisis. Thousands of
weapons remain unaccounted for and could be used in
further actions to wreak violent destabilization. A
climate of fear still prevails, with about 150,000
internally displaced people, which is a huge number for
such a small country. In regard to the police and
military weapons that have not been accounted for, we
must acknowledge that the international forces have
achieved only modest results. It will be difficult to
achieve sustainable political reconciliation in an
environment where individuals and groups with
political grievances are in possession of illegal arms.

At the Council's last open meeting on Timor-
Leste, on 13 June 2006 (see S/PV.5457), I stated that
Timor-Leste needed the universality and impartiality of
the United Nations, which must once again take a
leading role. The reality on the ground has reinforced
our belief. Only the United Nations can successfully
lead the efforts to facilitate political dialogue and
reconciliation, restore and maintain security and ensure
that the 2007 elections will be peaceful, free and fair.

In line with the expectations of Timor-Leste, as
expressed by Prime Minister Ramos-Horta in his letter
of 4 August, and as reiterated today by Foreign
Minister Jose Luis Guterres, Portugal will review the
current bilateral arrangement regarding the presence of
its gendarmerie force in Timor-Leste, with a view to
have that force and other elements ready to serve under
the command and control of the United Nations.

I recall here that one of the key recommendations
in the Report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, which is widely known as the Brahimi
report, regarding the importance of clear, credible and
achievable mandates, is that

"Security Council resolutions should meet
the requirements of peacekeeping operations
when they deploy into potentially dangerous
situations, especially the need for a clear chain of
command and unity of effort." (5/2000/809, para. 64(c)).

Portugal fully supports the recommendations of
the Secretary-General's report regarding the police and
military components of the follow-on mission in
Timor-Leste. Also, and as a future contributor to the
mission, we attach great importance to the security of
all United Nations personnel, including our nationals,
and we consequently deem it necessary that this
mission be backed by an adequately sized military
force under the command and control of the United
Nations.

For both political and operational reasons, we
would have great difficulty in understanding any
solution which ignored the sovereign will of Timor-
Leste, the recommendations of the Secretary-General
and the lessons learned of the recent past concerning
the need for a clear chain of command and adequate
security for United Nations personnel in peacekeeping
missions.

We welcome the establishment of an Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry for Timor-Leste, as
outlined in the letter of 8 June 2006 from Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta to the Secretary-General
(S/2006/391, annex), and especially the fact that all
relevant actors considered this to be a necessary step to
reach a political settlement and uphold the rule of law.

The demand for justice and accountability for
serious crimes committed in 1999 remains a
fundamental issue in the lives of many Timorese.
Portugal welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste
(S/2006/580), and particularly its recommendations
aiming at the completion of investigations into
outstanding cases of serious crimes and the need for
reconciliation and community healing.

Much remains to be done in this regard, as the
recent outbursts of violence have demonstrated,
namely the attacks on several key Timorese judicial
institutions, causing serious concern regarding the
potential loss of vital records with the attendant
security implications for Victims, witnesses and
suspects alike. The prevailing climate of impunity is a
major obstacle to long-lasting social reconciliation and
political stability. It is imperative to establish the truth
and achieve accountability, in keeping with
international human rights standards.

Portugal recalls the responsibility of the
international community and of the Security Council in
relation to Timor-Leste. Portugal will remain
committed to the consolidation of peace, democracy
and the full political independence of Timor-Leste.

