I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General, and Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for their briefings and updates. Viet Nam is very concerned about the fighting that broke out in Yemen after just a few days of implementing the unilateral ceasefire announced by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen, with the support of the Government of Yemen. Viet Nam welcomes the aforementioned announcement and calls on all parties, especially the Houthis, to immediately cease hostilities. Viet Nam commends the tireless work of Special Envoy Griffiths and the United Nations team in helping the parties concerned de-escalate the situation. Viet Nam also supports the joint appeal on 11 April 2020 by the five United Nations Envoys to the Middle East to urge warring parties in the region to work towards an immediate ceasefire, in line with the Secretary-General's recent call for a global ceasefire during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. With regard to humanitarian issues, we regret to have learned about the recent move by some donors to cut funding to humanitarian work in Yemen. The World Food Programme now has to cut off 50 per cent of aid for several areas in Yemen. Against the backdrop of a disastrous humanitarian situation, the country is now facing the risk of an outbreak of COVID-19 following the country's confirmation of a positive case of coronavirus. In the light of the foregoing, my delegation wishes to make following observations. First, we call on all parties to commit to an immediate ceasefire to faciliate humanitarian work and the fight against COVID-19. Secondly, we call on the United Nations, its States Members, international organizations and international donors to continue to support humanitarian work in Yemen. Financial assistance, medical supplies, test kits, ventilators and necessary training are needed to a greater extent than ever before. Thirdly, we echo the call of other Member States for the parties concerned to make further efforts aimed at upholding their obligations to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement. We also stress the need for an inclusive political process that assures the full and meaningful participation of women. Accordingly, we call on all parties to continue their cooperation with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen on the basis of his three-pillar proposal. In conclusion, we call for closer cooperation among the United Nations, international partners and all parties in Yemen in the fight against the COVID-19. It is extremely urgent at this critical moment for us to implement appropriate measaures to protect people in Yemen from both the pandemic and resurgent violence.
