The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Greece.

I welcome the presence of the President of the
Coordination Centre for Kosovo and Metohija,
Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic. I would like to join others in
welcoming here for the first time Mr. Rficker, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I
thank him for his presentation. I would also like to
welcome, among the delegation of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
Mr. Ceku, Prime Minister of Kosovo.

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore limit myself to a few brief remarks.

The Secretary-General's report clearly indicates
that over the past few months the provisional
authorities have continued their efforts towards
progress in the implementation of standards. There is
now concrete progress in some areas, especially on a
number of the 13 priorities identified by the Contact
Group. This is a positive development which we
welcome.

We note once again, however, that additional
efforts will be required for all 13 priorities to be
implemented. Furthermore, implementation of the rest
of the standards - those not on the list of 13
priorities - remains of equal importance for the
creation of a multi-ethnic, stable and democratic
Kosovo.

We are concerned by the lack of progress in the
key areas of decentralization, as well as in other crucial
and sensitive areas such as returns, dialogue, and
cultural and religious heritage. It is regrettable that, as
the Secretary-General mentions in his report, high-
level outreach by Kosovo Albanian leaders to minority
communities has decreased during the reporting period.

The security situation remains far from
satisfactory. We join others in condemning the latest
violent incident last month in Kosovska Mitrovica and
reiterate the need for all such incidents to be
thoroughly investigated and prosecuted. We also
condemn the increase in incidents of vandalism of
Serbian orthodox churches, which undermines the
progress made in the reconstruction of religious sites
damaged during the violence of March 2004.

We have on many occasions stressed here the
need for reconciliation as an absolute requirement for
the creation of a peaceful and secure future for all the
communities in Kosovo. Reconciliation, however,
presupposes the involvement of both the Kosovo Serbs
and the Kosovo Albanians. We therefore reiterate the
need for the Kosovo Serbs to engage, as the only way
to serve their own best interests, with the Provisional
Institutions. We kindly urge Belgrade once again to
encourage and not to hamper the participation of
Kosovo Serbs in the Provisional Institutions.

Regarding the ongoing political process for the
determination of Kosovo's future status, we reiterate
our full support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General and the Vienna process. We echo the
Secretary-General's disappointment over the absence
of common ground in the positions of the two parties.
We support his call for greater flexibility and a spirit of
compromise. We continue to believe that the best
outcome will be one that is reached through a
negotiated and mutually acceptable settlement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Finland.

