Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic ofIran): I am sorry to
take the floor at this late hour.

My delegation has asked for the floorjust to respond
to the allegations made by the representative of the
Israeli regime during this meeting. In that connection, I
would like to state the following.

What the representative of that regime said in
today's meeting was totally irrelevant to the subject
of today's open debate. Indeed, foreign occupation
constitutes the gravest form of terrorism. We do not
believe that there is any doubt that that regime is
responsible for aggression; occupation; the killing of
civilians, including women and children; the crime of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
other criminal acts. It is also responsible for turning
millions of Palestinian inhabitants into refugees far
from their homeland. Its network of State terrorism has
a long list of deadly operations all over the world, and it
continues to threaten more wars.

Also, to respond to my colleague from Saudi
Arabia, as my Minister mentioned this morning, the
aggression against Yemen has created a new, bleeding
sore in the region and is inflicting death and destruction
upon civilians, while emboldening extremist groups
and providing a new space for them. Those who
unleashed their armies against the innocent people of
Yemen must have realized by now that no way forward
exists other than by a political process based on a broad
inter-Yemeni dialogue.

Once again, I reiterate that the world has not yet
forgotten Saudi Arabia's complicity in the creation
of Al-Qaida and the Taliban, as well as in Saddam
Hussein's crimes against our people and the people
of Iraq. Those were the major contributing factors in
the dangerous emergence of Takfiri elements and the
spread of terrorism in the region.

I would also like to mention the question of the
tragedy that happened during the haj. As my President
already mentioned in the General Assembly this week
(see A/70/PV.13), we are not trying to politicize the issue.
We are talking about the lives of hundreds of people
who, unfortunately, fell victim to the incompetence
and mismanagement of those in charge. Due to their
unaccountability, even now as we are talking, the
missing cannot be identified and the expeditious return
of the deceased to their mourning families has been
delayed. Public opinion demands that Saudi Arabian
officials promptly fulfil their international obligations.
More important, conditions must be established for
an independent and professional investigation into the
causes of this disaster and methods identified to prevent
its repetition in the future.

