Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to convey my country's condolences to
Bangladesh.

The Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
will shortly be making a statement on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union. My delegation fully
associates itself with that statement.

Allow me also to thank Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa
for his briefing and for the work he is doing in the
field, which we highly appreciate. I would also like to
express my gratitude to Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, whose
presence does us honour. We listened very carefully to
his statement.

Allow me to say that we agree with the Secretary-
General's analysis on progress made over the past 12
months in establishing solid State institutions and in
promoting democracy and human rights. Major
progress still remains to be made in several areas:
border control and delineation; the strengthening of
public administration and State institutions; economic
self-sufficiency; and respect for good governance and
human rights. Thus, it is clear that international
support remains necessary, and that is what the
Timorese authorities are requesting.

Accordingly, we will be favourably considering
the proposals of the Secretary-General on maintaining
a United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. But in this
phase of peacebuilding, the United Nations should not
act alone. The Timorese authorities must keep up their
commitment, without which peacebuilding cannot
occur. Several bilateral and multilateral partners - I
am thinking in particular of the international financial
institutions - should increase their support in order to
allow for a smooth transition towards full stability.

At a time when UNMISET is preparing to
complete its drawdown, the enormous progress that it
has made possible since it was established in May
2002, when Timor-Leste gained independence, must be
recognized. Stabilization is not complete, but it is well
under way. Much remains to be done, and a United
Nations presence must be maintained for some time to
come. The level of United Nations presence must take
account of the work done by UNMISET, which most
definitely was a success story.

