Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to start by thanking our briefers for their statements. I
also want to express our sadness on hearing ofthe death
yesterday in Mogadishu of the human rights defender
Ms. Almaas Elman. We offer our condolences to her
family, especially Ms. Ilwad Elman, who was with us
the day before yesterday (see S/PV.8668), as well as to
the Governments and peoples of Somalia and Canada.
We hope that the full circumstances surrounding her
death will be brought to light. I would like to highlight
four points today.

First, with regard to the political situation in
Somalia, France remains extremely concerned about the
deadlock in relations between the Federal Government
of Somalia and some federal member states, which
represents a major obstacle to the completion of critical
projects for Somalia. As the Special Representative said,
it is therefore urgent to see that dialogue is resumed,
particularly between the Federal authorities and the
authorities of Jubaland, Puntland and Galmudug. That
dialogue should in no way be conditioned by time
pressures surrounding local elections to the detriment
of national interests.

Secondly, regarding the 2020-2021 elections,
France welcomes the commitment made by the Somali
Federal Government at the Somalia Partnership Forum
to adopting a new electoral code by the end of this year,
which is a fundamental step in the process for elections
to be held at the end of 2020 or the beginning of 2021
in line with the principle of one person, one vote, as
Ms. Ibrahim recalled, and with the full and effective
participation of Somali women.

Turning to the security situation, France
remains concerned about the frequency of attacks by
Al-Shabaab, particularly in Mogadishu. In that context,
we want to emphasize the importance of continuing to
implement the plan for transitioning security from the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to the
Somali security forces. The operations conducted in
Lower Shabelle were a step in the right direction, but
efforts must now continue in coordination with regional
forces, AMISOM. and international partners. Of course,
it is also extremely important that the Somali Federal
authorities continue their force-generation efforts.

With regard to AMISOM, France is paying close
attention to the issue of respect for the deadlines fixed
by the Council, in particular the reduction of the troop
ceiling by 1,000 military personnel by 28 February
2020. We believe that AMISOM's reconfiguration
must be a gradual process and conducted in the most
stable areas of the country. It is therefore essential
that the Council's decisions are fully complied with.
In addition, I would like to reiterate that the European
Union's support for AMISOM. is part of a cooperation
framework based on mutual commitment. Our
significant efforts hinge on tangible results on the part
of Somali's Federal authorities, both in terms of the
security transition, which I have already mentioned,
and on the resumption of dialogue with federal member
states. This was the approach taken in the run-up to the
signing of the Mutual Accountability Framework at the
Somalia Partnership Forum, which we commend.

Finally, France remains concerned about the serious
humanitarian situation and the ongoing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. I
particularly have in mind the acts of violence against the
civilian population, including sexual and gender-based
violence and violence against children, crimes that
we know are perpetrated by terrorist groups but also,
regrettably, sometimes by the Somali security forces.
It is therefore essential to ensure that such violations
cease and that those responsible are prosecuted. The
reintegration of survivors of such violence is also
essential to ensure a return to lasting peace.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate the
importance France attaches to smooth cooperation
between the Somali Federal authorities and United
Nations entities generally, especially the Panel of
Experts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, which we
hope will be able to conduct a visit to the country as
soon as possible.

