Mr. Luque Marquez (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to express our deepest
condolences and solidarity with the Government and
people of France, in particular to the families of the
victims of the heinous terrorist attacks perpetrated
Friday night in Paris, as well as to the Governments
and peoples of Lebanon and Russia for the tragedies of
recent weeks. Ecuador unequivocally rejects all forms
of terrorism.

Overcoming poverty is a moral imperative of
humankind because, for the first time in our history,
poverty is not caused by a lack of resources, but by the
existence of perverse and exclusive systems. We believe
that the best strategy to overcome poverty is by reducing
social, economic, territorial, environmental and cultural
gaps. In that respect, inequality - reflected in the
opulence of some compared to the intolerable misery
of others - is a great affront to our human dignity and
one of the most deep-rooted causes of conflict.

It is clear that the three pillars on which the United
Natins is founded - development, peace and security
and human rights f are interlinked. The negotiators
of the San Francisco Conference recognized that
reality and therefore endowed our Organization with
different organs with the aim of promoting those
three pillars. For that reason, the Economic and Social
Council was created to undertake studies and reports
on international affairs pertaining to economic, social,
cultural, education, health and other related matters. The
Security Council was established with a mandate from
Member States to assume the primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. The
General Assembly, the universally representative body,
may discuss all relevant issues under the Charter of
the United Nations or that pertain to the powers and
functions of any other organ created by the Charter.
That same founding document defines the respective
tasks of each of the main organs and outlines the
mechanisms for cooperation and coordination among
them.

The delegation of Ecuador therefore reiterates its
concern over this new attempt by the Security Council
to address issues that, under the Charter of the United
Nations, belong either to the Economic and Social
Council or the General Assembly and its subsidiary
bodies. This growing trend on the part of the Security
Council contravenes the founding principles of our
Organization. The Council claims to be seized of
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security that in fatc belong to other spheres, and
infringes on the rights and prerogatives of other United
Nations organs, which ultimately does not strengthen
our work but, on the contrary, undermines it.

