Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Poland for convening this debate,
which is important for all of us.

(spoke in English)

If the President will allow me, I would first like to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Group
of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, which
is made up of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and my own country,
Belgium.

As a principal organ of the United Nations, the
Security Council has an obligation to comply with the
rules of the Charter of the United Nations, including
respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms
of individuals. The rights of due process and fair and
clear procedures, which are also rules of customary
international law and have been recognized as
general principles of international law, are part of that
important cause.

In that regard, we would like to recall that the
position of the Ombudsperson for the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, has remained vacant since
8 August 2017. The longer that vacancy continues, the
more likely it is to undermine Members States' trust
and confidence in Security Council sanctions and
to jeopardize the progress made over many years in
establishing and implementing fair and clear procedures
to place and remove individuals and entities on Security
Council sanctions lists. We are particularly concerned
about the pending cases. Delays in those cases are
a direct result of the vacancy. In other words, the
vacancy is directly affecting the rights of individuals
to due process.

We therefore call on the Secretary-General
to appoint an Ombudsperson with the necessary
qualifications specified in resolution 1904 (2009)
as soon as possible and to take all the necessary
measures to further strengthen the independence and
impartiality of the Office of the Ombudsperson, as
decided in resolution 2368 (2017). We also call on the
Secretary-General to take measures to guarantee that
the important work of the Ombudsperson can continue
until the new Ombudsperson is appointed and to avoid
the recurrence of a similar situation.

(spoke in French)

I will now make some remarks in my
national capacity.

The fight against impunity is at the heart of
our actions, and Belgium has been a pioneer in the
development of international criminal law. We continue
to work to consolidate the existing legal framework, and
we welcome the fact that three amendments to add three
war crimes to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court were adopted last December. We are
pleased that the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute decided at the same session to trigger
the jurisdiction of the Court with respect to the crime
of aggression. All those amendments contribute to
creating a world in which such atrocities become less
likely. We therefore call for their ratification by each of
the States parties.

Within the context of its mandate related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council clearly has a special role to play
both in promoting respect for international law and in
fighting impunity. If elected on 8 June, Belgium will
be committed to consistently and concretely promoting
those essential objectives.

The following four main principles define Belgium's
vision of the role of the Security Council in this area.

First and foremost, we must remember that
respecting international law is not only the business of
international tribunals, it is above all the responsibility
of each State. With regard to the most serious crimes,
that implies the obligation to prosecute perpetrators so
that they cannot escape justice, wherever they may be.

Next, the actions of the Council must primarily form
part of a preventive approach. The Council must first
intervene to support States. The peaceful settlement of
disputes must be the favoured approach. In that respect,
we consider mediation to be an essential instrument.

In addition, the rule-of-law components of the
mandates of United Nations political and peacekeeping
missions should be strengthened and systematized by
taking into account the specific circumstances of each
mission. There can indeed be no lasting peace without
justice and solid institutions.

Finally, when it takes note of mass atrocities, the
Security Council must not allow disagreements among
its permanent members to lead to inaction. Its credibility
as a key player in the maintenance of international
peace and security is at stake. That is why Belgium
supports the Franco-Mexican initiative to regulate the
right of veto in the case of crimes of atrocity and why
we signed the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.

In the light ofthe Council's inaction, we welcome the
role played by the General Assembly in establishing the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism

for the Syrian Arab Republic. Belgium is proud to have
been able to contribute effectively to that collective
effort, alongside Liechtenstein and Qatar.

