Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, Mr. President,
to greet you very respectfully and to express, on behalf of
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
our appreciation to you for the important work that you
have been doing at the helm of the Security Council. We
acknowledge your resolute commitment to peace and the
defence of the sovereignty of the peoples of the world, in
particular of Palestine.

When our Government, through the Mission of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the United
Nations, expressed its views on the Middle East crisis
and on the situation in Palestine in this body, we
warned of the urgent need to prevent the Government
of Israel from committing, through its war machine,
what we predicted would be a crime against humanity.
Those 22 days of occupation and aggression between
27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, according to
figures provided by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur for Human Rights, have borne that out.

During the occupation, 1,434 Palestinians died, of
whom 235 were combatants, 239 police officers and
960 civilians, including 288 children and 121 women.
Also, 5,303 Palestinians were wounded, of whom
1,606 were children and 828 women. Even today, most
have not been able to return to a normal life as a result
of war-inflicted injuries. In the world's memory, there
has never been such callousness displayed before our
very eyes.

Our Government is emphatic in denouncing the
flagrant violation of international law and of the human
rights of the Palestinian people in Gaza. The ineffective
application of resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
which has still not been implemented, brought about
the tragedy that we deplore today. The resolution, in
which the Security Council called for an immediate,
durable and fully respected ceasefire, sadly illustrated
the inaction of the major Powers in urging Israel to
stop the attacks against Gaza. Nor has the blockade
been lifted; nor is there free transit to allow
humanitarian aid to enter and to put an end to Gaza
being a prison and concentration camp.

We must remember that the Bolivarian
Government of President Hugo Chavez Frias decided
to expel the Israeli Ambassador to our country for
disproportionate and unjustifiable military action
against the Palestinian people. United Nations Special
Rapporteur Richard Falk himself urged the
Organization "to take urgent action to protect a civilian
population being subjected to collective punishment
that amounts to a crime against humanity". At that
time, Mr. Falk believed that the International Criminal
Court should investigate the situation in order to
establish if the Israeli civilian and military leaders
responsible for the Gaza siege should be indicted and
tried for violations of international criminal law.

Today, we note that despite General Assembly
resolution ES-10/8, adopted by the General Assembly
at its resumed tenth emergency special session on
illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, held on
15 and 16 January 2009, which called for an end to the
occupation, the Israeli aggression continues. United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories Richard Falk has
again reported that Israel committed massive violations
during the 22 days of its invasion of the Gaza Strip. He
confirmed that the bombings carried out by Israeli
forces on the Palestinian civilian population constituted
a massive violation of international humanitarian law.
The report of the Special Rapporteur will be very
important for the Human Rights Council in Geneva to
confirm that the Israeli Government committed war
crimes under the Geneva Conventions. The findings of
the United Nations expert are conclusive. The Israeli
army carried out crimes such as the deliberate
execution of women and children by sharpshooters. It
deliberately destroyed infrastructure such as schools,
universities, public services, electricity and water
systems and 21,000 homes, thus worsening the already
negative human development indicators and dragging
the population of Gaza to the lowest levels of poverty.

The Government of Israel cannot indefinitely
remain beyond international laws. Complacency and
complicity clearly have negative consequences on
Palestinians every day, Worse yet, however, they create
a precedent that could affect all countries, including as
regards international impunity, which could create an
environment for the destabilization of the international
system. Hence, it is important to establish criminal
responsibility for what took place, lest the Security
Council lose even further credibility and legitimacy.

Our criticism of the Israeli Government and
Israeli army policy of genocide cannot be mistaken for
anti-Semitism. The Bolivarian Government respects
the Jewish people and its religious beliefs and
practices. In Venezuela, Jewish communities enjoy full
guarantees that their culture, economic well-being and
social aspirations will be respected - as befits a
tolerant, multi-ethnic and multicultural country that
demonstrates tolerance both to those born in Venezuela
and to immigrants. Our respect is extended to Jewish
people in Venezuela and throughout the world.

We believe in the importance of all initiatives
towards the attainment of peace in the Middle East, in
particular the demand by Palestine as a nation for
peace, respect for its sovereignty and the full
development of its people. The League of Arab States
is playing a fundamental role in that regard. The
United Nations must stress the need to meet the urgent
needs of the population and bring about lasting peace.
That will be possible only if justice is systematically
sought.

It is a fact that there can be no peace in the
Middle East so long as the occupation continues, so
long as the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination is denied, so long as inhumane and
degrading practices continue daily against thousands of
Palestinians, and so long as colonization, carried out
through Israeli settlements, continues.

In the midst of its tragedy, Palestine has produced
great poets, lending distinction to the memory of its
people. I shall conclude by quoting from "Homeland,"
by the Palestinian poet Ibrahim Nasrallah.

"Under the yoke of our mornings
The sun crumbles

And in the darkness of our steps

Our panting breath is on fire

These incomplete homelands

In which we appear to be

Nothing more than prisoners of war."

