The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May 2008, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Dumisani Kumalo,
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of April 2008. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Kumalo
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Myanmar

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
statements of 11 October and 15 November 2007
and all the expectations expressed in those
statements.

"The Security Council takes note of the
announcement by the Government of Myanmar of
a referendum on a draft constitution in May 2008
and elections in 2010. It further notes the
commitment by the Government of Myanmar to
the

ensure that the referendum process will be free
and fair. The Security Council underlines the
need for the Government of Myanmar to establish
the conditions and create an atmosphere
conducive to an inclusive and credible process,
including the full participation of all political
actors and respect for fundamental political
freedoms.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
unwavering support for the Secretary-General's
good offices mission and expresses its
appreciation for the work of his Special Adviser,
Ibrahim Gambari. The Security Council
encourages the Government of Myanmar and all
parties concerned to cooperate fully with the
United Nations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
important role that the ASEAN countries continue
to play in supporting the United Nations good
offices mission.

"The Security Council affirms its
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Myanmar and, in that context,
reiterates that the future of Myanmar lies in the
hands of all ofits people.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/l3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
08-32636

