Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): At the outset, allow me
to state that, given the critical importance of the issue,
Japan considered it desirable for States not members of
the Council to be afforded the opportunity to express
their views. We therefore highly appreciate your
initiative, Sir, of convening today's open meeting.

Having said that, let me offer several comments
at this juncture. First, Japan shares the serious concern
and misgivings at the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery and believes
that the Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole must play a more effective role in addressing
this issue. With respect to the present draft resolution,
it is urgent and essential for us to act to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction do not fall into the hands
of terrorists and other non-State actors. For that reason
and because the issue is one that is directly tied to the
security of many countries, including mine, my
Government supports the adoption of a resolution by
the Council, as long as it is acceptable to Member
States after further discussion of the present draft.

Secondly, in order to ensure the effectiveness of
the resolution, it is desirable that the committee
mentioned in the current draft resolution offer advice to
countries concerned in order to enable them to correct
their specific, concrete violations. Such a committee
should be staffed by persons with sufficient expertise,
who should be recruited not only from the members of
the Council but also widely from Council non-
members. For its part, Japan is prepared to make a
contribution in that respect. In addition, I wish to draw
the attention of the Council to the fact that the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, with
responsibility for disarmament and non-proliferation,
already exists within the United Nations. It might be
advisable for the committee to make good use of its
resources.

Thirdly, in order to counter the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, it is essential to secure
the active - not passive - and willing cooperation of
a large number of countries, especially developing
countries. The Security Council should therefore also
play an important role in encouraging the provision of
technical assistance to developing countries, so that
they will be able to enact the necessary domestic laws
in implementing the effective non-proliferation
measures imposed under the resolution.

Finally, allow me to make a general observation.
In adopting a binding Security Council resolution
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the
Security Council assumes a lawmaking function. The
Security Council should, therefore, be cautious not to
undermine the stability of the international legal
framework.

Japan strongly hopes that the Security Council
will take note of these observations so that discussion
on the draft resolution may be conducted in such a
manner that full transparency is guaranteed and that the
Council will adopt a resolution with the widest support
among Member States.

