Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, terrorist attacks using suicide
bombers brainwashed by hatred continue across the
globe in many cities. Last month, the casualties of these
bloody crimes included citizens in Saint Petersburg,
and Copts and Orthodox Christians in Egypt were
attacked. Recently, concert-goers in Manchester were
subject to such attacks. Unfortunately, the list of
these attacks could go on for some time. In this and
many other cases, suicide bombers are guided by an
ideology of violence that is totally disconnected from
any religion or shared human values. This is a targeted
ideology skilfully propagated by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Jabhat Al-Nusra and other
terrorist organizations. These thugs utilize the Internet
and social networks, which are the means of choice
used by young people.

We have consistently called for the improvement
of the toolkit to counter terrorist narratives. Our
delegation voted in favour of the adoption of resolution
2354 (2017), reiterating the international comprehensive
framework here, and was a sponsor of the resolution.
We should like to thank the delegation of Egypt for its
initiative last year to draw up the framework.
We think that the document prepared by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (S/2017/375, annex)
also reflects in a balanced manner existing ideas of the
Council and Member States on the matter of countering
incitement to terrorism and fortifying such ideas with
relevant recommendations.

One of the most important elements of the resolution
is the list of principles that should guide such efforts.
First and foremost, these are the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, including the
inadmissibility of interference into the internal affairs
of States. As we have seen in practice, disregard
for these principles, including to carry out various
geopolitical schemes, plays into the hands of terrorists.

The resolution enshrines the frontline role of States
in counterterrorism. Of course, when necessary and
in the light of national priorities, civil-society bodies
could participate in this work, as well as religious and
education institutions. As is rightly noted in the very
framework, a pivtoal deterrent to terrorism and terrorist
narratives is the implementation of comprehensive law-
enforcement measures. Here, we believe that ample
capacity could be tapped to improve the international
legal basis for counterterrorism.

The adoption today of resolution 2354 (2017)
cannot be seen as the final outcome of the Council's
work to counter terrorist narratives. On the contrary,
we are of the view that the creation of a framework
allows us to better understand the tasks before the
Council in this sphere. There is a need to improve
the legal and sanctions toolkit enshrined in Security
Council resolutions, including criminalizing the public
justification of terrorism and spread of materials
of a terrorist nature, establishing relevant sanction
criteria and strengthening international cooperation in
this field.

We think that this type of endeavour would not
run counter to prevalent human rights standards. On
the contrary, tackling these challenges would ensure
one of the most important of them - the right to life.
Without firm and effective measures to counter terrorist
narratives, we will not get rid of suicide bombers or
other phenomena. We stand ready to engage in that
regard.
