The coronavirus disease pandemic has tested the United Nations capacity to maintain its operational ability to continue its work and to make decisions regarding the disease. We acknowledge the numerous efforts to safeguard the work of the Security Council, transparency and the participation of Member States through the use of temporary, extraordinary and provisional working methods. However, such methods are not sufficient, for they do not allow the participation of a State non-member of the Security Council in a closed videoconference (VTC) when a topic affecting it specifically is being discussed, as established by rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council. Nor are Member States able to fully participate in open VTCs as they would in open debates. In this regard, we emphasize that such methods respond only to the current and exceptional circumstances and cannot in any way become a regular occurrence for future scenarios. We reiterate our support for comprehensive reform of the Security Council, including of its working methods, with a view to making it a transparent, democratic and representative body, in line with the evolution of the United Nations and international relations. The expansion of the Security Council should encompass permanent and non- permanent members alike, aimed at correcting the insufficient representation of developing countries. Such expansion should include an increase of new permanent members: at least two African countries, two Asian developing countries and two Latin American and Caribbean countries. The Council should comprise no less than 26 members. Effective measures are needed to eliminate exclusionary practices and ensure genuine participation and democratization in the Council's work and decision- making, including the elimination of the veto. However, until the veto is eliminated, any new seats in the category of permanent membership must have the same prerogatives and rights as the current members, including the veto power. In any case, any State directly involved in or particularly affected by a matter under discussion must always be allowed to participate in deliberations and decision- making on matters directly concerning it, as established by Article 31 of the Charter of the United Nations. In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations, its members recognize that the Security Council, in discharging its functions, acts on their behalf, and consequently the work of the Council is the collective responsibility of all Member States. Greater transparency in the work of the Council would thus help us fulfil that collective responsibility. We advocate, inter alia, for transparent informal transparent; the adoption of the Council's rules of procedures, which remain provisional to date; the issuance of minutes of informal consultations, which should be the exception rather than the rule; and an annual report that is thorough and analytical. While we recognize the increase in the number of public meetings, including open debates and wrap-up sessions, over recent years, as well as the unprecedented process of consultation and exchange with Member States in the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General, there remains a tendency for the Security Council to work mainly in closed formats, to make decisions without addressing the concerns of Member States and to force decisions on draft resolutions when considerable differences in their content still exist. Likewise, we regret that the Council submits annual reports to the General Assembly that consist of merely descriptive accounts of Council meetings, activities and decisions, rather than reflecting a comprehensive explanatory analysis of Council work in order to assess the causes and implications of its decisions. In addition to reforming its working methods, the Security Council must align its functions with the mandate conferred upon it by the Charter of the United Nations. Interference in matters beyond its purview must cease - in particular, those concerning the mandate of the General Assembly. Precisely in accordance with its mandate under the Charter, the Security Council must focus on addressing the most urgent problems representing threats to international peace and security. Chapter VII should be invoked as intended - as a measure of last resort. We reject the selective manipulation of the Council's methods and practices based on political agendas and domination - in particular, attempts to introduce issues that are not part of its agenda - as well as the politicization of other parties to be considered by the body. We support the intergovernmental negotiations in the General Assembly, which must remain transparent and inclusive. It is only through debate, in compliance with the established timelines and frameworks, that we will be able to define the way forward, with the consensus of all Member States. We reiterate the need for a reformed, democratic, transparent and efficient Security Council that represents the interests of all States Member of the Organization in order to preserve multilateralism and the long-term credibility and legitimacy of the United Nations.
