Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish at the outset to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and
Head of Office for the Sahel for her briefing.

As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/866), the security situation in the Sahel region
remains unstable, giving rise to concern at the direct
effects thereon of the complex political realities
prevailing in Libya and Mali, the terrorist threat posed
by Boko Haram and other terrorist groups, as well as
increased drugs and arms trafficking. Venezuela has
repeatedly warned of this in the Council, and we have
expressed our concern at the armed violence, the spread
of terrorism and the destruction of the capacities of the
Libyan State following the 2011 military intervention,
which gave rise to instability in the subregion and other
parts of the world.

Concerning Mali, as we have stated before,
Venezuela welcomes the efforts made in the area
of dialogue and negotiation among the parties to the
conflict in Mali, as well as the mediation team led by
Algeria, as reflected in the signing last June of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, which has led
to considerable progress, not just for the country itself
but in terms of the stability of the region.

At the same time, we continue to condemn the
spread ofterrorism, which has given rise to a structurally
serious situation in the northern and central parts of the
country, where the prevailing violence was reflected
in the terrorist attacks that took place in Bamako last
week, which were strongly condemned by the Council.
The political and security instability in Libya and Mali,
as well as trafficking in small arms and light weapons
in the subregion, has created a dangerous hotbed
of tension in the Sahel as a whole, resulting in an
exacerbated climate of violence, which has promoted
criminal activity and trafficking in drugs and weapons,
as well as terrorism, with the civilian population being
the primary victims.

We are concerned at the fact that terrorist groups
such as Boko Haram and Al-Qaida, among others, have
intensified their operations in the Sahel region, with
the inevitable consequences being an increased number
of displaced persons and refugees. We therefore hope
that the sustained efforts being carried out in the field
by the Multinational Joint Task Force to combat Boko
Haram will lead to its achieving its goal in the fight
against terrorism.

Unfortunately, the effects of these conflicts and
threats to security have forced the States in the region
to give priority to financing the security sector over and
above critical socioeconomic needs such as those arising
from the humanitarian situation. The report of the
Secretary-General describes a set of factors reflecting
the humanitarian needs of more than 20 million people
in the region, including conflict-related violence, food
insecurity, epidemics and natural disasters.

While we recognize the advances made by the
United Nations 2014-2016 Humanitarian Strategic
Response Plan for the Sahel in responding to acute and
chronic needs in the region, including capacity-building
for Governments, we are concerned that humanitarian
programmes in the Sahel continue to be underfunded.
We therefore call on the international community to
continue to commit itself to mobilizing resources in
order to alleviate the urgent humanitarian needs in the
Sahel. The role played by Mauritania, Burkina Faso,
Chad, the Niger and Mali as members of the Group
of Five for the Sahel, the Ministerial Coordination
Platform for the Sahel, the Nouakchott process and the
informal group of international partners for the Sahel
has been very important in implementing social and
security policies in the region.

We stress the fact that these efforts should be
focused on sustainable development in the region and
not purely a military vision. Failure to address the
structural causes of conflicts lads to more violence.
It is only with sustained attention to the root causes
of conflict - such as poverty, lack of access to basic
services and education, political dialogue and adequate
support by regional and international partners - can
we ensure strong and sustainable peace and security.
Because of its geographic and political characteristics,
the Sahel has the ability to contribute to constructive
solutions that effectively meet the major challenges in
terms of internal displacement, refugees and migratory
flows, which in recent times have had a significant
human impact on the Mediterranean region.
While we must go after mafia groups that traffick
in human beings and take advantage of misfortune of
the disadvantaged, we must also act with political and
moral coherence in putting in place policies for the
region that do not encourage armed conflicts by way
of economic interests. In that way, we could avoid
the tragic consequences and eventual regret over the
interregional impact of such crises as the current one
involving migrants.

We acknowledge the importance of the good results
achieved by the joint efforts of the specialized agencies
of the United Nations, as reflected in the Secretary-
General's report, especially the work aimed at women
and young people as those especially vulnerable to the
effects of violence, the purpose of which is to prevent
armed conflicts and the spread of violent extremism,
but above all to relieve the suffering of millions of
people who are excluded from the right to development.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the
wealth and many natural resources of Africa have
historically been a target of the ambition on the part of
more powerful nations and their dire colonial legacy,
which has led to untold suffering, conflicts and divisions
in the region. Mobilizing resources and financing for
development initiatives and projects in the Sahel must
be based on the spirit of sustainability and cooperation,
whereby leadership in overall management as well as
over specific projects is exercised by Governments
and peoples jointly with the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and the African Union, which should
lead the international effort.

