Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month and to wish you every success. I
would also like to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Panama, for his
successful leadership of the work of the Council last
month. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations for his comprehensive evaluation of the
present situation in Afghanistan. I welcome the
Secretary-General's recent decision to appoint Mr. Kai
Eide as his Special Representative for Afghanistan and
as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).

In spite of some progress made by the
international community in Afghanistan over the past
six years since the conclusion of the Bonn
Agreement- particularly in the areas of advancing
economic recovery, building infrastructure, reforming
the judiciary system and improving a number of
educational, health and local governance services -
the political transition process in Afghanistan continues
to face serious challenges due to the unsafe and
volatile environment, the slow implementation of

national reform programmes and initiatives, a
notorious lack of resources and the country's poor
infrastructure.

The United Arab Emirates, which has stood by
the Afghan people since the beginning of their plight
and which has made generous contributions to
emergency humanitarian relief and economic recovery
and rehabilitation programmes, is deeply concerned at
the increasing threat of violence, which continues to
impede the country's political and development efforts
and which prevents the affected population in 36
districts from having access to humanitarian supplies.
Indeed, the threat of violence has also had a direct
impact on the lives of innocent civilians, United
Nations personnel, humanitarian workers, the
personnel of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) and members of diplomatic missions. A
member of the United Arab Emirates diplomatic
mission in Kabul was critically injured last January in
an armed attack. Therefore, while we welcome the
appointment of the former Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Algeria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, as Chairman of the
Independent Panel on Safety and Security of United
Nations Personnel and Premises, we affirm the
importance of all parties honouring their obligations to
maintain the safety and security of international
workers and members of diplomatic missions in
accordance with the 1961 Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations, the 1963 Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations and the 1973 Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against
Internationally Protected Persons, including
Diplomatic Agents.

In this context, we reiterate the importance of the
following subjects. First, it is important to re-evaluate
Afghanistan's national security structures and judicial
system and to implement a comprehensive strategy
aimed at reforming, training and building the capacities
of security personnel and the Afghan National Army,
especially as regards meeting the requirements of
security, fulfilling the country's law enforcement needs
and combating armed groups.

Secondly, it is important to mobilize and increase
various forms of assistance to the Government of
Afghanistan in order to enable it to build its capacities
and improve its performance, particularly in achieving
national reconciliation, extending central authority to
the entire territory of Afghanistan, providing
development support to local councils, establishing
alternative development with the support of
international partners, implementing the national
poverty-reduction strategy, providing essential health,
social and educational services and alleviating the
suffering of the Afghan people, many of whom remain
without electricity and energy to this day.

Thirdly, it is important to strengthen the central
and neutral role of the United Nations in leading the
international community's efforts in Afghanistan; in
coordinating the humanitarian assistance and donor
activities in Afghanistan in accordance with the needs
of the Afghan people, especially vulnerable sectors; in
ensuring provincial reconstruction; in providing
technical and financial support for the elections
scheduled to be held next year; and in addressing the
problem of landmines, a problem which continues to
pose a great danger to the Afghan people and which
impedes economic recovery. There is also a need to
deal with the problem of refugees. In this regard, we
reaffirm our support for Afghanistan's proposal to
convene an international conference on the return and
reintegration of Afghan refugees later this year.

In conclusion, we highly appreciate the
substantial efforts made by the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan under the leadership
of NATO, by UNAMA and by other international
partners with a view to bringing security and stability
to Afghanistan and achieving the goals set out within
the framework of the Afghanistan Compact of 2006 to
improve the lives of the Afghan people. At the same
time, we emphasize the importance of focusing on the
priorities of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy and its implementation mechanisms, so that
the Strategy's goals can be achieved, especially those
relating to the advancement of peace, development,
reconstruction and stability in this friendly country.

