Ms. Rodriguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's meeting. We also thank Ms. Tetteh
and Ms. Mohammed for their briefings.

We attach great importance to strengthening
multilateralism and cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as other regional
and subregional organizations and international
financial institutions, so as to meet contemporary
challenges with greater consistency, effectiveness and
efficiency. We recognize in the African Union Master
Road Map of Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in
Africa by the Year 2020 an example of the commitment
and responsibility of African countries with a View
to building a continent free of conflict, which means
addressing such root causes of conflict as poverty,
inequality, climate change and weak institutions.

In those objectives, and as indicated in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/759), there is a
clear convergence of interests and responsibilities
between the United Nations and the African Union,
from peacekeeping and security to the implementation
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which will require fostering synergies
and complementarity that leverage the comparative
advantage of each of these bodies.

With regard to conflict prevention, we recognize the
efforts of the African Union to promote the Continental
Early Warning System, as well as to establish the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention and
Mediation, to strengthen the role of women in the context
of the African peace and security, including through a
network of mediators ready for deployment. We believe
those mechanisms could be put in place to enable them
to be used in peacekeeping operations, particularly in
countries that will hold elections next year.

Regarding peace operations, we highlight the
additional work being carried out in Darfur, Somalia
and South Sudan, among others. We also believe that it
is possible to strengthen the existing cooperation based
on the experience gained in the field in combating
the scourge of terrorism. Greater cooperation with
innovative initiatives, such as the Multinational Joint
Task Force against Boko Haram or the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel, should be explored in
greater depth.

We believe it important to continue exploring
options so that the United Nations can contribute to
strengthening the capacities and efficiency of such
forces in order to provide them with predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding. Similarly, given that
there can no peace without justice, we recognize the
importance of the United Nations continuing to work
closely with the African Union in developing capacities
to prevent, investigate, address and report violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

We also deem it necessary for both organizations to
jointly coordinate in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
phases so as to address the root causes of conflicts
and promote the rule of law and economic growth
based on greater citizen participation, in particular by
women and young people, the private sector and civil
society organizations. To that end, we believe that the
Peacebuilding Commission is an appropriate platform
for promoting synergies in such areas.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight the work
carried out by the United Nations Office to the African
Union along with other regional and subregional entities
on the ground, which provides a space for interaction
that can offer strategic guidance for cooperation and
mutual coordination.

