Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): Permit me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Although Nigeria left the Security Council as a non-
permanent member more than two years ago, my
delegation recalls the occasions when you presided over
the Council during our tenure; therefore, we are confident
that under your able leadership, the deliberations of the
Council will be conducted with skill and wisdom and in
a manner that will ensure justice and enhance the
principles and purposes of the Charter.

The adoption of a draft resolution creating the
United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) will be a unique milestone in the
constructive relationship between the United Nations and

 

the Economic Community of West Africa States
(ECOWAS) in the efforts to restore peace and security to
Sierra Leone. The positive role of ECOWAS and the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in the process of
restoring stability at the request of the democratically
elected Government of Sierra Leone is well documented
and has been acknowledged consistently by the Security
Council and its members, including the last speaker. States
members of ECOWAS committed substantial human and
material resources to the overthrow of the junta in Sierra
Leone. The peace plan for Sierra Leone supported by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United
Nations was successfully implemented by ECOWAS heads
of State.

It was indeed a remarkable occasion when the
legitimate Government of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah
was restored to power in Sierra Leone on 10 March 1998.
It was, however, obvious that more needed to be done to
consolidate peace and stability in Sierra Leone. In this
regard, urgent and concrete support in the form of financial,
logistical and material resources is needed to enable
ECOMOG to defeat the remnants of the junta, who
continue to commit unspeakable atrocities in parts of Sierra
Leone; this support would assist the process of
reconciliation and reconstruction in that country.
Furthermore, considerable humanitarian assistance is
required for Sierra Leone, as well as for neighbouring
countries which continue to host large numbers of refugees.

Recently, at the initiative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, the Chairman of ECOWAS and head of State
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, General Abdulsalam
Abubakar, hosted a meeting between President Ahmad
Tejan Kabbah of Sierra Leone and President Taylor of
Liberia, which took place at Abuja on 2 July 1998. The
meeting, which was co-chaired by the Chairman of
ECOWAS and the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
addressed a number of regional and subregional issues,
including, in particular, ways in which security and
cooperation between the neighbouring States of Liberia and
Sierra Leone could be further improved and the role
ECOWAS and the United Nations could play in support of
such efforts. The communique issued at the end of the
Abuja mini-summit contains important agreements which
should now be implemented in full and without further
delay.

It is timely that the United Nations-proposed
conference on Sierra Leone has been scheduled for 30 July
1998. The conference would be the appropriate forum to
sensitize the international community to peacekeeping
activities and to encourage the donation of humanitarian
and emergency provisions. The Nigerian delegation, as
well as other members of ECOWAS, would join with
others to ensure the success of the conference.

Meanwhile, we wish to draw attention to the fact
that the Trust Fund that would support peacekeeping
efforts in Sierra Leone still requires substantial
contributions from Member States of the United Nations,
and my delegation, on behalf of ECOWAS, will call on
them to make contributions.

Furthermore, concrete assistance from States in the
form of logistical and technical support would help the
Government of Sierra Leone directly in its quest for
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the country.
We welcome the recommendation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, that Sierra
Leone be recognized as one of the pilot projects for a
more effective response to the needs of children in post-
conflict peace-building. This recommendation, along with
the efforts of the Government of Sierra Leone to pursue
an effective national response to the fate of children
affected by armed conflict, augurs well for the welfare of
children suffering as a result of violent conflicts.

It will, however, be an even greater achievement
when the international community eventually succeeds in
preventing the involvement of and the assault on children
and puts an end to the phenomenon of child soldiers in
many parts of the world, particularly on the African
continent.

The establishment of UNOMSIL, consisting of
military observers, a well-equipped medical unit and
civilian support staff, should help in the monitoring of
several aspects of the military and security situation in
Sierra Leone, including, in particular, the disarmament
and demobilization of former combatants.

My delegation welcomes very much the
establishment of UNOMSIL and wishes it success in
carrying out its mandate on behalf of the subregion and
the international community as a whole. It is important,
however, to emphasize that the success of UNOMSIL will
depend to a large extent on continued close cooperation
and mutual support between UNOMSIL and ECOMOG.
Such cooperation and support would undoubtedly
encourage greater and successful collaboration not only

 

between the United Nations and ECOWAS, but also
between the United Nations and other regional bodies.

