Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Chairmen of the three Committees, the Permanent
Representatives of India, Germany and South Africa,
for their exhaustive briefings and efforts alongside all
members of the Security Council to promote
international counter-terrorism cooperation. I should
like to make the following comments.

First, with respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and Associated Individuals
and Entities, Lebanon welcomes the efforts of the
Committee, its Panel of Experts and the Secretariat,
which have helped to update the consolidated list and
better to disseminate information on the reasons for
listing. We also support the efforts of the
Ombudsperson, who has contributed to the
transparency of the Committee's regime and to respect
for the fundamental rights of listed individuals. We
believe that the success of her mission is closely linked
to States' cooperation with her. Lebanon supports
efforts to improve the working methods of the
Committee. In that regard, we reiterate that if we want
sanctions to have greater legitimacy, they must be in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
international humanitarian law, even if they are
preventive in nature.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which was established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), Lebanon welcomes its efforts and those of the
Executive Directorate to promote the legislative and
institutional capacities of States in combating
terrorism. We encourage the continuation of
cooperation with States and international and regional
organizations in order to implement the provisions of
resolutions 1624 (2005), 1373 (2001) and 1267 (1999),
for combating terrorism must be complemented by
regional and subregional efforts. We welcome the
Committee's meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations in Strasbourg in April to
consider the best ways to prevent terrorism.

11-3390]
Lebanon looks forward to the comprehensive
updated survey on resolution 1373 (2001), which will
be published next month, as the survey will evaluate
the implementation of the resolution and the challenges
all of us face. We would also like to emphasize the
importance of the meeting to be held to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001). That will be a very important
international milestone that will provide us an
opportunity to discuss the issue of terrorism and
counter-terrorism in general.

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we support the
adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), which extended the
Committee's mandate for a further 10 years. The
Committee will have to address a number of new
challenges in the coming 10 years in order to fully
implement the resolution's provisions. Resolution 1977
(2011) affirmed the importance of States' compliance
with their obligations to work towards disarmament
and limit proliferation. In that regard, we wish to stress
the importance of all three aspects and the need to take
into account the principle of equitable geographic
representation in selecting the members of the Panel of
Experts.

We welcome the role played by the Committee to
strengthen the ability of States to take effective
measures at the international level to prevent terrorists
and non-State actors from acquiring sensitive
technologies that could lead to proliferation, whether
nuclear, biological or chemical. We believe that the
assistance provided by the Committee and the Panel of
Experts to States that request it is one of the key
elements to implementation.

Efforts undertaken at the national, regional and
international efforts are of great importance when it
comes to providing assistance, exchanging experiences
and capacity-building. All of this is aimed at better
implementing resolution 1540 (2001). In that regard, I
would like to recall the efforts made by the League of
Arab States to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their falling into the hands of
terrorists. We also wish to stress the importance of
making the Middle East a zone free of nuclear
weapons.

Finally, given the numerous acts of terrorism we
have suffered over the years, Lebanon is among the
States most familiar with the dangers of terrorism. We

11-3390]
would therefore like to reaffirm our cooperation with
the three Committees and our full support for counter-
terrorism efforts.

We believe that the death of Osama bin Laden,
leader of Al-Qaida, opens up a new chapter but does
not bring an end to terrorism, which continues to claim
lives on a daily basis regardless of faith or nationality.
We therefore call for continued constructive dialogue
among all countries to develop a common definition of
terrorism pursuant to international human rights law.
This is a scourge that threatens all of our lives, our
security and our prosperity. It also threatens the values
that unity us.

Notwithstanding the resolutions and steps
adopted by the United Nations, Lebanon believes that
the struggle against terrorism entails dealing with the
root causes of this phenomenon, especially by
eliminating hotbeds of tension, double standards,
foreign occupation, ignorance and violations of human
rights and sacred religious principles.

