Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me also thank
our briefers today. The United Kingdom held an open
debate on mediation during our own presidency of
the Security Council in August (see S/PV.8334). We
are very glad to see the Kuwaiti presidency taking
the debate further, because we believe that mediation
can and does work. We believe that properly deployed
and executed, mediation can help parties to resolve
disputes before they are allowed to spiral into darker
and more entrenched cycles of violence. We also
believe, as the Council recognized in its January 2018
presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/ 1), that mediation
has to be one element of a comprehensive conflict-
prevention strategy.

Ban Ki-moon talked about the importance of
conflict prevention, of dealing with issues before they
get out of control. I know that some members of the
Security Council are concerned by any expansion
of the Council's agenda. If we do not find ways of
effective conflict prevention in countries not yet on our
agenda where we have concerns, then we make it more
likely that they will actually come onto the agenda.
We therefore have to find some way of collectively
resolving this dilemma. At a time when the concept of
conflict prevention can prompt different responses from
Security Council members, I believe that the question of
the importance of mediation is something that unites us
all, around which we all can find consensus. I actually
thought that the statement by the representative of
China underlined that very point.

Let me also salute the hard work of United
Nations Special Envoys and Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, who are on the front lines
of complex negotiations in situations such as Libya
and Yemen. Again, I find myself agreeing with Ban
Ki-moon on the importance of standing behind our
mediator when the going gets tough. In our recent press
statement on Yemen, the Security Council, among
other points, reiterated its unequivocal support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
need to stand behind the people we send out there, even
when things are difficult.
I also want to salute, as my French and Chinese
colleagues have done, the role that regional and
subregional organizations play. They are well placed to
assume mediation roles, as the African Union (AU) did
during the peace talks in the Central African Republic,
for example. Let me take this opportunity also to express
our strong support for ongoing AU-led mediation
efforts to resolve the current crisis in the Sudan and its
people's calls for a civilian-led transitional authority.
It was good that the Security Council issued a press
statement last night standing behind African Union
efforts condemning violence and calling for talks to
resolve the situation.

It is therefore critical that the United Nations retains
an agile mediation capacity. The mediation standby team
of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
(DPPA) is an important part of this prevention toolkit,
with a wide range of preventive diplomacy capacities
and expertise, including on the design and management
of dialogue processes, constitution-making, gender and
inclusion issues, natural resources, power-sharing and
security arrangements. The United Kingdom has been
one of the largest donors to the DPPA multi-year appeal
to support those activities.

The United Kingdom believes strongly, however,
that further progress is essential on the matter of
women's participation. Women continue to build peace
when formal processes fail. They lobby for peace
processes to begin when parties refuse to talk and
implement peace agreements long after the international
donors have walked away. For that and other reasons,
the United Kingdom in 2018 committed $1.6 million to
increasing women's participation in peace processes.
The Secretary-General talked about FemWise-Africa,
and I would also like to highlight the development of
the Commonwealth Women Mediators Network, which
I believe will play an increasingly important role in the
coming years. More broadly, peace processes including
and involving women fully are more likely to be
inclusive of all groups and of the grass roots, making it
more likely, in turn, that they will succeed. It is indeed
about achieving success.

The Kuwaiti presidency's concept note for today's
meeting (S/2019/456, annex) states that the Council's
"reactive" approach to crises means that action is often
taken only once political and security situations have
already deteriorated. Regrettably, it is difficult to
disagree with that assessment, but I am grateful that
we have an opportunity today to pause and consider.
Let me give an example of a country-level issue and
a thematic issue where I think we could be thinking
about these questions.

At the country level, the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the north-west and south-west regions of
Cameroon is an example of a developing crisis that has
implications for fragile regional stability and wider
international peace and security. But where there
may be scope to prevent further deterioration through
quick action by the United Nations and regional and
subregional bodies - including, in particular, the
African Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States - and to encourage and support efforts
to establish a credible political dialogue, the United
Kingdom is open to working together with all parties
and organizations to try and find solutions.

On the thematic issue, I would also note Mary
Robinson's words on the behalf of The Elders on climate
change. I agree very much that this is an increasingly
concerning driver of instability. That is why the
United Kingdom called the first Security Council
debate on the impact of climate change on peace and
security in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). It is also why we
offered the groundbreaking resolution 2349 (2017) on
the Lake Chad Basin issue and its root causes, which
include climate change. Let me take the opportunity to
inform colleagues that the United Kingdom has today
announced that we will reduce our emissions to net zero
by 2050 and will enshrine that commitment in our law.

When the Security Council embraced the concept
of sustaining peace in resolution 2282 (2016), it
recognized the shared responsibility of all three pillars
of the United Nations to act to prevent the outbreak,
escalation, continuation and recurrence of conflict.

As members of the Security Council, we too
have a shared responsibility to act, to come together
on the basis of these commitments and to continue
to strengthen our approaches, with the support of
others - the rest of the United Nations system - in
the area of conflict prevention and mediation. Mary
Robinson shared some wise quotes from Kofi Annan.
Let me end with his words: "We need to keep hope alive
and strive to do better."

