I thank you, Sir, for keeping the linked challenges of environment and security on the Council's agenda, and for shining a light on how the changing climate is eroding human security across both the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. I also thank our expert briefers - Peter Maurer, Ibrahim Thiaw and Inna Modja - for their very valuable insights. It is great to see Mr. Maurer again. It is important to continue to bring expert insights to our debates in the Security Council. We note that it was 13 years ago that the United Kingdom convened the first open Security Council debate on the importance of climate security (see S/PV.5663). Indeed, this is the second time in the past three months that I have joined a Security Council debate, which underlines the importance that we collectively attach to this important agenda item. As we work towards the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26) in Glasgow next year and seek to turn the commitments made in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change into specific deliverable actions, there are 200,000 people who are victims of floods across Chad and the Niger telling us that now - not tomorrow - is the time to act. Climate change exacerbates food insecurity and, indeed, the causes of conflict. This year, there are 20 million people in need of humanitarian assistance across the Sahel, alerting us again that now is the time to act. The most recent United Kingdom National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review, published in 2015, identified climate change as one of the biggest global long-term challenges to our country's security. And this year, for the first time in the history of the World Economic Forum's annual Global Risks Report, the top five global risks were all environmental. With temperatures warming at one and a half times the global average, the Sahel knows all too well the urgency of that threat. The warnings grow louder and louder and come from further and further afield. Now is the time to act. For our part, the United Kingdom has sought to lead by example. In the Sahel, we have given $64 million to the World Bank Sahel Adaptive Social Protection Program over the past six years to help Governments of the region improve weather data and adapt to climate shocks. Over the same period, we spent $179 million in the region on pilot projects to build resilience and adaptation measures. Overall, the United Kingdom has pledged to provide over $14 billion of international climate finance over the next five years. A significant proportion of that will go towards building resilience. The cliche that we can only overcome this problem by working together has rarely been so true. This challenge is enormous and that is why we have committed to leveraging our co-chairmanship of COP26 to drive the expansion of climate financing, to improve early warning systems and the capacity of countries to act on the risks and to strengthen inclusive social protections, especially for women and the most vulnerable across societies. Climate change and conflict dynamics interact in a vicious circle. Of course, we must tackle the governance challenges that are the root causes of conflict. But if the Security Council is to support peace and security in regions on the front line in the battle against climate change, we must also make climate risk assessment and climate resilience an integral part of the Council's work. We need to routinely factor climate risks into United Nations conflict prevention and resolution strategies and into peacebuilding plans. We need to strengthen the ability of our United Nations system to analyse and act upon climate risk as a fundamental way of working. We know from our work together that insecurity hits the most marginalized and the most disadvantaged groups the hardest. The same is true of climate-driven insecurity. And as we all know, tragically and sadly, it is girls and women who are routinely more exposed to disaster-induced poverty and indeed exploitation. Our approach to climate security must absolutely address the needs and priorities of women and girls and draw on their potential to lead our collective response from their key positions within their own communities. In thanking you once again, Sir, for convening today's important debate, I would conclude by saying that the regions of the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin provide us all with hard and harrowing evidence that climate-related security threats are real. They exist. They are immediate and profoundly undemocratic, and we must address them in a collective and holistic way. The Security Council presents to us the best vehicle we have for doing just that. Now is the time to act.
