Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting
and Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener for her briefing
on her progress in addressing the serious plight
of Rohingya refugees and in promoting justice,
accountability and reconciliation in Myanmar. We also
welcome the presence of Mr. Haque, Foreign Secretary
of Bangladesh, as well as the Permanent Representative
of Myanmar.

We note with concern the clashes that have taken
place in Rakhine state between the Myanmar police and
the so-called "Arakan Army". We condemn such attacks
and regret the deaths, while at the same time deeming it

important to avoid any disproportionate military action
that could lead to an escalation of violence.
Peru believes that we must not lose sight of the
fact that the main objective of our efforts must be the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation
of the more than 1 million Rohingya refugees by
addressing the structural causes of the situation,
which have made that community one of the most
discriminated against in the world.

In that regard, we wish to reiterate our appreciation
to Bangladesh for its solidarity and to the international
community for its important contribution in supporting
refugees and host communities. We believe it crucial
that Bangladesh and Myanmar maintain an ongoing
dialogue to prevent situations of distrust and a possible
escalation of tensions.

I would like to mention three elements that we
believe to be key. First, we must reiterate the importance
of effectively implementing the memorandum of
understanding signed with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme. A few months before
the expiration of the memorandum, we must regret
the limited results seen mainly due to bureaucratic
obstacles and, recently, the new limitations on access
to Rakhine state.

We recognize the efforts of the Special Envoy
during her most recent visit to address the situation of
the Rohingya who are in internally displaced persons
camps. In that regard, we welcome the initiative of the
Government of Myanmar to develop a national strategy
to close those camps, whose effective implementation
would send a positive message to the Rohingya who are
in Bangladesh.

Secondly, the sustainability of those efforts
depends mainly on the ability of the Government to
bring about the profound changes that would make it
possible to establish a truly democratic and inclusive
society. To that end, the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Annan Commission for the
development of Rakhine state remains the main frame
of reference.

Among the various recommendations, we stress the
urgency of removing the restrictions on the freedom of
movement of the approximately 300,000 Rohingya who
remain in Myanmar and who cannot access adequate
means of subsistence and basic services. We hope
that in the short term that will contribute to resolving
the issue of citizenship. We recognize the regulatory
efforts in that regard but we believe that greater and
deeper changes are required.

Thirdly, we underline the need to carry out
investigations into the human rights violations that have
occurred since 25 August 2017. We hope that the efforts
of the independent commission of inquiry, as well as
those of the investigative mechanism of the Human
Rights Council, contribute to the goal of achieving
justice in that territory.

Among those efforts, we would also like to
acknowledge the recent visit of Ms. Pramila Patten
and the signing of a communique between the United
Nations and the Government of Myanmar to prevent and
respond to sexual violence in conflict. In that regard,
we join the call of the Special Representative to adopt
a law on the prevention of violence against women in
accordance with international norms.

We also highlight the role of regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the involvement
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
including through the Centre for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance, to address the situation. We
believe that such efforts could be complemented by the
United Nations.

Finally, I underline the need for our efforts to be
translated into concrete progress on the ground. To
that end, we reiterate the importance of the Council
continuing its close attention to the situation and its full
support for the work of the Special Envoy.

Before concluding, Peru would also like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your team
on having efficiently led our work in the month of
February and to wish the delegation of France every
success during its presidency of the Council, which
begins tomorrow.

