Mr. Langeland (Norway): We are marking the
100th anniversary of the outbreak of the First Wold
War. Clearly, preventive policies prior to that horrific
war failed. There was no form for global governance,
such as a Security Council or regional organizations,
to contain events as they spiralled out of control.
As Members of the United Nations, we all have a
responsibility to contribute to preventing and resolving
conflicts. For many years, peace and conflict resolution
has been a Norwegian foreign policy priority. Each
conflict has its own dynamic, and there is no magic
formula for preventing and/or resolving them. Yet,
based on experience, there are certain common lessons
to be derived.

Conflicts do not come out of the blue. In most
cases, there are clear signs when a country is spiralling
downwards in a dangerous pattern. Serious or massive
violations of human rights are often such precursors.
It is not early warning that we lack but early action.
For this reason, Norway has supported the Rights Up
Front plan of action of the Secretary-General. Norway
has also consistently advocated that the Security
Council should make more use of the provisions laid
out in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations,
pertaining to the pacific settlement of disputes.

Parties must be ready to talk. Attempting to resolve
conflicts will be futile if the parties cling to the logic
of war. Dialogue is crucial to fostering confidence or
gaining insight into the other party's positions and
thinking. Parties must be accompanied in changing
their perception. It is hard, but doable. Somalia has
been plagued by more than 20 years of devastating war,
but may now have set the course for a better future.
Today the challenge is to change the mindset in the
Syrian conflict. We are pleased that the second Geneva
Conference on Syria was convened, but prospects for
ending the civil war in Syria soon remain bleak. Syria
is a test case today for the Organization.

Another important element is understanding
the context. A fundamental challenge for a peace
mediator is to motivate the warring parties to meet
at the negotiating table. Extensive knowledge of the
root causes to conflict is an absolute requirement.
Women must be involved in all phases and levels of
negotiating processes. Norway appreciates the fact that
the Secretariat has developed guidelines for effective
mediation, as well as its emphasis on impartiality.

We have the tool box. In addition to mediation,
there is a wide range of other tools in the United
Nations toolbox for the prevention of conflicts that can
be used more frequently, such as the good offices of
the Secretary-General, special envoys, commissions
of inquiry, truth and reconciliation commissions,
arbitration, judicial settlements, and resort to regional
agencies and arrangements.
When a ceasefire or a peace agreement has been
signed, the real job begins. Too often we have seen how
a fragile peace could not be sustained. This may be due
to lack of real commitment on the part of the parties to
honouring their pledges, or to the country in concern
falling off the international radar screen. In 2005, we
established the Peacebuilding Commission to overcome
these challenges, yet room for improvement remains in
the peacebuilding architecture. The 2015 review will be
important in this regard. Furthermore, we are convinced
that peace, security and stability are essential to long-
term sustainable development and should be included
in the post 2015-agenda.

Peace cannot last unless it is just. A durable peace
requires all stakeholders to be engaged, which is
essential for ensuring broad-based ownership. National
reconciliation is a fundamental requirement. In seeking
to achieve truth, justice and reconciliation, there can be
no impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. This underlines the vital importance
of such mechanisms as international tribunals, the
International Criminal Court, commissions of inquiry
and truth and reconciliation commissions.

We should always seek to further enhance the ability
of the international community, and in particular the
United Nations, to prevent and resolve armed conflicts.
We must be ready to learn from history. Research,
documentation of results and systemization of the
experiences gained are crucial. As we work together to
understand the trends of today in order to enable our
institutions to adapt appropriately, we must keep in
mind that the international order is not fixed once and
for all. It is in the making. If the United Nations is to
be an Organization for the twenty-first century, capable
of ensuring lasting international peace, security and
development, we, its Member States, need to adapt to
this reality.

