Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank Mr. Gambari for his briefing on a
situation that continues to deteriorate.

The news concerning Lebanon that he announced
earlier was not at all reassuring. I, too, condemn the
assassination of Minister Gemayal and offer his family
and the Government of Lebanon my sincere
condolences. I believe that this tragic event should not
prevent us from encouraging the inter-Lebanese
dialogue and, in particular, from combating impunity.

We are holding yet another meeting today, and
some would say that we shall merely be making more
statements, but that is simply because there seems to be
no definitive solution on the horizon. Instead, the
opposite would seem to be true, and yet that is not
because the international community has not sought to
advance the concrete modalities of a settlement to the
crisis that would rule out any use of violence. I would
refer to certain approaches that have been repeatedly
taken in the past, such as recourse to international law,
including international humanitarian law; resolutions
of the United Nations; the principles of the Madrid
conference; and the Road Map drawn up by the
Quartet, with its generous vision of two States.
Unfortunately, the second of those two States,
Palestine, has yet to see the light of day, which only
exacerbates frustrations and tension. I would also refer
to the Arab peace initiative announced in Beirut in
2002. In particular, I restate its generous offer of an
exchange of land for peace. Other initiatives have also
been tried.

Given the impasse, what should be done? The
first thing that needs to be done is to implement
decisions already taken. The crux of the whole tragedy
is that we fail to implement our own decisions. Today,
however, I want to be somewhat naive and cling to an
approach that stresses certain positive signals that
should be encouraged.

The first of those signals are the attempts,
sometimes desperate, of the Palestinian leaders to
establish a government of national unity that would
allow the situation to be resolved. In our view, the
current deadlock punishes the people. We should not
give the impression that the international community is
trying to punish the Palestinian people for freely
exercising its right to democracy by electing its own
leaders. Furthermore, we call on those democratically
elected Palestinian leaders to abide by the rules of the
game by accepting all previously concluded
agreements.

We also thank the Arab leaders for sending
another positive signal when they committed
themselves recently to assisting the Palestinian people,
which has been hard hit by sanctions and other
restrictions.
We would also like to welcome the announcement
made a few weeks ago by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert
that he is prepared to hold discussions with President
Abbas.

Moreover, we must explore and encourage every
possibility to involve all the main regional stakeholders
in the various peace processes under way. Here in the
Chamber a few days ago, one of those stakeholders -
Syria, if I may refer to it by name - clearly indicated
to us its willingness to contribute to the search for
peace. The representative of that country also told us
that Syria was not part of the problem, but rather a part
of the solution. We should encourage Syria.

I also wish to note that there have been some
stirrings in the Middle East region with regard to
another crisis, namely, the situation in Iraq. Meetings
between leaders of the region have been announced in
an effort to consider how to stabilize the situation.

I believe that those are all developments that we
should encourage. Other stakeholders who are not
necessarily part of the region could also join in those
efforts. We believe that those are signs that must be
resolutely encouraged and followed up.

I have told the Council that my delegation's view
is somewhat naive, because realism in the course of the
last 60 years has brought the situation to a deadlock.
My delegation very much believes in the virtues of
negotiation. I would like to conclude with an anecdote.

Several months ago, a delegation that we believe
to be friendly warned us that the Council had before it
an unacceptable draft resolution. We responded that it
was possible to improve the text. The reply to us was
that that was impossible and that it should not be
improved. I said, in turn, that they were talking to the
wrong person, because my Government pays me to
negotiate. I mention that just to illustrate that we truly
believe in the virtues of dialogue without
preconditions. For if all draft resolutions submitted to
the Council were perfect from the very outset, we
would have nothing more to do in either the Chamber
or anywhere else. I therefore call upon all actors to
give up all of their prejudices and truly begin dialogue.

