Ms. Adan (Somalia): I am honoured to be here
today, and I thank the Council for this opportunity to
inform the Security Council of the progress and recent
developments in the Federal Republic of Somalia.
First and foremost, I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing
on Somalia, and I thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for your personal engagement
and support for Somalia. I have no doubt that our
collective desire to achieve the common goal of a
peaceful and thriving Somali nation will prevail.

The Council's commitment and sustained effort
in support of our Government's policies and priorities
is critical as we work together to bring about an
economically, politically and socially stable Somalia.
We are obliged to the Council and the United Nations
for bringing international attention to the challenging
circumstances facing the Somali nation.

Somalia welcomes United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and Mr. Nicholas
Kay, and congratulates him on assuming his duties in
Somalia, on 3 June.

Since my last statement before the Council, on
14 February (see S/PV.6921), there have been significant
and encouraging developments in my country. Somalia
has finally rejoined the community of nations and is
moving from emergency to recovery. The Government
has adopted and is now implementing the six-pillar
policy framework, a credible and relevant political
platform based on the principles of the foundation
of a new Somalia, with the objective of creating an
achievable and applicable political platform.

Security is improving as Somali and African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) forces and their
Ethiopian allies recover towns and routes previously
held by Al-Shabaab. The number of pirate attacks
committed off the coast of Somalia has also drastically
decreased.

Without the support of AMISOM. and the troop-
contributing countries, such as Uganda, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Burundi, Djibouti, Sierra Leone and Nigeria,
Somalia would not be where it is today. The ultimate
sacrifice of those troops in the quest towards the noble
goal of peace and security for Somalia will be indelibly
recorded in the history of Somalia.

The Government is in control of more areas than
at any other time in the past 20 years. Many areas have
recovered from the enemy, Al-Qaida. Al-Shabaab has
lost fighters, finances and territory, and their morale is
low. Both young people and adults continue to defect
from the misery that terrorism offers.

However, we should be under no illusion that the
road is cleared of obstacles. Challenges still remain.
Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab are still a threat to peace
and security. Millions still live in camps for internally
displaced persons and refugees, and the country lacks
developed Government structures, schools, hospitals,
sanitation and other basic services. We have those
problems and issues to overcome. Our most pressing
concern is to bring to an end the constant threat and
cycle of conflict that bubbles beneath the surface in so
many of our communities.

The positive news, however, is that the famine
has receded, the diaspora has begun to return, and the
economy is starting to recover. Piracy off the coast of
Somalia is down. There were only 36 confirmed pirate
attacks in 2012, as compared to 176 in the previous
year. Only five ships were captured, down from 25 in
2011. Overall, the number of ships seized has fallen by
80 per cent as compared to the previous year, and that
is matched by the falling cost to the global economy by
some $580 million, or 12.5 per cent since 2011.

After more than 20 years of war and anarchy,
Mogadishu, the capital, is finally enjoying relative
calm. But we remain vigilant, and the President is
deeply engaged in alleviating the problem, not only
through security measures, but also by creating
initiatives promoting development and employment
for all, including potential pirates and former militia
groups. We are reforming our justice sector, rebuilding
our armed forces, developing our police forces and
revolutionizing our public finance management.
However, we lack developed Government institutions
and are reviewing our Constitution, which is only
partially complete.

On the foreign affairs front, the Government
achieved several foreign policy goals it had planned to
achieve in the first six months. Those include the formal
recognition of the United States Government, which
has already led to many more doors opening up. That
includes the reinstatement of Somalia's membership in
the World Bank and International Monetary Fund and
a partial lifting of the arms embargo by the Council.
More embassies have been opened in Mogadishu, with
the United Kingdom being the most recent Government
to open an embassy there, and ambassadors are queuing
up to hand in their credentials. That also includes the
most recent finalization of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) summit agreement.
We have been engaging with and encouraging the
diaspora communities to come back and rebuild the
country, signing joint communique's with Ethiopia,
Kenya and several other countries, and actively
participating and co-hosting and organizing major
international conferences.

Our collective vision is for a federal Somalia at
peace with itself and its neighbours that poses no threat
to the world and actively contributes to regional and
international issues. Somalia is moving forward, finally
returning to take its place among the community of
nations.

Also indicative of that progress was the recent
holding of the London Conference on Somalia,
co-hosted by Prime Minister David Cameron and
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The conference
lifted Somalia further. The Somali people are grateful
to the United Kingdom for that successful initiative. It
was followed the next day by a private-sector investor
conference, which was imbued with the knowledge that
there was growing investor confidence, improvements
in security and promising signs of opportunities for
business throughout Somalia. Another positive event
was the holding of the Nairobi conference organized by
Somali diaspora groups on private-sector investment in
Somalia, which was well attended. We also welcome the
Brussels conference to be organized by the European
Union in September.

Somalia is rich in natural resources and has a lot
of potential. The key to unlocking all that potential
is support, development investment and recognition.
Somalia is blessed with the longest coast in Africa,
the highest per capita availability of livestock, some of
the richest marine resources in the region, more than
8 million hectares of agricultural land, rivers flowing
into the sea, as well as minerals, gas, oil, uranium, coal,
titanium, to mention but a few of the resources. The
Government is fully aware that the long-term economic
and social viability of the country will depend upon
our ability to lay the policy foundations and establish
the confidence-building measures that will allow the
domestic private sector to flourish, and likewise attract
foreign investment in the Somali economy.

Somalia is fully committed to the "New Deal"
and compact initiatives. However, based on our
Government's action plan, we must understand that
the stabilization of Somalia is dependent upon on the
robust development of the security sector. In particular,
we need to establish the rule of law, develop an effective
justice system and strengthen the capabilities of the
national security forces. The military gains of the past
year are at stake if the national security forces lack
training and equipment.

Ultimately, however, we should rely on fair, just
and effective governance as the most effective way
to bring peace and security to our nation. We are
painfully aware that our forces lack discipline and
professionalism. The President has personally engaged
in enhancing control and oversight over the armed
forces. Rogue individuals acting with impunity cannot
be tolerated, nor can violations of human rights. We all
agree that strict monitoring and accountability must
be put in place to ensure that our forces perform and
operate in accordance with international convention on
human rights.

The current Government will not tolerate any
abuse or violation of human rights. We are particularly
committed to abolishing the recruitment of child soldiers
in armed conflict. Furthermore, we are committed to
preventing sexual violence and to implementing the
joint communique that my Government signed on the
margins of the London Conference on Somalia held on
7 May.

The Federal Government of Somalia is committed
to implementing gender-sensitive policies and
programmes for women, so as to ensure that all
women are legally protected against violence and
exploitation. We seek further international support for
that endeavour, and we want to assure the Council of
our firm commitment.

On the Juba regions, the Federal Government of
Somalia welcomed the recommendations of the IGAD
mission that visited Mogadishu and Kismayo. We also
welcomed the recent IGAD communique following
the meeting held in Addis Abeba on 24 May, which
recommended that the Federal Government of Somalia
convene a reconciliation conference with the support
of IGAD. The communique also recommended that
the Government consult key stakeholders in the Juba
regions of Somalia, with the goal of developing a road
map that establishes an interim administration and
permanent regional administrations in accordance with
the provisional Constitution and with IGAD playing a
supporting role.

My Government is therefore ready to lead
reconciliation efforts in the Juba regions and to hold a
genuine reconciliation conference with key stakeholders
in order to devise a programme and plans to establish
an interim administration that can lead to the formation
of federal unit states in accordance with the provisional
Constitution. We therefore urge UNSOM, IGAD and
other appropriate actors to support the process.

The Federal Government of Somalia is mandated to
represent the interests of all Somali people, including
those who are silent and powerless as they look for the
Government to safeguard their constitutional rights.
The culture that developed over the past two decades in
Somalia due to the lack of a functioning State was one
in which everyone and every group claimed the right to
represent the Somali people. The Federal Government
sent a committee to Kismayo to start a process of
reconciliation based on a road map that outlines the
way forward until federal units are established in the
regions.

I would also like to report to the Council that,
with the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of
Kenya - with whom I have spent more time working
than any other Foreign Minister, which is a sign of
the closeness between our two countries; not just in
proximity in physical proximity but also in the depth
and breadth of cooperation and interests that ties
our two countries and the region at large - we have
launched a joint cooperation commission that will be
responsible for promoting and enhancing cooperation
between our two countries. The commission will
also coordinate the implementation of all bilateral
agreements to be concluded between us. We also signed
a similar agreement with Ethiopia a few months ago.

Before I conclude, I would like again to express
our thanks and gratitude to the Security Council, the
African Union, IGAD, the European Union and other
members of the international community for their
continued support to Somalia on peace enforcement
and stabilization efforts. I also wish to thank all the
Governments who made pledges during the London
Conference totaling more than $300 million. On behalf
of my President and the people of Somalia, may I also
pay the utmost tribute to Ambassador Susan Rice for
her unrelenting efforts and support to my people and
the people of Somalia, which will not be forgotten. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Mahiga for his
relentless and hard work during his tenure in Somalia.

In conclusion, allow me to leave members with the
words of Hassan Sheikh Mohamud: "Winning the war
in Somalia has proved that winning the peace will take

patience and great skill. We are at a critical juncture,
and the time is now."

