Mr. Mahiga: Please accept my congratulations,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council on behalf of your country, Lebanon. I
2
take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence of
The Honourable Prime Minister of Somalia, His
Excellency Mr. Abdiweli Mohamed Ali.

Thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to present the report of the Secretary-
General (S/20ll/549) to the Security Council on the
latest developments in the Somalia peace process. At
the outset, I would like to pay tribute to the Council for
its continued support to the peace process in Somalia.
Since I last briefed the Council, on 10 August from
Mogadishu (see S/PV.6599), there have been positive
developments in Somalia, even as difficult times still
lie ahead. Let me begin with the humanitarian crisis,
which is still hitting the world headlines.

On 5 September, a sixth district in the Bay region
was declared a famine zone, in the area controlled by
Al-Shabaab. More people are at immediate risk.
Assistance is now coming in from the international
community. The African Union held its first-ever
pledging conference on 25 August, raising $350 million in
cash and in kind. But more is needed to cover the next
five months. The moral authority of the Council and
the entire international community needs to be brought
to bear to facilitate life-saving assistance in the famine-
stricken areas of Somalia and to address the overall
challenge of drought in the Horn of Africa.

On the political side, the peace process has just
taken a great step forward. The game has
fundamentally changed. In the spirit of the Transitional
Charter and the Djibouti Agreement, the long-awaited
consultative meeting on ending the transition in
Somalia was convened successfully in Mogadishu from
4 to 6 September. While the situation remains tenuous
and unstable, holding the meeting in Mogadishu was
itself a notable achievement and a testimony to the
much improved security situation in the capital. Two
months ago, the Islamist insurgency group Al-Shabaab
held much of Mogadishu, and threatened the rest. A
week ago, we held a meeting with all stakeholders at
the Somali Parliament building, in the heart of
downtown Mogadishu.

The consultative meeting brought together high-
level representatives of the Transitional Federal
Institutions, the regional States of Puntland and
Galmudug, the Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a and most
international partners. The meeting in Mogadishu was
a milestone in the peace process, but the light that the
road map now sheds on our path forward shows clearly
1 I-49644

just how far we have to go. We have now officially
launched the implementation of the transitional tasks
that are to be completed in the next 11 months, which
offers a real opportunity to end the transition in a
responsible and productive manner. It is different from
previous efforts because this time there is broad-based
consensus and political commitment to end the
transition.

In addition, there are agreed upon benchmarks
and timelines to be fulfilled. In the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), we have
established a dedicated unit to manage the
implementation mechanisms. The implementation will
be undertaken under the close supervision of the
monitoring mechanisms, which are both regional and
international in composition.

The constructive atmosphere at the consultative
meeting also enabled UNPOS to facilitate an
agreement between the regional States of Puntland and
Galmudug after several days of fighting at their
common border in the town of Galkayo.

The meeting immediately followed Somali
Transitional Federal Government President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed's historic trip to Puntland on
28 August. It is our hope that the groundbreaking visit
will herald a new chapter in relations between the
Transitional Federal Government and the regional
administrations and set a positive tone for national
reconciliation and improved outreach with a wide
range of other entities and individuals across Somali
civil society, both inside the country and in the
diaspora. This issue will be further discussed and
reflected in the next constitutional consultations, to be
held in another location inside Somalia, which will
include a wide cross-section of civil society groups.

In my political advocacy for a more inclusive
peace process, I have reiterated the presidential
statement issued by the Council on 11 May, which
indicates that those groups and individuals in the
armed opposition should renounce violence and join
the peace process (see S/PRST/ZOll/lo). The changing
security dynamic may help us in that regard.

As we move forward on the implementation of
the road map, the international community must
redouble its engagement and strike that most delicate
of balances between inducement and compliance. Here
I need to be crystal clear: the benchmarks and timelines
enshrined in the road map will simply not be realized
11-49644

in the absence of commensurate resources. Those
providing oversight must play their role effectively to
ensure that the implementation is done on schedule. We
are looking into a range of measures to be invoked in
case of non-compliance.

I have consistently reminded the leadership that
future assistance will be contingent upon the timely
implementation of the road map. Ultimately, though,
the Somalis need our assistance right now. The
international community must immediately provide
resources to the Transitional Federal Institutions and
other implementing partners in order to ensure that we
capitalize on the substantial political investment that
has earned us all this moment of optimism and hope.

The improvement in the security situation in
Mogadishu is an important step towards stabilizing all
of Somalia. Security is a central element of the road
map, as a secure environment is a precursor to the
effective implementation of other transitional tasks.
The withdrawal of Al-Shabaab from Mogadishu has
offered the Government an opportunity to expand
territory under its control and enhance its legitimacy by
delivering services to its population. We must prevent
warlords from re-emerging in Mogadishu by not
allowing a security vacuum to develop. The prospect of
peace and stability in Mogadishu has also attracted
400,000 internally displaced persons fleeing Somalia's
drought-stricken areas under Al-Shabaab control,
which is creating additional pressure on the still-fragile
Government to provide security and support for the
new arrivals.

In addition to those security challenges, the
extremists are likely to resort to terrorist tactics in
Mogadishu and elsewhere. Forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Government
forces must be equipped to respond to this new threat,
which will require agility, enhanced mobility, expanded
surveillance and a greater tactical capability around
Mogadishu and beyond. The military plan must be
accompanied by a civilian strategy designed to
stabilize and rehabilitate Mogadishu. Together with the
Transitional Federal Government and the United
Nations country team, we have prepared the
Mogadishu stabilization plan, which requires
$5 million in initial funding. Somalis must see a
tangible difference between their lives under
Government authority and their lives under
Al-Shabaab.
3

As I pay tribute to the African Union and

AMISOM, I wish to recognize the presence of the

Special Representative of the Chairperson of the

African Union Commission, Ambassador Boubacar
Diarra.

I would again like to take this opportunity to
commend the Governments of Burundi and Uganda for
their continued and unflinching support to AMISOM
and their readiness to provide additional troops to it.

The report of the Secretary-General expresses
support for the rapid deployment of a guard force as
part of AMISOM. That force would provide protection
for AMISOM. civilians and United Nations personnel
and assets, relieving pressure on the main AMISOM
force and enabling it to focus on its core mandate. The
guard force is essential for enabling my Office to
facilitate the effective implementation of the road map.
I would therefore welcome the Council's support in
that regard. UNPOS and the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM. are ready to expedite the
deployment of staff to Somalia, especially in
Mogadishu, as accommodation and logistical support is
made available.

As I said at the outset, this is a remarkable
moment for Somalia. The situation remains fragile and
tenuous, but we have a golden opportunity to end the
transition and stabilize Somalia. I appeal to the Council
to send an unequivocal message of encouragement to
the Somali leaders while simultaneously putting them
on notice that there can be no return to political
bickering. There will be no more extensions and we
must all work together to end the transitional period by
August 2012. The seeds of hope and progress have
begun to sprout, but they will need to be carefully and
generously nurtured if they are to bloom into
sustainable peace.

