Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): I would like to
express the sincere appreciation of my delegation for
the interest shown. We take all the comments and
concerns in good faith. My Government has taken full
note of the issues raised regarding the constitutional
review, sexual violence and the reparations process, as
well as regarding our commitment to implement the
joint communique.

On behalf of President Ernest Bai Koroma, I
would like to thank members of the Security Council,
our bilateral and multilateral donors and the broader
international community for their continued
engagement and support to Sierra Leone.

I wish to reassure the Council of the commitment
and cooperation of Government and all Sierra
Leoneans in ensuring that Sierra Leone does not revert
to conflict. I wish to reiterate my Government's
determination to keep up the momentum towards
rebuilding a prosperous, peaceful and free Sierra Leone
for the benefit of all Sierra Leoneans.

President Koroma believes that failure is not an
option and understands that of those to whom much is
given much is expected. He is very much aware of how
much the international community has and continues to
invest in Sierra Leone and realizes that the best form of
gratitude that Sierra Leoneans can show to the
international community is to succeed. This we are all
committed to achieve. We know with the Council's
continued support and engagement, we will arrive at
our final destination of a prosperous, free and peaceful
Sierra Leone.
09-36192

I would also like to thank the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Chairman of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their dedication and commitment to Sierra Leone's
peacebuilding process. Once again, I would like to
thank you, Sir, and the other members of the Council
for your commitment and to call upon you all to
support the high-level event of 10 June and to
contribute to the multi-donor trust fund for the
implementation of President Koroma's Agenda for
Change and the United Nations Joint Vision.

