Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate on security sector reform (SSR). Today's
debate is very timely and appropriate, as the Security
Council is increasingly including matters relating to
SSR in the mandates it issues. My delegation is also
grateful to the Mission of the Slovak Republic for the
extensive and thorough preparations it has made for
this meeting. We are certain that today's debate will
provide a sound basis for the Security Council to
formulate its role in developing a comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated United Nations approach to
security sector reform.

States emerging from conflict are invariably
faced with the immense challenges of stabilization and
reconstruction, often in highly volatile security
environments. Those challenges can be met only in
conjunction with SSR, which enables the security
sector to provide the necessary security and justice,
which are the preconditions for sustainable peace and
development.

Recognizing that there are currently no common
guidelines on the role of the United Nations in
supporting SSR programmes, my delegation would like
to highlight some basic principles that we believe merit
serious consideration.

First, national ownership should be stressed. The
principle of national sovereignty and the practical
realities of SSR make national ownership of any such
programme an imperative. No sector is more sensitive
than national security, and no SSR effort can succeed
without the participation of local security actors.

Secondly, SSR should be understood as a long-
term process, particularly in States in post-conflict
situations. It is thus important for the United Nations to
incorporate long-term planning into SSR efforts, not
least by ensuring that the necessary resources will be
available over time. Short-term donor funding cycles
undermine local ownership and lead to unsustainable
outcomes.

Thirdly, SSR must be conceived in a
comprehensive way. The various components of the
security sector are interlinked, and reforms are apt to
be ineffectual if they are confined to only one
component. At the same time, where the recipient
Government is weak, SSR must take realistic account
of financial and human resource constraints. Careful
planning, prioritization and sequencing are needed
from the outset of any SSR effort.

Finally, SSR must be seen in the broader context
of the reform and rebuilding of societies that are
democratizing, emerging from conflict or otherwise in
need of international assistance. The Security Council
has an important role to play in establishing missions
and mandates that incorporate that reality. The
Council's efforts will be strengthened through close
cooperation with other relevant organizations, both
within the United Nations system and in the broader
international community. In particular, we hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission can provide

recommendations and coordination. My delegation
therefore hopes that the Security Council will establish
coordinating mechanisms with other bodies to ensure
that assistance to societies in need is comprehensive,
coherent and effective.

My delegation believes that the immediate
priorities for the Security Council on SSR should
include, first, determining an appropriate allocation of
roles and responsibilities among the various United
Nations entities; secondly, determining the specific
mandate and programmes of each entity in relation to
SSR; and, thirdly, acquiring the necessary expertise.
We hope that today's debate will help the Council to
forge a more systematic and comprehensive strategy on
SSR as an integral component of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

