Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate and for preparing the
concept note (S/2018/184, annex) to that end. I would
also like to thank His Excellency the Secretary-General
for his valuable briefing, as well as His Excellency
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and Ms. Fatimata Toure for
their briefings.

Out of our sense of responsibility with regard to
peacekeeping, and based on our previous experience
as a troop-contributing country (TCC) and a host
for 12 years to the successful United Nations Iraq-
Kuwait Observation Mission, whose mandate ended
in 2003 - and Kuwait funded two-thirds of its
budget during the whole period - we would like to
focus our statement on improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations through four aspects.

First is shared responsibility. Peacekeeping
operations require coordination among the relevant
parties and United Nations organs, which in turn
requires addressing the pressing needs on the ground.
In order to do so, we use peacekeeping operations,
one of the most United Nations effective means for
maintaining peace and security. When we speak of
the three principles of peacekeeping - the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the use of force solely for
self-defence - we must begin with the cornerstone,
which is the perspective of the host country. It is the
party that must be consulted throughout the phases of a
mandate, from its formulation to full implementation,
and including its extension and review.

The triangular cooperation, consultation and
coordination that has been initiated by the Security
Council mechanism with the TCCs and the Secretariat
is another necessary way of ensuring cooperation with
TCCs and hearing their concerns and perspectives
throughout the various phases of a peacekeeping
mandate. In addition to that, the note by the President
on the Security Council's methods ofwork (S/2017/507)
provides guidance on coordinating with TCCs.

The second aspect is current challenges. Last year's
debates on peacekeeping operations provided us with
many ideas and visions, most recently in December in
this Chamber (see S/PV.8150), when Council members
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations addressed the issue of the ongoing provision
to peacekeeping missions of the information they need
in order to gain a clear understanding of the threats
that they and civilians face, in addition to addressing
the gaps in the military and civil requirements of
peacekeeping in the areas of training, equipment, skills
and language.

The cooperation of TCCs in sharing experiences
and in capacity-building throughout the various stages
of troop deployment can help to ensure coherence
and coordination in dealing with challenges faced by
peacekeeping. Kuwait supports all actions and efforts
of the Secretary-General to improve the performance
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations and
address deficiencies that present obstacles to the
full implementation of peacekeeping mandates. We
appreciate the deep sense of responsibility that the
Secretariat has demonstrated and its in-depth study of
performance, as well as the current action plan, set out
in the Cruz report, for addressing the increasing number
of fatalities in peacekeeping operations. We highly
commend the peacekeepers who sacrificed their lives
to maintain peace and protect civilians everywhere.

The third aspect is external factors affecting
peacekeeping operations. The changes that
peacekeeping operations are dealing with are not
limited to coordination or addressing challenges
during deployment. They also include adapting the
principles of peacekeeping, such as the use of force in
self-defence and defence ofthe mandate, to the increase
in threats that do not respect the United Nations
flag and the protection it provides, as the Secretary-
General mentioned. Addressing external factors and
cross-border challenges with their implications for
peacekeeping operations, such as climate change,
migration, displacement, increased conflicts and
greater needs, requires a whole-of-mission approach
that addresses the root causes of conflict, achieves
sustained peace and ensures the non-recurrence of
conflict. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
importance of the Secretariat's ongoing strategic
reviews of peacekeeping operations, which are a tool
that the Council must use in order to adapt to changes
that Member States cannot control.

Fourth is regional cooperation. Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations provides us
with an effective tool for cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, particularly when
deployment of peacekeeping troops requires the
participation of neighbouring countries, as we have
witnessed in a number of missions in Africa. Regional
cooperation is not limited to mobilizing and deploying
forces. It also requires the participation of the parties
concerned, starting with the host country, in the phases
of formulating and reviewing a mandate, the emergence
of challenges and changes before a situation escalates.

In conclusion, the aforementioned factors and
challenges require clear and flexible mandates that can
give peacekeepers the ability to adapt to changes on the
ground and to the level of threats that they face, and
ensure that operations can function properly without
being indefinitely extended while at the same time
failing to achieve their mandated goals. We must take
the initiative and draw on the Council's reports, reviews,
experiences and recommendations accumulated over
more than a quarter of a century. We reiterate our
appreciation to the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
raising this topic today, with the aim of listening to
the views of the greatest possible number of Member
States on ways to improving peacekeeping, which has
been one of the Council's most important tools over
more than 70 years of maintaining international peace
and security.

