Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by thanking Special
Envoy Michel Kafando and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their illuminating briefings on
the situation. We firmly believe that respect for the
constitutional order of every country defines and
sustains modern States today and thereby guarantees
their stability and plurality.

The results of Burundi's constitutional referendum
of 17 May, with the participation of 26 political
parties, reaffirm the will of the people and define
the determination of the Burundian authorities and
the majority of the Burundian population to advance
towards an inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue and
political stability. The fact that the referendum was
held without major incident is testament to the overall
improvement in the country's situation.
In that connection, we call on all parties to abstain
from taking actions that could be counterproductive.
We believe that the provisional results announced by
the Independent National Electoral Commission on
Monday, 21 May, which show a 73.26 per cent vote in
favour of the new Constitution of Burundi and a mere
18 per cent against, with a high participation rate,
represent a solid foundation for elections to be held in
2020. We believes that those results express the will of
the people and that this decision lies exclusively within
the purview of Burundi's national sovereignty. That
is to say, we see this as an internal Burundian issue
and a decision that will ensure the country's long-term
stability. Similar processes have been carried out in
other countries without major problems. In that regard,
we believe that all necessary precautions and preventive
measures should be taken to optimize the subsequent
processes. The Council should continue to promote
a spirit of impartiality and negotiated settlement by
fostering and calling for inter-Burundian dialogue.

Equatorial Guinea has always believed in and
supported the mediation efforts of all international,
regional and subregional organizations together with
those of Burundi's national political actors. That is
the only way to ensure a negotiated settlement of the
conflict in Burundi. That political process must be based
on respect for democratic principles and values and the
promotion of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
In that regard, we call on all Burundi's political actors
to continue to make efforts to establish and build
trust in order to advance a comprehensive, frank and
transparent national dialogue that can bring national
unity and cohesion. In that effort, we believe that the
Government of Burundi must assume a leadership role
and take appropriate measures to maintain the country's
unity and build a national reconciliation process. All
such efforts should have the backing of the Council and
the international community.

