The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
commend the Republic of Burkina Faso for organizing
this important debate. There is no nobler mission for
the United Nations than helping to settle conflicts by
peaceful means. On numerous occasions the United
Nations has shown that it is capable of helping parties
to find specific solutions to their disputes. The
situations that are most frequently discussed are those
that culminate in a comprehensive peace agreement.
Often they lead to a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. At times, we are obliged to deploy
peacekeeping troops rapidly in order to save lives, even
before peace has been restored. In such situations
vigorous mediation efforts are indispensable to prevent
further bloodshed and to ensure that the Blue Helmets
are not deployed indefinitely.

We talk less of other situations where discreet
diplomacy has enabled parties to resolve a dispute
before conflict breaks out, thus helping the countries
and the international community to avoid the loss of
countless human lives among civilians and soldiers, as
well as considerable expenditure.

Today, I ask the Council and all Member States to
invest further in our mediation activities, so that we
will be better able to exercise that discreet diplomacy
and find ourselves less often facing that Rubicon, the
crossing of which inevitably leads to unspeakable
suffering and enormous expenditure in terms of
peacekeeping.

(spoke in English)

The United Nations does not claim a monopoly
on the settlement of disputes. Very often we play a
supporting role while regional players take the lead, as
in Kenya and Zimbabwe. Increasingly, our regional
partners are asking us not only to support them in
specific cases but to help them build their own
mediation capacity, which we are gladly doing.

The Security Council plays a central role in
mediating and settling disputes, as laid out in Articles
33 and 36 of the Charter. From experience, I believe
that its most important contributions come when it is
unified. A successful outcome is most likely when the
Council agrees on common principles for solving the
conflict. Conversely, risk of failure is high when there
is no common vision or when Council members and
other key Member States hold contradictory positions.

The Council's second most important
contribution is when it is prepared to use its leverage.
The Council has had a positive impact on peace
processes when it has used, or been prepared to use, its
leverage. Targeted sanctions greatly supported the
mediation efforts in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Angola.

The third contribution is when the Council
supports one clear chief mediator. By authorizing the
mediator with the best comparative strength for a
particular situation or a particular phase of the process,
the Council greatly enhances the chance of success.
While the mediator must consult all concerned parties,
he or she must be fully supported by all partners.
Competing mediators only encourage forum shopping.

The fourth contribution is when the Council gives
the process space, if that is what is needed. Once the
Council has agreed on a strategy, it is often important
to allow the mediator space and time to work with the
parties. The Security Council, neighbouring countries,
groups of friends and Member States must stand
behind the mediator in support of a chosen strategy.

My own good offices are always on offer to
parties that wish to avail themselves of an honest
broker, who can help them stay or return to what is
sometimes a difficult path to peace. That role, which
successive Secretaries-General have played in cases
such as Iran, Iraq, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nigeria,
Cameroon and Afghanistan, is a critical tool for the
international community in settling a dispute. Such
good offices can be useful when intergovernmental
bodies are deadlocked or the parties actively resist
intergovernmental involvement. In 1997, the East
Timor question was resolved when Indonesia accepted
the offer of the good offices of the Secretary-General
to mediate.
08-51564
Many peace processes have benefited from the
ability of the Secretary-General to speak to all relevant
parties, even when no other actor was willing or able to
take such an initiative. Often those efforts appear
neither on the Council's agenda nor in the press. They
are undertaken discreetly by my envoys or by United
Nations staff. That low visibility often achieves
success, but it comes at a price for the Organization.
Very often we struggle to convey to a sceptical world
the breadth and depth of our efforts.

Pursuant to the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), a small Mediation
Support Unit (MSU) was established within the
Department of Political Affairs to provide operational
support to peace processes and be a repository of
knowledge for mediators. In 2008, the MSU
established a stand-by team of mediation experts that
can be deployed anywhere in the world in a matter of
days. In the first half of 2008, the MSU provided
support to some 15 peace processes. It is also
supporting the Southern Africa Development
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the African Union to strengthen
their mediation capacities.

However, the funding for MSU in the regular
budget is meagre, and MSU has no funds for
programme activities. Without prejudicing the role of
the General Assembly in deciding budgetary matters, I
urge the Council to ensure that mediation efforts have
the requisite resources. Past experience suggests that
an effective and coordinated mediation effort
throughout the conflict cycle is necessary for effective
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Thus, it is critical that
the Security Council provide the same support to
enhance the structures, processes, tools and resources
required for mediation as for peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities.

I am grateful for this opportunity to share some
thoughts with the Council and look forward to working
closely with all Council members in that important
endeavoun

