Mr. Ekanza Ezokola (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this public
debate on an issue whose importance and multifaceted
implications and its impact upon international peace
and security warrant steady and particular attention by
the Security Council, as well as by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. I
would like in particular to express the gratitude of my
delegation to the Belgian presidency of the Council for
underscoring the link between natural resources and
conflict.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Tunisia on behalf of
the African Group.

The link between natural resources and conflict is
well known. We of course know of the existence of
blood diamonds, but there also exists blood gold, blood
cobalt, blood coltan, blood copper and blood
cassiterite, to mention only a few examples. In other
words, natural resources have been used to finance
armed movements. That has led to bloody conflicts and
their attendant tragedy and the sombre scenario of
cruelty and destruction.

Peace and security are threatened in various
developing countries due to the fact that those
countries possess abundant natural resources, which
give rise to greed and both domestic and external
predation. The illegal exploitation of resources is
therefore both a cause of conflict and a factor that
exacerbates existing conflicts. The report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/ 1998/318,
which describes the various elements of conflicts, is
eloquent on this issue.

The same natural resources that bring about
happiness and wealth to certain people and groups of
people - namely, warlords, arms merchants and those
who illegally exploit resources, both domestic and
foreign operators - to the great detriment of States,
unfortunately also contribute to insecurity and the
unhappiness of populations, who are entitled to
resources that should be assets to their own
development and fulfilment. The question therefore
arises of whether natural resources are a blessing or a
curse for those countries.

This situation is the result of several factors. In
order to remedy the situation, there is a need for
collective national, regional and international will to
adopt approaches appropriate to each situation and that
distinguish between the pre-conflict, conflict and post-
conflict phases. During the pre-conflict period,
extending State authority throughout the whole of a
country's territory, respect for human rights,
transparent management, equitable distribution of
natural resources, good governance and the exercise of
democracy are all essential to preventing natural
resources from becoming the cause of conflict.

During a conflict, the approach must involve
preventing the entrenchment and spread of the conflict.
In order to do so, we must prevent aggressor countries
and armed groups from gaining access to and
exploiting natural resources. In that regard, we
welcome certain decisions taken by the Council, such
as, the sending of peacekeeping missions, the
establishment of sanctions regimes, the imposition of
various embargoes and, of course, its support for the
Kimberley Process for diamonds, which began in 2000.
Processes similar to the Kimberley Process for
resources other than diamonds should also be
considered, including for resources that are largely
exploited illegally and those which account for a high
degree of funding for conflicts. That should be done by
identifying and categorizing those resources by zones
of conflict.

With regard to the post-conflict period, the
approach should entail preventing a relapse into
conflict. It is therefore important to assist countries in
post-conflict situations, especially developing
countries in Africa, to rebuild their destroyed
infrastructure, to build local capacity in all areas and to
take the steps I just described for the pre-conflict
situation. We therefore call upon the international
financial institutions to ease the criteria and conditions
for the granting of assistance to countries emerging
from conflict, in order that we do not discourage the
legitimate hopes of populations to live better lives once
a conflict has come to an end.

We welcome the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We call upon the
international community to help to consolidate the
gains of regained peace. We ask our development
partners to truly work in a sincere and constructive
partnership with those countries in the exploitation of
natural resources in the interest of all parties.

In conclusion, we call on everyone to rehabilitate
natural resources in those countries so that they can
play a positive role in development. That role could
serve to raise the collective standard of living and to
benefit the common social good.

