The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for presenting the twenty-
first report to the Council, pursuant to paragraph 8
of resolution 1593 (2005), outlining the judicial and
prosecutorial activities of the Court.

We are deeply concerned at the security situation
in Darfur, as reflected by the escalation in fighting
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the armed
groups, the intercommunal conflicts and incidents of
banditry and criminality. The proliferation of small
arms has further contributed to the destabilization
of the region. The humanitarian situation in Darfur,
according to the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, is also a matter
of concern. The escalation in conflict has resulted in an
increase of 130,000 new internally displaced persons,
especially in the Jebel Marra area. We call on the
parties to immediately cease all attacks on civilians and
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel. We wish to
remind all parties to the conflict of their obligations
under international human rights and humanitarian law.
We also believe that the perpetrators of such crimes
must be held accountable.

We are also concernedthat the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
continues to face restrictions on movement, denials of
access and attacks against its personnel. We call on the
Government of the Sudan to expeditiously investigate
and deal with the numerous reported status-of-forces
violations. In light of those challenges, we commend
UNAMID for its steadfastness and resoluteness in
striving to achieve its strategic objectives. It is in
recognition of UNAMID's important role in and
contribution to the Darfur peace process that Malaysia
supported the adoption of resolution 2228 (2015),
renewing UNAMID's mandate for a further year.

We also commend the convening of the Joint
Working Group to deliberate on UNAMID's exit
strategy. We are supportive of basing UNAMID's
phased and gradual exit against a set of benchmarks, as
laid out in annex 1 of the Secretary-General's report of
15 April 2014 (S/2014/279).

We are convinced that there is no military solution
to the conflict in Darfur. We strongly condemn
any action aimed at the forced overthrow of the
Government of the Sudan. In that regard, we urge the
parties to the conflict to continue to be guided by the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur framework. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to relaunch
direct negotiations with the parties to the conflict,
and further encourage the parties to return to the
negotiating table and to engage constructively. As
regards the inter-communal and inter-tribal conflicts,
we encourage the Government of the Sudan to look into
and effectively address the root causes of the disputes.

We acknowledge and highly commend the efforts of
the Government of Chad in successfully mediating the
signing of a peace agreement between the Government
of the Sudan with a breakaway faction of the Sudan
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi, in a parallel initiative
to the Doha Document and the efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel on Sudan and
South Sudan. We believe that efforts such as those will
contribute significantly to the peace process in Darfur.

Malaysia is of the view that the efforts of the
Government of the Sudan to demonstrate compliance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and its
commitment to holding those responsible for violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law accountable will contribute positively
towards building trust and confidence.

I now resume my function as president of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.

