Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to welcome Foreign Minister Hyseni in his first
appearance before the Security Council. It is important
that Kosovo have the opportunity to speak for itself
and to present its position on its future and that of the
region.

It is very good to see Foreign Minister Jeremie
here again. I would like to warmly welcome the
constructive approach that he set out to the Council
today. There are still some difference between us, but I
believe we now have a basis to move towards our
common goal of a future in Europe's institutions for
Serbia and Kosovo alike. I welcome and take very
seriously what Mr. Jeremie said about Serbia's
intentions, not least about its future in Europe and the
practical steps that his Government has taken towards
that goal.

In particular, I would like to warmly congratulate
the Serbian Government on the arrest of Radovan
Karadzic this week. We had proposed that the Security
Council as a whole welcome that hugely important step
forward, and we regret that one delegation was not
ready to do so. But let me state clearly on behalf of the
United Kingdom how warmly we welcome that
particular step and that we see it as a very significant
advance for Serbia on the road towards Europe. We
hope that the Serbian authorities will continue his
efforts and complete the process of cooperation with
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, not least by locating and transferring the
remaining indictees, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2008/458) and to welcome
Mr. Zannier here as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, again for the first time. We thank
him for his informative, timely and very clear briefing.

The Secretary-General informed the Council last
month, on 20 June of his decision to reconfigure the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in the light of the profoundly
changed reality in Kosovo. Whether or not we
recognize Kosovo's independence, I do not think
anyone can contest the Secretary-General's assessment
that UNMIK could no longer perform the vast majority
of its tasks as an interim administration. We therefore
welcome his instructions to UNMIK to work with other
international organizations in Kosovo, notably the
European Union and NATO, to effect the efficient
reconfiguration of the international presence there. As
it is in the interests of maintaining peace and stability
in Kosovo and the region, we all share that goal, and I
believe that we should all support the Secretary-
General in those efforts.

Obviously, the reconfigured international
presence will work primarily with the Kosovo
Government. We believe that the European Union Rule
of Law Mission for Kosovo can and will soon be able
to deploy as planned and play its role as envisaged. We
look to Belgrade to support its words and actions about
peace and stability in Kosovo with actions on the
ground.

We noted with interest the Special
Representative's dialogue with Belgrade that started
this week on the six specific issues identified in the
Secretary-General's special report in June
(S/2008/354). We believe that the dialogue must be
conducted in an open, transparent and balanced
manner, in close cooperation and consultation with the
authorities in Pristina and with relevant stakeholders.
We believe that it can make a useful contribution to
determining how Serbia can work with Kosovo and
with the international presences there as part of
enhancing cooperation among all the countries of the
Balkans.

Of course, that dialogue does not represent the
beginning of a new negotiation process; the time for
talking about Kosovo's status is past. The United
Kingdom and many other countries with interests in
and commitment to the Balkan region have recognized
Kosovo as an independent State, and that is not going
to change.

We congratulate the Kosovo Government on the
progress made since its declaration of independence in
adopting and enacting priority legislation on minority
rights and decentralization and on the entry into force
of the new Constitution on 15 June. We welcome the
outreach efforts by Kosovo's political leaders to the
Kosovo Serb communities. We urge them to continue
with those efforts. They are very important, and they
lay the foundation for the multi-ethnic community in
Kosovo that we are all looking for.

I would like to conclude by saying that today,
both Mr. Jeremie and Mr. Hyseni looked forward, and
that is what this Council should do. We now have a
clear path before us towards a more stable and
prosperous region increasingly at ease with itself, and I
believe that that is the vision behind which the Security
Council should unite.

