Mr. Konishi (Japan): Throughout the process of the
adoption and implementation of resolution 986 (1995),
Japan consistently supported its objective: to provide for
the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, who are
suffering from the impact of sanctions. My delegation is
concerned about the Secretary-General's observation in
his report that, despite the ongoing implementation of
resolution 986 (1995), the population of Iraq continues to
face serious nutritional and health situations and there is
an urgent need to contain the risk of a further
deterioration.

In renewing the provisions of Security Council
resolution 986 (1995), my delegation is guided by the
practical consideration of ensuring the smooth and
efficient implementation of the resolution. The Secretary-
General's report indicates that the slow and erratic pace
at which humanitarian inputs arrive in Iraq has been very
unsatisfactory, and it expresses his intention to submit to
the Council a supplementary report with recommendations
addressing concerns over processing and supply issues.

The report of the Committee established by
resolution 661 (1990) also states that it will continue to
work for the smooth and effective implementation of the
relevant arrangements under resolutions 986 (1995) and
1111 (1997). We support these efforts of the Secretary-
General and the Committee established by resolution 661
(1990), and my delegation will continue to contribute
actively to this process.

We have noted with particular interest the Secretary-
General's suggestion that the Council may wish to re-
examine the adequacy of the revenues as envisaged by
resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997) and to consider
the possibility of increasing those revenues to meet Iraq's
priority humanitarian requirements. Japan is ready to
consider this matter favourably, based on the
supplementary report to be submitted by the Secretary-
General, taking into account the relevant aspects, such as
the specific humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people.
In paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, the Council
would express its willingness to consider these issues in
the light of the recommendations of the Secretary-General
to be included in the supplementary report.

For these reasons, my delegation will support the
draft resolution.

