Ms. King (Australia): Thank you, Madam President,
for your initiative in convening this briefing, which
provides a timely opportunity for us to take stock of
the United Nations peacebuilding efforts over the
past 12 months. I thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
Antonio Patriota and United Nations Development
Programme Administrator Helen Clark for their
briefings.

We completely agree with the Deputy Secretary-
General that ensuring that we have an efficient and
effective peacebuilding architecture is our collective
responsibilty. We should be working on that constantly
to ensure that the architecture serves the interests
of those who genuinely need peacebuilding in their
countries.

We will have some important opportunities to
address this more systemically in the coming months,
but it is also fundamental that we constantly bear in
mind in the Council that the relationship between it and
the Peacebuilding Commission must be as effective and
cooperative as it can possibly be. We strongly support
the notion of regular informal exchanges between the
Council and the Commission, in line with the Council's
own formal commitment to that.

Today I would like to touch upon two priority areas
that the Secretary-General outlined in his 2012 report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746),
namely, inclusivity and institution-building. In doing so,
I want to highlight the importance of the participation
of women and the role of police in peacebuilding.

The Secretary-General's report has helped
underscore that there cannot be any sustainable peace
without inclusive peacebuilding processes. Ensuring
that all the relevant actors are included in peacebuilding
activities is undoubtedly a difficult and time-consuming
task, but it needs to be done in order to generate a clear
sense of national ownership of the path being forged.

Ensuring that peace agreements and political
settlements include all the relevant stakeholders is
only the first step. To reduce the risk of relapse into
violence, it is imperative that the views and needs of
not only parties to the conflict * those who are holding
the guns - but also women, youth, ethnic groups and
minorities are heard and integrated into the peace
process. We need look no further than current efforts
to move past conflict to peace in Syria, South Sudan,
the Central African Republic and elsewhere to see that
without inclusivity, such efforts will not succeed.

Yet that is only the beginning. Inclusivity must
be a factor in long-term peacebuilding processes,
from consolidating democracy to promoting national
reconciliation and strengthening institutions.
The Deputy Secretary-General has highlighted
the example of Sierra Leone. We are following a long
and brutal civil war. We have witnesses a successful
transition from peacekeeping to post-conflict
peacebuilding. With the completion of the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone at the end of March, the focus has now
moved to ensuring sustained economic development.
Inclusivity in the peacebuilding process in Sierra
Leone has certainly been a key factor in the success of
that process.

The importance of women's participation in
peacebuilding cannot be underestimated. Australia
welcomes the significant advances made by the Security
Council in 2013, including through the adoption of
resolution 2122 (2013), on women's participation in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. We must now
ensure that we use that road map effectively to realize
the benefits of our collective peacebuilding efforts.

Involving women's organizations is a critical
part of that agenda. Such groups are often the bridge
between formal mechanisms and the needs of local
communities. Their views and experiences should be
valued accordingly. That means their involvement in the
institutions and structures that we are putting in place
as part of our peacebuilding efforts. We need to ensure
that women are lawmakers, members of the judiciary
and advocates for the removal of laws that restrict
women's access to justice and economic security.

Institution-building is a central pillar of
sustainable peace. Studies show that countries with
strong, accountable and inclusive institutions are 30 to
45 per cent less likely to fall into large-scale conflict.
Strengthening institutions and governance at an early
stage so as to provide security and the rule of law is
a precondition for communities to start to rebuild.
We have come to understand that requirement from
operations in our region, such as in Timor-Leste and
Solomon Islands, but there are clear lessons on such an
approach everywhere.

The early development of a credible national
police service is often an essential element of effective
peacebuilding. Reverting to the issue of inclusivity, the
recruitment and training of women to serve as police
officers are essential elements of a credible national
police service. Female police officers are better able
to access women within local communities, provide
the support that those communities need and better
understand what may be inhibiting their effective
participation in peacebuilding. An effective police
service that fairly and justly services communities
within the newly established rule of law will be
instrumental to peacebuilding efforts.

To conclude, we look forward to the first-ever
annual session of the Peacebuilding Commission and
commend that initiative. We reiterate our commitment
to the effectiveness of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and to fine-tuning that architecture and
its operationalization. It is absolutely critical to our
ultimate substantive goal, which is to genuinely tailor
peacebuilding to the very specific needs of the countries
concerned, to prevent a relapse into conflict and,
instead, to provide a path to security and development.

