Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I wish to thank all of our
briefers and welcome my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine. On this occasion, I would
like to congratulate the Government and the people
of Ukraine on the successful holding of a peaceful
and competitive presidential election, which reflects
Ukraine's vibrant democracy.

Turning to the topic at hand, Indonesia is worried
about the developments in eastern Ukraine. It is very
clear from the briefing we have just heard that there is
not yet a positive development in eastern Ukraine.

On many occasions Indonesia has stated its
principled position on respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. On this occasion I will
withhold from repeating it. I would like to highlight
three pertinent points.

First, based on the briefings, there remains an urgent
need for all parties to refrain from actions that could
be perceived as provocative. In the current situation, it
is essential that all the parties concerned exercise the
greatest possible restraint in order to prevent it from
escalating. We are also against any action that might
exacerbate hostilities and cause an already fragile
situation on the ground to deteriorate further. For those
reasons, Indonesia calls on all the parties to exercise
the utmost restraint, manage the crisis responsibly,
promote a peaceful settlement and consistently uphold
and respect international law.

Secondly, Indonesia has consistently maintained
that all the parties concerned must fully implement
resolution 2202 (2015). They must cease all hostilities,
fully implement the Minsk agreements and stay
committed to seeking a comprehensive, lasting solution
to the Ukraine issue. We share the view that Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo expressed in her briefing,
emphasizing that the Minsk agreements constitute the
legal basis for achieving a political solution to end the
conflict in the eastern Ukraine pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as presidential
statement S/PRST/2018/l2. It is always important to
reflect and to ask what we can do in order to better
implement the agreement in good faith rather than wait
for other parties to act.

Thirdly, as we have said many times, any settlement
ofthe crisis in Ukraine must be a political one and should
be reached through inclusive and direct dialogue. We
also stress the importance of dialogue and diplomacy
between the parties concerned so that they can make
progress in achieving peace, stability and development
in Ukraine. Indonesia believes in the value of dialogue
and the importance of settling disputes amicably.

The situation in Ukraine has been on the Council's
agenda since February 2014, and progress in the region
has unfortunately been limited. While I realize that
a bumpy road lies before us, I am still hopeful that
the Council will take on its full responsibility for
ensuring the maintenance of international peace and
security and promoting a dialogue aimed at achieving a
universally acceptable solution. Only through genuine
dialogue and diplomatic talks among the parties, with
the support of the United Nations and the international
community, will they be able to reach a sustainable
solution to the crisis. For its part, Indonesia will fully
support all constructive efforts aimed at resolving the
conflict in Ukraine peacefully, in accordance with
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

