Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
and for the comprehensive briefings by Mr. Griffiths,
Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore, in which they described a
complex scenario that requires the Security Council's
urgent and sustained attention. Peru recognizes the
important work that they are doing in their respective
fields to bring the devastating conflict in Yemen to an
end and alleviate the terrible human suffering there.

We believe it is crucial that we discuss this matter
transparently, taking account of the efforts under way
to prevent escalation and put an end to a conflict for
which there can be no military solution and that has led
to the worst humanitarian crisis in the world today. We

first want to welcome the encouraging developments in
the past few days aimed at ensuring the relocation of the
forces present in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and
Ras Isa, and we thank Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
for his important contribution. We acknowledge the
concrete commitments that Ansar Allah has made to
this critical part of the political process promoted by
the United Nations. We also hope that the other side
will soon redeploy, bearing in mind the positive attitude
that it has maintained throughout the process, that these
developments will translate into new and sustained
progress towards the inclusive political solution
promoted by the United Nations, particularly on such
sensitive issues as the composition of local security
forces in Al-Hudaydah, the administration of revenues
from commercial activity and the implementation of
the second phase of redeployment, and that all of this
will lead to the holding of a new round of consultations
as soon as possible.

We also want to point to the importance of
approaching the recent events with caution, since the
path towards sustainable peace in Yemen is not without
its difficulties. The reality is that violence is worsening
in various parts of the country and mistrust is growing.
It is from that perspective that we encourage the parties
to continue their efforts in critical areas such as the
exchange of detainees and the cessation of violence in
Taiz, and to refrain from confrontational rhetoric and
mutual accusations.

We must underscore the importance of continuing
to address the humanitarian situation on the ground,
which is worsening, as we heard this morning. We are
particularly concerned about the alarming levels of food
insecurity and the deterioration of economic indicators,
which are intensifying the suffering of the people of
Yemen. In the circumstances, we emphasize that
ports, airports and land routes must remain open and
operational, in accordance with the Security Council's
presidential statement of March 2018 (S/PRST/2018/5).
Furthermore, humanitarian aid and people's access to
it cannot and must not be conditional on any military
objective. We also consider it essential to continue
mobilizing financial support from the international
community with a view to controlling inflation,
stabilizing the local currency, facilitating imports
of essential goods and reactivating the deteriorating
Yemeni economy. We also point to the urgency of
containing the new and worrying outbreak of cholera
before the onset of the rainy season.

Peru hopes that new and greater progress in the
matters that bring us together today will contribute in
the coming weeks and months to promoting the easing
of hostilities required to put an end to the conflict and
achieve reconciliation in Yemen. In that regard, we
support the next steps that Mr. Griffiths has announced.
The Security Council has a fundamental role to play
in requiring the parties' strict compliance with their
obligations in the areas of international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians, and that they commit
in good faith and without preconditions to the inclusive
political solution being promoted by the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General.
