Mr. Ahmed (Bangladesh): Let me first of all
extend our heartiest welcome and warmest greetings to
Mr. Bernard Kouchner. It is good to see him with us
again.

Let me also begin by conveying the deep regret of
Ambassador Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, who headed
the Security Council mission to Kosovo last April, for
his inability to be present here today, as he is away
from New York. He was looking forward to meeting
Mr. Kouchner personally. Since he is unable to do so,
Ambassador Chowdhury has asked that I convey
through you, Mr. President, his thanks and appreciation
to Mr. Kouchner for all the support that he so
wholeheartedly extended to the Security Council
mission during its visit to Kosovo. The compactness of
the programme, coupled with the richness of inputs,
yielded very good results in terms of the objectives of
the Council mission. This was reflected in the report of
the Council mission, which was presented upon its
return from Kosovo. The report also contained a
number of concrete measures in terms of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

We are all aware how complex the situation in
Kosovo is. We know about the determination and
promptness with which the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK) acted when the
occasion demanded. We commend UNMIK, under the
leadership of Mr. Kouchner, for carrying out its
formidable job admirably. We are aware of the
constraint of resources at his disposal vis-a-vis the
challenges that he has been facing.
We are concerned that UNMIK has not yet been
able to have filled its desired staffing requirements for
civil administration and civilian police, as requested by
the Secretary-General. All of us agree that the security
situation needs further improvement, but this cannot
take place unless the machinery has been put in place
in its approved strength. A number of other important
issues, such as the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, also hinge to a large extent on the
feeling of a secure environment for all.

An issue of great concern for us is that of missing
persons and detainees. We have seen the agony and
torment of the families of these people. Day after day,
they wait in great anxiety and tension for information
on the fate of their near and dear ones. The continuing
tension breeds mistrust. The security situation in
Kosovo cannot be expected to improve unless decisive
and definite steps are urgently taken to address this
problem. My delegation has strongly supported the
appointment of a special envoy for mission persons and
detainees. We believe that the magnitude and
importance of the problem merit this appointment. We
do not believe that the appointment of a special envoy
would politicize a humanitarian issue. Rather, it would
be a major step towards the settlement of a long-
standing issue for which no effective measures or
remedy have yet been found.

For normalcy to return to Kosovo, there should be
a significant boost in economic activity. Although the
pace is gradually picking up, it is still insufficient to
create opportunities for enough jobs for people to
pursue with confidence. Spurring the economy is not
only necessary for reconstruction and development for
a war-torn community; it is also needed to give people
hope for looking to the future rather than indulging in
past misery and springing into desperate action and
undertaking adventures.

In its interaction with the ethnic communities, the
recent Council mission to Kosovo could sense a desire
on the part of the people to live in peace together. The
decision of the Serb National Council to work with
UNMIK and KFOR was a welcome development. Our
attention has been drawn to the recent letter of Bishop
Artemije to the President of Security Council and his
insistence on a better security situation in Kosovo. We
hope that the international community will redouble its
efforts in ensuring the protection of everyone in
Kosovo.

In closing, we would like to record our high
appreciation for the valuable work of Mr. Bernard
Kouchner and his team in Kosovo, and for the
teamwork and collaboration of the international civil
and security presences in Kosovo. Bringing back peace
in a region which has long been troubled, and where
the memory of the violent past is still vivid, is a task of
immense complexity. But the notable progress already
achieved shows that it is not impossible. We all need to
extend our strong support to the process of
reconstruction and reconciliation already under way in
Kosovo.

