Mr. Caldas de Moura (Brazil): I am pleased to join
previous speakers in welcoming you, Sir, and in
congratulating your delegation on the initiative of holding
this debate. I wish also to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Louise Frechette and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for their contribution to this exercise.

When your delegation, Sir, started the preparations
for this meeting, it circulated an aide-memoire that set the
ground for our debate. The Council was to address the
subject of the culture of violence and intimidation created
in the regrettably very frequent cases of internal conflicts
that have plagued the post-cold-war period. In a constant
and perverse rule, those conflicts thrive in an environment
where small arms and light weapons are easily and
inconceivably available.

I recall that the Council has addressed some aspects
of this issue in the resolutions and presidential statements
adopted in relation to the historical report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa. The Council also examined the question of the
maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict
peace-building in a two-day open debate held in
December 1998, when it reaffirmed its primary
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security and underlined

 

"the need for close cooperation and dialogue between
the bodies of the United Nations system, in particular
those directly concerned in the field of post-conflict
peace-building". [S/PRST/1998/38, p. 2]

In this context, I would like to recall the guidelines on
conventional arms control/limitations and disarmament
adopted by consensus at the 1999 substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission. Those guidelines deal with
practical measures relating to the collection, control,
disposal and destruction of arms - especially small arms
and light weapons - and the demobilization and
integration of former combatants. They are quite detailed.
They deal with post-conflict situations that result from
internal conflict. The Council should avail itself of that
important work.

In our View, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration cannot be dealt with separately. They have to
be seen under the more embracing light of promoting
peace, prosperity and stability. The rehabilitation of ex-
combatants and their reintegration into society are essential.

We also understand that this process cannot be carried
out successfully without a firm political commitment by the
parties involved, for the dimension of such considerations
extends well beyond the peace and security levels and
thereby touches on a number of crucial social and economic
issues. The political will shown by the parties must be
supplemented by the support of the international
community. We believe that the Economic and Social
Council has a significant coordinating role to play in these
efforts.

It is important for the international community to
come up with a network of experienced arms experts from
those Governments that contribute to peacekeeping
operations, forming thus a worldwide database on these
matters. In this connection, continuous attention must be
paid by the international community during the post-conflict
period, which may include the presence on the ground of
follow-up political missions. Of course, we must
accordingly call for the strict implementation of arms
embargoes, where applicable, with particular emphasis on
stopping the circulation of small and light arms and on
avoiding their accumulation and proliferation.

The observance of such steps is fundamental to
ensuring the positive outcome of a particular conflict in
terms of building and strengthening peace. Where this has
been the case, as in El Salvador, Nicaragua, Guatemala and
Mozambique, for example, peace has been established and
ex-combatants have been reintegrated into society. Where
this has not been the case, as in Angola, tension and
conflict linger on and the issues of disarmament,
demobilization and the re-integration of ex-combatants
fall behind the very pressing task of promoting peace.

To summarize, I wish to express the support of my
delegation for the Council's request that the
Secretary-General present, within a period of six months,
his observations and recommendations to the Council,
especially those concerning experiences and lessons
learned that may enrich the Council's future review of
these issues.

