Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Like previous speakers,
I wish to thank the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr.
Annabi, for his briefing on the current situation in East
Timor. We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and the
staff of the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET).

We note in particular that over the past few
months UNTAET has directed its focus and redoubled
its efforts to ensure that the East Timorese people are
more and more involved in the process of rehabilitation
and reconstruction. This, in my delegation's view, is the
only path to the sustainability of institutions in East
Timor and to ensuring that the requisite local capacity
and ownership are created.

We welcome in particular the recent opening of
the civil service campus, which will provide training
and which in fact houses the Public Service
Commission. We will follow closely the progress of
training in basic administration and in leadership and
supervisory skills. UNTAET must also be commended
for having moved swiftly to establish the
administrative units and departments that could form
the basis for the future East Timorese Government
agencies.

At the same time, my delegation believes that
care has to be taken to ensure that the structures will
not be too costly for an independent East Timor to
operate. It is, after all, a small territory, with fewer than
1 million persons, and a mostly agricultural population.

We have been told by Mr. Annabi that the law and
order situation has improved. Nevertheless, the role
and effectiveness of the civilian police component of
UNTAET in maintaining law and order and developing
a credible, professional and impartial East Timorese
police force remains critical. We therefore urge that top
priority be given to the quick and full deployment of
this component of the mission.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express our condolences to the families of those who
lost their lives in the recent flooding. This flooding, we
note, also affected the refugee camps in West Timor
and a total of some 50,000 persons. UNTAET and the
humanitarian agencies must be commended for their
speedy response to the crisis. We also commend the
Government of Indonesia for its actions and note its
efforts in coordinating relief.

The number of returns of refugees to East Timor
now stands at more than 161,000. While the number of
returns seems to demonstrate that there is a growing
level of confidence in the situation in East Timor and
that the fear for personal safety may have diminished,
it is important that the conditions for peaceful and safe
returns be created, if those still in the refugee camps
are to return. This, we believe, is a significant factor in
the process of rehabilitation.

The employment situation in East Timor
continues to be of concern to my delegation. We note
that the transitional employment programme has
provided employment for a number of persons in the
13 districts of East Timor, in a wide range of areas. We
are encouraged that this initiative has generated
employment, but remain concerned that the
employment initiative must focus on long-term
rehabilitation. The quick-fix approach will, in the long-
term, leave gaps and generate problems.

My delegation would be interested to hear about
the progress in the small-enterprise projects
spearheaded by the World Bank, which envisaged
providing loans to East Timorese enterprises and
reviving the local economy. Like the delegation of the
United Kingdom, we would also like to hear more
about the trust fund for the East Timor programme,
particularly in the area of agriculture. We also welcome
the health sector programme, which provides support to
the Interim Health Authority and which will revamp
the health system and develop appropriate policies and
systems.

Turning to another subject, we continue to believe
that those responsible for gross violations of human
rights in East Timor must be brought to justice. In view
of the information provided by Mr. Annabi, it is clear
that UNTAET must continue its investigative work and
its monitoring of human rights violations. We also wish
to thank the Government of Indonesia for the
cooperation it has demonstrated with UNTAET. We
hope that the Lisbon donors' conference, which is
scheduled for 21 to 23 June, will attract the funds
required, and we wish to thank those Governments that
have already contributed to East Timor's development.

In conclusion, my delegation acknowledges that
the challenges in East Timor are indeed great, but
remarkable progress has been achieved in a few short
months. The process there is a gradual one, at the end
of which a new, independent and viable country will
emerge. We will therefore continue to support the work
of UNTAET and to show our solidarity with the people
of East Timor.

