Mr. Madeira (Mozambique): I would like, first
of all, to express, on behalf of my Government and on
behalf of the African Union, our condemnation of the
despicable acts of terrorism that were committed in
Turkey against the citizens of that country and of the
United Kingdom. I convey to those two countries our
heartfelt condolences.

The Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation wanted to know what the African Union can
do to combat impunity. I want to say, first of all, that
we in the African Union adhere to, and strive to
practice, the principles of democracy, good governance

and the rule of law. Democracy cannot go hand in hand
with impunity. We have striven to ensure that crime
does not go unpunished by, in the first place, doing our
utmost to ensure that the Rwanda Tribunal is in place
and working. We have done the same with regard to
Sierra Leone. With regard to the Lusaka Agreement,
we in the African Union have been extremely active in
ensuring the effectiveness of the tracking down,
neutralizing and handing over of negative forces to the
Tribunal in Arusha.

As the Council will have noted, many African
countries have effectively adhered to all efforts and
principles aiming to ensure that crime does not gone
unpunished, including the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. At this very moment, we
are working hard to ensure that the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union is put in place in order
that we may have a proper instrument to handle these
problems. Many of the people who are in Arusha today
were handed over by African countries, including your
own country, Mr. President, Angola, which has been
responsible for handing over very important
personalities responsible for genocide in Rwanda who
are now being tried in Arusha.

Having said that, the problem with Africa is one
of poverty and underdevelopment. We want to do many
things. We want to undertake many initiatives. But if
we do not have resources, those initiatives will remain
just words. That is our problem. As long as we do not
have resources, many of those things will not move
ahead and we may be erroneously perceived as merely
sitting idly by and talking.
We will try to develop ourselves. We will try to
become rich. We will try to have everything we need to
prove to everyone that we are as committed as they are
to ensuring that crime does not go unpunished. Even in
our own countries, because of a lack of resources, there
is severe institutional weakness. Our own criminals go
unpunished. We look for them and we cannot track
them down. That is also reflected at the level of the
international community.

