Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Once again the
Security Council is meeting to consider the critical
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. Once again the circumstances in which we
are meeting are those of pain and sorrow, with blind
terror and violence taking the upper hand and
jeopardizing all attempts to move forward with a
meaningful peace process between Israelis and
Palestinians. My delegation deeply regrets the
prevailing situation, in which any signal of hope is
immediately destroyed by terror, by policies of
collective punishment and by revenge, in a never-
ending cycle of death and terror.

We are all the more saddened and dismayed since
both peoples, Israelis and Palestinians, are our friends;
we would like to see them enjoy the benefits of peace
and coexistence. Unfortunately, all the efforts that have
been deployed over the years, bilaterally and
multilaterally, have remained engulfed in a deadlock;
this is a cause of great frustration and despair for the
entire international community.

The most recent events in Palestine will surely
contribute to worsening the situation. My delegation
has stated time and again its total opposition to the
extrajudicial killings occurring in Palestine,
particularly of children. We express our deep regret at
the events of recent days, which constitute the key
reason why the Security Council has convened this
special meeting.

Indeed, the killing of Sheikh Yassin will probably
add to the frustration among Palestinians and
encourage extremist elements to carry on with terrorist
suicide bombings - something we all regret. We need
to break the cycle of violence. In our View, an
investment in peace by both Israelis and Palestinians
would surely be more rewarding than such actions.
That means abiding strictly by international law and
meeting the just demand of the international
community that the parties work together by
implementing the road map, which the Council
endorsed as the path away from the cycle of retaliatory
violence.

We reiterate our conviction that terrorism and
occupation are the factors that feed the conflict. They
close every window of opportunity for peace and
should be addressed by the parties with realism and
determination. We call once again on Palestinians and
Israelis to put an end to terror and occupation. We also
call on them to avoid taking any steps that could
escalate terrorism and violence and to abide by their
obligations under international law. The framework for
action to be undertaken by the parties leading to the
peaceful resolution of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
exists and only requires courageous steps and taking
risks for peace. The international community, for its
part, must persevere in its efforts to bring the parties to
the negotiating table.

Through the adoption of resolution 1515 (2003),
the Security Council endorsed the road map and joined
in the efforts of the Quartet in the search for a
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East. In
my delegation's view, at the present juncture the
Security Council and the Quartet should renew their
efforts, applying all political and diplomatic resources
to push forward with the implementation of the road
map. My delegation renews its appeal to the parties to
take the risks for peace, to take the first steps
envisaged by the road map and, by doing so, to create
the necessary mutual confidence conducive to
meaningful peaceful negotiations. Together with the
international community, my country, Angola, is ready
to do its part in the process and to help the parties to
walk the road towards peace.

