Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this meeting. We would
congratulate Mr. Haekkerup on his work since
becoming head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and thank
him for the informative briefing he has provided today.

Ireland fully subscribes to the detailed statement
which will be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, as Presidency of the
European Union, and I will therefore endeavour to be
brief and to highlight only a few points.

Ireland totally condemns the continuing
ethnically motivated violence in Kosovo. We welcome
the ongoing efforts of UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
to maintain stability, and urge political leaders in
Kosovo to take more responsibility for developing a
peaceful and tolerant society.

We were interested in Mr. Haekkerup's comments
about the improvement of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina and support his view that the international
community should continue to engage the Yugoslav
authorities in constructive dialogue regarding Kosovo.
In this regard, we welcome the recent adoption of the
Amnesty Law and urge the authorities in Belgrade to
take steps to release all remaining political prisoners.
Progress must also be made regarding missing persons
and the return of refugees to their homes in Kosovo.

Ireland gives its full support to the fundamental
priorities of UNMIK, as outlined today by the Special
Representative, including the establishment of a legal
framework, the strengthening of law enforcement and
criminal justice systems in Kosovo and the completion
of economic reconstruction. We believe that the
electoral system needs to be developed further so that
the elections reflect the will of the entire population of
Kosovo.

We understand the impatience of many people in
the region to push ahead with elections. We also
appreciate the difficulties inherent in the preparations
and, in this regard, agree with Mr. Haekkerup that the
diversity of Kosovo's communities should be reflected
in the joint Working Group on the legal framework. We
therefore regret the withdrawal of the Serb
representative from that Group and encourage Belgrade
to exercise its influence to ensure that Kosovo Serbs
are adequately represented in this process.

Although today's discussions are focused on
Kosovo, we cannot ignore developments in southern
Serbia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, which endanger the overall security of the
region. We welcome the commitment of Belgrade to
respect the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and its
initiatives that stress the need for a long-term,
comprehensive settlement. To assist in achieving this,
the European Union has decided to increase the number
of its monitors in the region. We note the decision by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to reduce the
ground safety zone and welcome the ceasefires signed
recently with Serb and Albanian representatives. The
parties involved should now begin direct negotiations
and work towards defusing tensions in the area.

We remain extremely worried about the increase
of violence within the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, including the most recent incidents near
Tetovo, and we condemn such acts unreservedly.

The violence which has escalated in and around
Kosovo in recent weeks has many causes, including
criminal activity. However, those who would seek to
sow the seeds of violence in the region can find fertile
soil in the political divisions there. In condemning, as
we must, all acts of violence, we must not lose sight of
the need to deprive such violence of the sustenance on
which it thrives. Ireland takes this opportunity to urge
all Governments in the region to develop confidence-
building measures grounded on democratic principles,
full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and the equality of all citizens. Beyond that,
it is also necessary for Governments to ensure parity of
esteem - that is, equality of respect between ethnic
communities - within their borders, so that all citizens
can identify with and feel at home in the State in which
they live. In this context, we would commend the
stated intention of the Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, as reiterated by
Foreign Minister Kerim in his statement to the Security
Council last week, to continue its commitment to a
multi-ethnic and democratic society.

