Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I can be quite brief. I will
not repeat our longstanding and well known positions
on the broader humanitarian and political situation.
However, I wanted to take the floor to express our
appreciation to Martin Griffiths for his briefing and,
more important, for the very determined and energetic
efforts he is making in Geneva.

Despite the challenges and temporary setbacks,
I think it is important to echo what he was saying:
things are difficult; it is understandable that there are
challenges after years of conflict and distrust. We are
encouraged by the launch of the consultations and
the steps taken in Geneva. The discussion with the
Government in Yemen on vital confidence-building
measures related to Sana'a airport, medical flights,
the release of prisoners and the economy is one such
promising step. We therefore commend the Government
for its constructive engagement.

We join others in welcoming the active participation
of the technical advisory group of Yemeni women.

It is regrettable that the Houthis did not make it
to Geneva - an opportunity that they should have
seized. Nevertheless, we are happy to note the Special
Envoy's assessment that there is willingness to take
the political process forward, and we strongly urge the
parties to engage. We support the approach outlined by
Mr. Griffiths today for moving forward by travelling
to Sana'a and the region to continue the political
consultations building on the discussions in Geneva.

However, now more than ever, it is crucial that the
emphasis remain on the political track. With that in
mind, we are concerned about the rocket attacks against
Saudi Arabia, the latest escalation in Al-Hudaydah,
reports of intensified clashes and air strikes, as well as
of the unrest in the South. Again, all of that results in
unacceptable levels of civilian casualties. We therefore
once again remind the parties that a full-scale escalation
in Al-Hudaydah would aggravate the humanitarian
disaster even further and risk hundreds of thousands of
lives, while clearly undermining the political process.
Yemen's ports, including those at Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef, must remain open and functioning to allow for
unhindered humanitarian and commercial imports.

Now is the time for the Security Council and
the broader international community to renew our
support for the United Nations Special Envoy and to
call on the parties to de-escalate, respect international
humanitarian law, ensure accountability and engage
in an inclusive United Nations-led political process
without preconditions. If we could express that through
a press statement or something of the like, as suggested
by my British colleague, we would be in favour.

