Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/934) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015). We note the work of
the Permanent Representative of Belgium as Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of the
resolution's provisions. We welcome the new Head
of Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, although I must say that I am used to seeing
him here in a different capacity.

We share the Secretary-General's position on
the withdrawal of the United States from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and the
reimposition of unilateral sanctions against Iran,
which are contrary to the aims of both the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) and undermine Iran's
ability to comply with their provisions. The current
report constitutes clear evidence of Washington's
violations of its obligations under resolution 2231
(2015), specifically its paragraphs 1, 2 and 7, and
under Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that those actions should be condemned as
well as deplored by the international community. We
are in effect encountering the paradoxical situation in
which a permanent member of the Security Council is
not only failing to comply with a resolution adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter, among other things,
but is actively threatening all other Member States with
unilateral sanctions for implementing the resolution's
provisions. We do not quite understand how it is
possible to strengthen international peace and security
by directly undermining Security Council resolutions.
Using sanctions as a stick in a blanket response to any
concern not only does not work but spawns new crises.

Iran cannot be expected to meekly comply with
Council resolutions that the United States itself is
undermining. Iran has a legal right, enshrined in
paragraph 36 of the JCPOA, to take measures in
response to United States violations of the Charter or
resolution 2231 (2015). Moreover, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has been notified about
all of Iran's steps to reduce its voluntary obligations and
they have been supervised by the Agency's inspectors,
in full compliance with the provisions of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Additional Protocol to Iran's Safeguards Agreement.
All of those measures are reversible under the entirely
logical condition of compliance with the obligations set
out under the JCPOA and the Charter.

A fully functioning procurement channel and
cooperation with Iran on the use of nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes are key elements in the full
implementation of both the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) itself. The work of those non-proliferation
mechanisms must not be disrupted. Such actions can
have only one aim, which is to create tension around
the Iranian nuclear programme and thereby deepen the
manifestations of crisis in the Middle East.

Today we are witnessing an artificial escalation of
the situation in the Persian Gulf, jeopardizing peace and
security in the region as well as the international efforts
to settle the conflicts there. The so-called evidence of
Iran's guilt that has been provided is neither convincing
nor corroborated by the report of the Secretary-General.
We believe that there is an alternative to escalation.
We have to strengthen the general atmosphere of
trust in the region. We want to remind the Council
once again that in resolution 598 (1988), the Security
Council instructed the Secretary-General to work with
the stakeholders in the region to develop measures to
strengthen its security and stability. That work is now
needed more than ever. Russia is ready to support that
by working in contact with our regional partners and
all interested parties. The ultimate aim must be to form
a genuinely inclusive security architecture that reflects
the legitimate concerns of all the countries of the
region. Our concept for strengthening security in the
Persian Gulf under international guarantees remains
relevant, and its implementation could and should begin
with the holding of a conference attended by States
of the subregion, with a view to eventually including
other Middle Eastern countries. For its part, Tehran has
proposed its own initiative for strengthening regional
peace and security.

We are sorry to see that the report suffers from a
chronic lack of evidence in the parts concerning Iran's
missile programme and supposed arms shipments out of
Iran, as well as various violations that Tehran is alleged
to have permitted of the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) on asset freezes and travel bans on individuals.
The problem of amateur inspections by representatives
of the Secretariat who do not have the necessary skills
or mandate to conduct them persists. That leads one to
ask why, if the Secretariat cannot confirm that there was
a violation of resolution 2231 (2015), does it constantly
include those subjects in its reports?
The only practical step that can be taken to save
the JCPOA is the remaining parties" implementation of
their obligations under the agreement. We must abandon
fear and selfish motives and prioritize the tasks of
maintaining the viability of the JCPOA, which is a vital
achievement of multilateral diplomacy. We believe that
constantly raising the stakes and one-upping each other
about who cares most about the agreement will only
result in extreme attitudes. We must not allow political
pressure, economic strangulation and blackmail
through military might to gain the upper hand.

In conclusion, I would particularly like to emphasize
that the Russian Federation remains committed to the
unconditional implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. We support the Secretary-General's call
in his report for refraining from provocative statements
and actions that could have a negative impact on
regional stability. We will continue to strive for a
dialogue aimed at finding compromises and a balance
of interests. That is the only way. Only coordinated
collective action can bring the current situation back
under control.

