Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): May I express our gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's meeting. I also
sincerely thank Ambassador Mayoral, Ambassador Loj
and you, Ambassador Motoc, for your comprehensive
briefings on the activities of their respective
Committees, whose work is part of our campaign
against terrorism. This is the third Security Council
meeting in this format. We support this approach,
which is in keeping with enhancing coordination and
cooperation among subsidiary bodies of the Council
and enabling the Council to more effectively carry out
its tasks in the key sphere of counter-terrorism.

The 2005 General Assembly summit once again
reaffirmed that the international community is counting
on the United Nations to formulate a reliable system to
counter terrorism, including preventive measures
against that global threat. This was reflected in the
active participation of Member States in the event
marking the opening for signature of the new
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism, which was an initiative of the
Russian Federation.

Another important step in that context was the
Security Council's adoption of resolution 1624 (2005),
which, for the first time, contains provisions pertaining
to the criminalization of the incitement of terrorism
and the enhancement of dialogue among civilizations
and religions in the context of ensuring international
security.

We welcomed the painstaking work towards
agreeing upon the counter-terrorism provisions of the
2005 summit Outcome Document, although we were
not able to achieve unanimity during the discussion
that took place. However, the debate helped to narrow
the gap between the positions of States on key aspects
of counter-terrorism activities and strengthened mutual
understanding with respect to finding solutions to the
problems remaining on the United Nations counter-
terrorism agenda.

We hope that States will heed and support the
2005 summit appeal that they do their utmost to
coordinate and agree upon a comprehensive convention
on international terrorism during the sixtieth session of
the General Assembly. The overall positive momentum
achieved in recent months concerning counter-
terrorism gives us hope that that task will be completed
successfully.

The Russian Federation advocates building on the
activities agreed upon by the Security Council in all
key areas of the struggle against terrorism and
strengthening its capacity through the relevant
subsidiary bodies.

Concerning the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we shall continue to pay close
attention to its activities, bearing in mind the massive
threat to peace and security posed by the terrorist
network of Al-Qaida, the Taliban and their
accomplices. In that connection, we support the efforts
of the 1267 Committee to intensify dialogue with
Member States and international organizations with a
View to strengthening the sanctions regime, consistent
with the provisions of resolution 1617 (2005).

We welcome the Committee's efforts to improve
the Consolidated List and adapt it to existing
conditions. We also acknowledge the effective work of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, which has been acting in ever-closer contact
with the expert groups of the other Committees.

In connection with the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), we note with special
satisfaction the completion of the organization and
staffing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), which enables us to intensify the
activities of the Committee in all the basic areas of its
mandate.

We welcome the goal set in CTC's programme of
work to address the issue of States late in submitting
their reports, and to ensure the expert review of
reports. We support the effort to further develop the
practice of conducting visits to Member States,
including through dialogue between the CTC and
States on the outcome of these field missions. The
Russian Federation supports the Committee's
consistent efforts to intensify cooperation with regional
organizations, first and foremost in facilitating
assistance to States in complying with their obligations
stemming from the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), and in order to strengthen the counter-terrorism
capacity of those organizations. That should be an
important element of the overall coordinated strategy
of enhancing the Committee's cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Today, as the CT ED begins addressing the full range of
its tasks, we see new opportunities for developing such
a dialogue. In that connection, we agree that
preparations for a new coordinated regional meeting of
the CTC should be undertaken.

We would especially like to point out the
importance of the work begun by the CTC, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1624
(2005), to combat incitement to terrorism. We believe
that the Committee, as part of the tasks set out in that
resolution, must use all its capacity, means and
resources in working with States - including letters,
visits, contacts with international and regional
organizations - to erect the obstacles necessary to
stem the spread of the ideology of terrorism. In that
connection, we must take into account not just the
letter, but also the spirit of resolution 1624 (2005).

The Russian Federation shares the positive
evaluation of the momentum of the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). We believe that the major task
now is to conclude the careful analysis of national
reports and responses to additional questions of the
Committee, to process the data received and to identify
the weak links in the national systems of measures, in
order to prevent the spread of weapons of mass
destruction, and in that connection, develop the
procedures needed to provide relevant assistance to
those who may need it.

We are convinced that the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) should not just be a one-time
action, or be reduced to a mere exercise in
accountability. The main task is to use that Security
Council decision to enhance the effectiveness of the
process of improving the non-proliferation efforts of
Member States, including in connection with the fight
against terrorism. This work will require significant
time and effort. Bearing in mind the scope of the tasks
pertaining to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and the limited time remaining before that
Committee's mandate ends, we believe that resolving
the issue of whether to extend the Committee's powers
for two years beyond April 2006 is a pressing matter.

We could have taken a decision on the matter in
the Security Council before the end of the current
period of the Committee's work.

