Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): My delegation remains
deeply concerned over the escalating violence in the
Middle East, which has exacted a high toll of casualties
and deaths, mostly among Palestinian civilians. For
almost a year now, violence has continued to ravage
the occupied Palestinian territories and is becoming
more intense. The increasing violence not only shatters
the confidence in the peace process, but also
compromises the sacrifice, time and energy invested so
far in the quest for peace and security in the region.

The extrajudicial killings of Palestinians by the
Israeli forces are proceeding at a dangerously
accelerated rate. This practice is unacceptable and must
be condemned. The situation on the ground today has
become alarming and explosive. Hundreds of innocent
victims, including children and women from both the
Palestinian and Israeli sides, continue to suffer because
of the apparent inability and failure by the international
community to take the necessary steps to stem the
violence. The death toll only continues to rise day after
day. Loss of life in any situation is tragic, but when
loss of life is avoidable, it becomes immoral.

Prospects for a durable peace in the Middle East
have been seriously jeopardized by recent events. If
appropriate steps are not taken promptly, there is a high
risk that the entire Middle East will be embroiled in a
full-scale war. No one wishes this to happen.

We at the Security Council need to assume our
responsibilities. Several Council resolutions continue
to remain unimplemented, and peace in the Middle
East still remains elusive. Today, the eyes of the
international community are once more focused on the
Security Council, which under the United Nations
Charter has the responsibility to intervene and stop the
situation from deteriorating any further. The Council
has no option but to remain actively engaged and
undertake the necessary action to contain the ongoing
violence and encourage confidence-building measures
between the two parties so that the peace talks may
resume.

My delegation urges Israel to put an end to all
acts of violence and targeted assassinations. Mauritius
strongly condemns the excessive and indiscriminate
use of force and violence against the Palestinian
people. We also strongly condemn the Israeli
occupation of Orient House in East Jerusalem and the
closure of other buildings belonging to the Palestinian
Authority. Orient House is a symbol of peace and of
the very dignity of the Palestinian people; its
occupation by Israel is unacceptable. These
unwarranted Israeli acts, which are flagrant violations
of past agreements signed by the two sides, would
further undermine prospects for reviving the peace
process and would constitute a deliberate act of
provocation. Unless such practices are immediately
halted, there will be a further radicalization of the
Palestinians. All acts of provocation should stop.

We join our voice to the call made by the
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, for Israel to
immediately end its occupation of Orient House and
other Palestinian buildings. Both Israel and Palestine
should exercise the highest degree of restraint and act
responsibly in order not to exacerbate the situation any
further.

In the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, the
blockades imposed by Israel have only further
worsened the sufferings of the Palestinian people and
resulted in untold daily hardship to the residents in the
Palestine-controlled areas. The blockade has cost the
Palestinian economy millions of dollars;
unemployment has soared, and hundreds of thousand of
people are struggling for their survival. It goes without
saying that unemployment, misery and frustration are
breeding grounds for more violent actions. We call
upon Israel to immediately remove all the blockades so
that the Palestinian people may resume their normal
activities.

My delegation is reminded of the remarks made
seven years ago by the late Prime Minister of Israel,
Yitzhak Rabin, that Israelis and Palestinians are
destined to live together on the same soil, in the same
land. The establishment of an independent state of
Palestine, together with the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), are the only safeguards for a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace between Israel and Palestine and
in the Middle East region. Israel, too, has the right to
exist within secure borders.

Since November last year, the Non-Aligned
Movement caucus of the Security Council has
relentlessly undertaken efforts to move the Council to
establish a United Nations observer force to provide
protection to the Palestinian people. We are convinced
that, had the Council agreed to the deployment of such
an observer force, the situation would not be as it is
today.

Over the past 23 years, several milestones have
been reached in the protracted peace process.
Beginning from the Camp David Accords in 1978, we
moved to the Madrid Conference, the Oslo peace
agreements and the Sharm el-Sheikh understandings of
October 2000. Each time we have expressed hope,
confidence and expectations that peace will finally be
within reach, but each time there has been
disappointment. Now we have the Mitchell report,
which provides a viable process for a peaceful
settlement. We cannot afford to lose this opportunity.

The acceptance of the Mitchell report four
months ago by both sides created expectations which,
unfortunately, have not been realized. Time has been
lost, but no more time should be lost. The report offers
a sensible and coherent foundation for resolving the
crisis and resuming meaningful negotiations.

Mauritius believes that both sides should look
forward to, and promptly consider adopting, the
confidence-building measures recommended by the
Mitchell report. We appeal to both the Palestinian
Authority and the Israeli Government to put an end to
the cycle of violence and return to the negotiating
table. In this regard, we wish to commend all the
efforts undertaken so far by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, to narrow down the differences
between the Israeli and Palestinian leaders. We
encourage the Secretary-General, as well as the leaders
of the region and those of the European Union, the
United States and the Russian Federation, to pursue
their efforts to break the deadlock.

We also endorse the statement made by the Group
of Eight in Genoa, Italy, which reaffirmed that the
implementation of the Mitchell report was the way
forward to break the deadlock, stop the escalation of
violence and resume the political process. It is clear
that in the case of such an impasse, the international
community should provide all possible assistance and
avenues to the two sides to stop the violence and
resume the peace talks.

My delegation supports the idea of creating a
monitoring mechanism that would help the two parties
to implement the Mitchell report. This is the only way
for us to ensure that the recommendations of the report
are respected and implemented. My delegation would
support such an initiative, if the matter were to be
considered by the Council, and we call upon all
members to give serious consideration to this course of
action.

