Mr. Li Baodong (China) (Spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Special Representative, Mr. Moussa, for his
briefing.

At present the countries of Central Africa are
actively committed to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the promotion of economic and
social development, and the strengthening of regional
integration. They have achieved positive results in that
regard.

At the same time, Central Africa continues to face
many challenges in the area of peace and security.
The situation in the Central African Republic and the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains turbulent. The threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) has not been eradicated;
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea also remains a challenge.
The cooperation of the countries of the region and of
the international community is therefore required.

China would like to make the following four points.

First, the international community should actively
assist the countries ofCentral Africa in efforts to achieve
peace and stability. China is deeply concerned about
the tensions in the Central African Republic and the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that the parties concerned will abandon all
forms of violence and resolve their differences through
dialogue and negotiation.

We support the countries in the region and
regional and subregional organizations in their efforts
to resolve those problems. We urge the international
community to provide support to the relevant countries
and organizations on the basis of full respect for the
sovereignty of the countries of the region. China
welcomes the recent visit by the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and other countries of the region. We thank him
for the important role he has played in helping to resolve
the issue of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an
appropriate manner.

Secondly, the international community must
continue to support the countries of the region in the
fight against the LRA, which continues to operate in
many countries of the region. The deterioration of the
security situation in the Central African Republic is
having a negative impact on the efforts of the countries
of the region to combat the LRA. China strongly
condemns the attacks carried out by the LRA against
civilians and demands its immediate disarmament.

We appreciate the efforts made by the countries of
the region in the fight against the LRA, and we support
the efforts of the African Union (AU) to implement
regional cooperation initiatives. We welcome the
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
in that regard. We expect that there will be effective
implementation of the relevant United Nations regional
strategy and plans of action.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue to be concerned about the ongoing threats
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, arms trafficking and
transnational organized crime. We support the efforts of
the countries in the region to formulate and improve the
relevant country strategies, with a View to strengthening
governance and law enforcement. We appreciate the
leadership of and coordinating role played by the
relevant regional organizations. The international
community should provide the necessary support to
the countries concerned through information-sharing,
the exchange of experiences, technical assistance and
capacity-building, as well as the adoption of integrated
policies aimed at tackling the relevant issues and
their root causes, with a focus on economic and social
development as well as other key aspects.

Fourthly, the United Nations should play a greater
role in achieving lasting peace in Central Africa. China
is grateful to the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) for its continuing efforts to
fulfil the Security Council's mandate and maintain
regional peace and stability. We hope that it will continue
its synergistic role in communicating between, and
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations system,
regional organizations and the relevant countries in
the region. China will continue to support the work of
UNOCA and Special Representative Moussa.

