Mr. Mikec (Croatia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his inspiring statement
and for the report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict that we are discussing today
(S/2012/746). I would also like to thank Ambassador
Momen for his statement on behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and for his able stewardship of the
Commission in 2012.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement previously
delivered by the obseraver of the European Union.
However, I would briefly like, in my national capacity,
to make a few additional comments.

Croatia welcomes the progress made in implementing
the Agenda for Action outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2009/304,
dated 11 June 2009. We are particularly encouraged
by his recognition of the increased effectiveness of
leadership on the ground and the improved functioning
of the funding mechanisms in support of peacebuilding
efforts. In that context, we also welcome the significant
improvements in the completion of integrated strategic
frameworks, and follow with interest the development
of a new policy on United Nations transitions in the
context of mission drawdown and withdrawal.

Croatia welcomes the priorities for the upcoming
period identified in the report of the Secretary-
General, in particular the focus on inclusive
peacebuilding processes, institution-building and
sustained international engagement. In our view,
inclusive country-owned and country-led initiatives,
supported by the coherent, coordinated and sustainable
engagement of the international community, are vital
for States to successfully emerge from conflict.

Croatia commends the initial progress made
towards the implementation of the seven-point action
plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding. We believe
that the equal participation of women in political,
transitional and peacebuilding processes is of crucial
importance for their comprehensive and effective
implementation. In that context, we strongly support
further efforts aimed at strengthening the position of
women in the such processes and at addressing their
specific needs as set out in the Secretary-General's
2010 report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).

Croatia welcomes a more interactive and dynamic
relationship between the Security Council and the
PBC. We are encouraged by the recent developments in
that regard and we hope that the Council will continue
to make clear what advice it needs from the PBC,
particularly during mandate discussions. Furthermore,
we welcome the possibility of informal interaction
between the two bodies, which is a form of interaction
we find particularly rewarding.

Croatia acknowledges the work of the Group of
Seven Plus countries aimed at clearly defining the ways
by which the international partners should support
their peacebuilding processes. Croatia believes that the
New Deal principles, including national ownership and
national responsibility for commitments undertaken
and mutual accountability offer useful additional
guidance for the Commission's engagement with the
countries on its agenda.

Croatia strongly believes that rebuilding civilian
capacities represents one of the most important fields
of assistance to countries emerging from conflict. In
that context, we closely follow the civilian capacities
initiative and its results. We stand ready to further
contribute to the broadening and deepening of the pool
of civilian peacebuilding expertise, including through
the newly established sharing platform, CAPMATCH.

Finally, let me conclude by emphasizing the
importance that my country attaches to the efforts
aimed at greater coordination and coherence among
multiple international actors engaged in peacebuilding
processes, including the further clarification of their
respective roles and responsibilities. We strongly
believe that only through increased collaboration and,
in particular, appropriate engagement by international
financial institutions, regional and subregional
organizations, private-sector and non-traditional
donors, can we all maximize output and ensure effective
international engagement in post-conflict situations.

