Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. My delegation is
confident that your wisdom, knowledge and diplomatic
skills will enable this body to fulfil its duties. Allow
me also to express our deep appreciation to your
predecessor, Permanent Representative of Turkey
Ambassador Baki Ilkin, for his able leadership. With
his team, he managed several crises and challenges
successfully. I also wish to thank Mr. Oscar F ernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his exhaustive and comprehensive briefing.

Once again, we are meeting to discuss the
situation in the Middle East; and once again, peace, as
well as the region, are facing critical challenges and
threats. What was supposed to be the year of peace and
a window of opportunity started with a systematic
Israeli war on Gaza. Indeed, for each call for peace,
Israel is building a settlement. For each step that the
international community takes towards establishing a
Palestinian State, Israel introduces its own definition of
that State and imposes its own conditions: no control
over the airspace, the sea or crossing points; no army;
no contiguous territory; no sovereignty; no Jerusalem;
and no return of refugees. There is only one yes,
namely, the responsibility of that so-called State to
ensure the security of Israel. In that context, one might
ask: Who will defend Palestine and the Palestinian
people? Who will defend the rights of Palestinian
refugees to return to their homeland? Who will defend
Gaza, the West Bank and Jerusalem? Who will defend
the peace process?

In the midst of this precarious situation, and again
from Lebanon, where the Arab Peace Initiative was
adopted in 2002, the President of Lebanon, General
Sleiman, reiterated the importance of this initiative
when he stated that "the Arab peace initiative is an
opportunity to achieve a just and comprehensive peace".
He urged the United States and Europe "to exert more
pressure on Israel to accept a fair peace initiative".

How hopeful we were when we heard statements
from various leaders from all over the world
highlighting the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative,
the need to put an end to settlements and the need to
address the continuing humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
Today, more than ever before, the will for peace
should prevail. Peace is not merely a choice. It was, is
and continues to be a necessity, and it should be
translated into a reality. We consider that the upcoming
Moscow conference should build on well-established
terms of reference for the peace process, such as the
principles of the Madrid Peace Conference, the Arab
Peace Initiative in its entirety and relevant Security
Council resolutions. As for the Moscow conference, an
honest commitment should be invested in it in order to
achieve a just, durable and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. We owe that to future generations in the
region and throughout the world.

I turn now to issues related to Lebanon. Almost
three years after the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), which ended Israel's
aggression against my country, the message from the
President of Lebanon is clear: Lebanon remains
committed to the full implementation of that
resolution. Lebanon reiterates its call upon the
international community to exert pressure on Israel to
abide by its obligations under that resolution and to put
an end to its violations.

Almost three years after the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006), we in Lebanon are still
suffering from Israeli violations on a daily basis. Israel
continues to violate Lebanon's land, sea and airspace.
The Secretary-General, in paragraph 63 of his tenth
report on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2009/330), clearly called upon Israel to cease
immediately all overflights of Lebanese territory,
which are in violation of Lebanese sovereignty and
resolution 1701 (2006).

Israel continues its occupation of the northern
part of Ghajar, in Violation of Lebanon sovereignty and
resolution 1701 (2006). In paragraph 64 of the same
report, the Secretary-General noted with concern, that
the Israeli Forces continued their occupation of part of
the village of Ghajar, and in accordance with its
obligations under resolution 1701 (2006), Israel must
complete its withdrawal from this area. Israel continues
to occupy the Sheba'a farmlands and Kfar Shouba
hills, in violation of our sovereignty over our land.

As if all those violations were not enough, the
Lebanese authorities have also dismantled Israeli spy
networks, which are in blatant violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and relevant Security Council resolutions.
In addition to the delay in providing complete
information on the strike data regarding the locations
of the millions of cluster munitions with which Israel
pounded Lebanon during the July 2006 war, killing or
maiming hundreds of Lebanese civilians, Israeli
officials are bombarding Lebanon with public threats.
These are hostile statements on launching a massive
and destructive war.

All of these violations are aimed at destabilizing
Lebanon and threatening its security. They threaten
peace and stability throughout the region and add to
existing tensions when serious efforts are being exerted
to achieve a comprehensive, just and durable peace.

As for the incidents which occurred two weeks
ago in the south of Lebanon, my delegation has already
shared its views on this matter in its letter of 22 July
2009. A joint investigation commission between the
Lebanese army and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) has been established. The
investigation is still under way, and preliminary
information of the investigation showed that the arms
and ammunitions found were remnants of the July 2006
war. While we are still waiting for the conclusion of
this investigation, we refuse to anticipate the outcome,
and we reject any accusations launched by Israel of
arms smuggling into UNIFIL's area of operation.

Whenever southern Lebanon is mentioned, the
image of UNIFIL appears. UNIFIL, which has been
present there since 1978, the year of the first Israeli
invasion, has become part of the social scenery. The
Force, like Lebanese civilians, has suffered losses
during successive Israeli acts of presumed "self-
defence". The events known as Qana 1 and Qana 2 are
there to remind us of that. An understanding of the
culture and the social traditions of the population and
close consultation and cooperation with the Lebanese
army have ensured UNIFIL's success and will reinforce
its important role and established image in the south.

The international community and, in particular,
the Security Council need to be fully aware of Israel's
intention to change the status quo, through attempts to
create new facts along the Blue Line and through
provocation, by establishing new realities on the
ground. Hence, our repeated calls to achieve real and
sustainable progress and to move from this precarious
cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire.

In the framework of resolution 1701 (2006),
UNIFIL has the mandate to defend civilians and
prevent another Israeli aggression against Lebanon. In
that context, on 4 July, my Government addressed a
letter to the United Nations which requested the
renewal of UNIFIL's mandate for one additional year
and without any amendments. While looking forward
to the upcoming renewal without any changes - either
in the mandate or in any of the relevant rules and
concepts of operation - my delegation would like to
express Lebanon's appreciation to all troop-
contributing countries and to all peacekeepers for their
courage and relentless efforts to maintain security and
stability in the region.

