The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.

I, too, would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his support and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
comprehensive briefing. Let me also extend a sincere
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and
reiterate our appreciation for the warm hospitality
extended to us during the Council's mission to
Afghanistan. I would also like to express our deep
appreciation to Mr. De Mistura and the entire staff of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their hard work and dedicated efforts in
Afghanistan.

As I am the last Council member to speak, I will
try to be brief and focus on two main issues. First, on
the elections, Turkey commends the Government of
Afghanistan for holding the second parliamentary
elections since 2001 as planned, on 18 September, in
spite of the difficult security conditions, and we
commend the Afghan people for their active interest
and participation in the elections. We condemn all
attacks and attempts to undermine the election process
by violence, and offer our condolences for those who
have lost their lives.

The elections were another step forward in the
consolidation of Afghanistan's democratic institutions
and national unity. The holding of the elections was
made possible by the determined efforts of the Afghan
authorities and the support of the international
community to this Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
process. We are confident that the Afghan electoral
bodies will keep up their good work in the weeks
ahead. It is particularly important for the Independent
Electoral Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission to deal with all the complaints they
receive in a speedy, impartial and transparent manner
in order to ensure that reliable final results are
announced in due time.

The elections were a critical step in the political
process in Afghanistan. With the elections carried out
on time and, we hope, the results to be announced in
the coming weeks after all the complaints have been
dealt with, we can focus in greater depth on
Afghanization, which is the second issue I wish to
touch into.

Ensuring the durability of the achievements made
thus far is directly linked to cementing Afghan
ownership and empowering Afghans. The Kabul
Conference was a turning point in this regard. The
Afghan Government and the international community
should now focus on the implementation of the Kabul
process, the most important message of which was
Afghanization and Afghan ownership. In that regard,
we are glad to see that the Afghan Government is
showing strong political will to take this process
forward and is drawing up concrete implementation
plans. The international community should, for its part,
be steadfast in its commitments and assist the Afghan
Government in a manner that conforms to the
conditions, priorities and requirements on the ground.

As foreseen at the Kabul Conference, the phased
transfer to Afghan responsibility should be led by the
Afghans. It should be conditions-driven and should not
be interpreted to mean an exit. Long-term commitment
to Afghanistan in all forms required and requested by
the Afghans should be emphasized. Transition is
possible in an atmosphere of security and stability,
which ultimately requires political reconciliation. This
process should seek to embrace all segments of society
under the leadership of the Afghan Government, giving
them fair opportunities to serve the Afghan cause and
enable their representation. Afghanistan can overcome
the hurdles it has been experiencing only through
enhanced unity and solidarity at the national level.

We also firmly believe that an essential pillar of
ensuring the irreversibility of the process under way in
Afghanistan is directly linked to regional cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours. This is one of
the pillars of the comprehensive approach, which
includes reconciliation. It is in this understanding that
we have organized meetings in various formats,
ranging from January to July, including two summits
and two ministerial meetings.

In conclusion, the Kabul Conference was a
beginning. Its implementation needs determined
leadership on the part of the Afghan authorities and
close coordination among the Afghan partners. In that
regard, Turkey has pursued the most comprehensive
assistance programme in its history, with various
civilian and military capabilities supporting
Afghanistan's historic process of transformation.
Turkey's commitment to Afghanistan is long-term, and
its assistance will continue as long as required by the
Afghans.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Canada.

