As a landlocked country and home to the Niger River, the third-longest river in Africa, my country considers the management of transboundary waters to be essential for the peaceful coexistence of countries that share the important natural resource that is a river. That is why our States set up the Niger Basin Authority, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Mano River Union. Indeed, water must be a source of cooperation and shared prosperity; it must not be a source of conflict or discord among riparian nations. Accordingly, the escalation of tensions over the Great Ethiopian Renaissance Dam project, although a source of concern, should have a happy outcome, as it concerns three sister countries, united by history and geography. When, a few days ago, the Security Council discussed the opportunity of addressing this issue, the situation among the three countries concerned had become tense as a result of an impasse in the negotiations. Our discussions today are taking place against the backdrop of the different atmosphere that I hope will emerge from the statements to be made by the three countries concerned. I would add that our discussions are taking place following the auspicious initiative undertaken by Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, President of South Africa and current Chairperson of the African Union Assembly, of convening, on 26 June, an Extraordinary Meeting of the Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union, by videoconference, with the participation of the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Prime Ministers of Ethiopia and the Sudan. I would like to take this opportunity to mention, with satisfaction, some of the outcomes of the videoconference, which we believe to be positive milestones on the path towards a negotiated solution to the problem. Indeed, the Extraordinary Meeting of the Bureau revealed that more than 90 per cent of the issues in dispute had already been resolved by the three countries and that they are determined to discuss the remaining issues within the framework of the African Union in a constructive spirit, reflecting the excellent relations and solidarity that have always existed among the three countries. The Niger is confident that the tripartite negotiating mechanism, which was expanded by decision of the Extraordinary Meeting, will produce a report in the coming days, which it will submit to the current Chairperson of the African Union Assembly, who can then convene another Bureau meeting in early July to decide on the outcome of the negotiations. In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the appeal made to the Council by the Extraordinary Meeting of the Bureau of the African Union Assembly to take note of the fact that the African Union is seized of this issue. In this regard, the Council could support this regional initiative, as it would send a strong signal of recognition of the essential role played by regional organizations in the peaceful settlement of disputes of this nature. Regional organizations such as the African Union often have a better understanding of regional dynamics. Accordingly, they can detect the early warning signs of impending conflict and, through that knowledge, promote dialogue and reconciliation among the parties, as has been pointed out in the reports of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in Africa.While the role of the Security Council is essential to the maintenance of international peace and security, in the name of the principle of subsidiarity, the African initiative should truly be supported in this particular case in order to give full force to the principle that African problems should be solved through African solutions.
