Mr. Wu Haitao (China)(spoke in Chinese): China
listened attentively to the briefings by Assistant
Secretary-General Keita and Ambassador Vieira.
China takes note of the Secretary-General's report on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2019/664).

China has closely followed developments in the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. As stated in the Secretary-
General's report, 2019 will be a pivotal year for the
political and social life of Guinea-Bissau. Legislative
elections were successfully held in March. In July, the
new Prime Minister took office and successfully formed
a new Government. On 24 November, Guinea-Bissau
will hold a presidential election. We hope that all parties
in Guinea-Bissau will make joint efforts to ensure that
the election is carried out smoothly and on schedule.
At the same time, the international community should
continue to provide technical, financial and logistical
support to election preparations based on the needs of
the Bissau-Guinean Government.

China appreciates the mediation efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and countries of the region to promote
the political process in Guinea-Bissau. All parties in
Guinea-Bissau should act in the long-term interests of
the country and its people, establish mutual trust through
dialogue and consultation, build consensus, resolve
differences, consolidate the positive progress achieved
in the political process, make sound preparations for
the presidential election and commit to improving
living standards and promoting stable development in
the country.

China has always supported African countries in
solving African problems in African ways, and has
supported ECOWAS and countries of the regional in
continuing to play a constructive role in promoting
stability and development in Guinea-Bissau and the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS six-point road map. We call on relevant
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and the United Nations country team, to strengthen
coordination and cooperation and provide targeted
assistance to Guinea-Bissau based on respect for its
sovereignty and will.

Development holds the key to solving all problems.
China firmly supports the people of Guinea-Bissau in
exploring a path of development suited to their national
conditions and has always respected their independent
choices. Cooperation between China and Guinea-
Bissau in the areas of agriculture, health and medical
care, in the framework of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation and the Forum for Economic and Trade
Cooperation between China and Portuguese-speaking
Countries, has made positive contributions to Guinea-
Bissau's efforts to achieve food self-sufficiency,
poverty alleviation and development.

China stands ready to work with international
community to continue to play a positive role in
promoting lasting stability and development in Guinea-
Bissau and West Africa.

