Mr. Inzko: More than 25 years have passed since
Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the United Nations in
1992, and more than two decades have elapsed since
the tragic conflict came to an end in 1995. In many
ways, the country has made remarkable progress since
then: the State institutions provided for in annex 4 of
the Peace Agreement - the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - were established; the three armies that
fought each other were unified into one; a modern and
efficient tax collection system was established; and the
country adopted a flag, a national anthem, common
passports and very stable currency. Those are just some
of the achievements.

The country is today at a crucial moment in its
history, as leaders of all ethnic affiliations aspire to
join the European Union (EU) and are working towards
fulfilling the requirements necessary for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be granted EU candidate status. Despite
those promising strides, Bosnia and Herzegovina still
requires the attention of the international community.
Looking at the past six months, many ofthe key political
actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina have continued to
hold maximalist positions on the concrete challenges
facing the country. Those political actors have been
unwilling, in most cases, to search for the compromises
needed to adopt the necessary reforms.

Of course, there have been positive counterexamples
to that negative trend. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
taken some steps to implement the EU reform agenda
and continues to work on the questionnaire of the
European Commission. In addition, the country signed,
in September in Trieste, a treaty establishing a transport
community with the EU and five other Western Balkan
countries, which will eventually open the door to
infrastructure developments.

There were also some positive developments in
terms of regional relations, such as the official visit
to Sarajevo in September of the President of Serbia,
Aleksandar Vueie. There were also important visits to
Bosnia and Herzegovina made by Croatian officials.
But the overall picture is one in which reforms have
slowed down considerably. The Foreign Ministers of
the European Union described the situation accurately
last month when they expressed

"regret that a divisive rhetoric rooted in the past
and an early electoral agenda have slowed down the
pace of reform and affected the political climate".

In addition to the current political stalemate, I want
to highlight the risk of a deeper political crisis arising
next year due to disagreement on the rules regulating
the indirect election of delegates to one ofthe Houses of
Parliament in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
If the Federation's House of Parliament is not formed
following the next elections, it will most likely prevent
the formation of the Federation's Government, as well
as one chamber of the State-level Parliament. I want to
call attention to that issue now, while there is still time
for the parties in Parliament to address the problem
before the elections in October 2018. The parties must
do whatever is necessary to ensure that the elections
can take place next year and that the results are
implemented without undue delays.
In addition to the possible political stalemate
in the Federation that I have just described, we have
also seen continued actions and statements from the
representatives of Republika Srpska, questioning the
future of the country and challenging the authority
of State-level institutions, including the decisions of
the State's highest courts. The President of Republika
Srpska has called for Serb judges to withdraw from
State judicial institutions and made it clear that entity
institutions will not implement decisions of the Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina related to the State's right
to own real estate within Republika Srpska territory.

That is part of a campaign to assert that Bosnia
and Herzegovina derives its sovereignty only from
the entities and that it is not a real State. In practice,
it involves challenging the competence of the State to
deal with almost any issue, and that has led to paralysis
on a number of concrete reforms needed for the country
to advance on its path of Euro-Atlantic integration. For
example, in October, the Republika Srpska National
Assembly adopted a resolution that asserts the entity's
neutrality Vis-a-vis integration with NATO and attempts
to redefine the position and obligations of the Republika
Srpska under the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular under
the Constitution, which is set forth in annex 4 of the
Peace Agreement.

In response, I have been clear that the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, including the
Constitution, prevails over any act adopted by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly and that foreign
policy is the exclusive responsibility of the State's
institutions. Furthermore, in my View - and this
stands for other issues as well - decisions of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's State Presidency remain valid until
they are amended by subsequent acts.

In the past I have reported to the Security Council
on another potential challenge to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and the sovereignty of the country, namely,
the decision to hold a referendum in the entity of
Republika Srpska on the State's judicial institutions
and the authorities of the High Representative. When
that issue arose in 2015, I made it clear that such a
referendum would violate annexes 4 and 10 of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. At the time, the European Council
also said that such a referendum would "challenge the
cohesion, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina".

Yesterday, the Republika Srpska National
Assembly formally took out of force the decision
made in 2015 to hold that referendum - a decision
that should never have been made in the first place.
However, that National Assembly also adopted
conclusions that pose gravely concerning issues. They
again incorrectly assert that Republika Srpska is a State
and that it has the right to hold referendums on matters
within the clear competence of the State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would like to emphasize that the
Republika Srpska authorities only have the right to
make decisions on matters that fall under their own
constitutional responsibilities - including through
referendums. That is clearly not the case when it comes
to the laws concerning judicial institutions at State
level or decisions made by the High Representative.

Many of the problems that we see in Bosnia and
Herzegovina serve to highlight a more general long-
term trend of diminishing regard for the rule of law by
those in authority. Those include the continued failure
to implement the rulings made in 2009 by the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdie and Finci and
related cases. As a result, under the current system,
certain groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina - such as
Jews and Roma peoples - have been discriminated
against for over two decades in their right to hold
political office.

In the city of Mostar, citizens have been unable to
elect local representatives during the past two electoral
cycles because the two main political parties in the city
have been unwilling to implement the Constitutional
Court's decision on the electoral system. One final
example: some of the cantons in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have failed to amend their
Constitutions to include guaranteeing the status of
Serb peoples and the Serb language, despite a legal
requirement since 2002 to do so.

All of those issues need to be addressed. Of course,
problems with the rule of law go much deeper in terms
of corruption in the political system, the large public
sector and the provision of basic services to the public.
Those deficiencies in the rule of law contribute to
the large exodus of talented young people from the
country, which strengthens the forces of nationalism
and division.

The Dayton Peace Agreement defines Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State governed by the rule of law. I
believe that we, as the international community, need
to re-engage and reinvigorate our efforts more robustly
in order to buttress the rule of law, including through
stronger anti-corruption efforts.

In the light of the many internal challenges still
present in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I believe that
the international community should retain all of the
instruments at its disposal to maintain stability. Bosnia
and Herzegovina represents a complex political and
security environment in which negative scenarios can
quickly endanger the Dayton Peace Agreement and
the progress achieved so far. For that reason, I am
firmly convinced that there is still the necessity to
maintain the EU military force on the ground with an
executive mandate.

Before concluding, I want to mention one more
recent positive development that I think reminds us
that our efforts are not in vain in supporting Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its people. Last year, politicians
in Central Bosnia Canton adopted an initiative in
the regional Parliament to segregate Bosniak and
Croat pupils in the local high school in the town of
Jajce. However, they quickly encountered determined
resistance from a group of vocal students and other
citizens of all nationalities. In large part because of that
resistance, the planned division of the school did not
move forward in September. That example reminds me
oftwo things. First, it shows that there is a desire among
citizens at the local level for social and institutional
integration and for European standards to be applied
in the public sphere. Secondly, it demonstrates to me
that, when we are united as an international community
in speaking out in support of local actors working to
improve their own country, we see results.

Looking ahead, the principal challenges for
the political leaders and institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are clear. First and foremost, they include
completing the actions needed to achieve the next steps
in Euro-Atlantic integration. Those are the very same
measures that will deliver the economic development
that is so badly needed for the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Secondly, they include taking all the
necessary steps to ensure that the 2018 elections can
be held and that their results be implemented smoothly.
And, finally, there is the rule of law. Respecting and
implementing the decisions of courts and respecting the
Dayton Peace Agreement are absolute preconditions for
real progress.

As an international community, we cannot do any
ofthose things on behalfofthe elected leaders ofBosnia
and Herzegovina, but we can speak out clearly against
attempts to roll back the progress made in integrating
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its peoples. And we can
support all those who demonstrate a true commitment
to making Bosnia and Herzegovina a stable, functional
and prosperous country, irreversibly integrated into
European structures.

