Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
share colleagues' feelings on the importance of this
briefing this afternoon and on the terrific role which
the World Food Programme (WFP) is playing. I would
like the Council's praise for that to go to the whole
team led by Mr. Morris. It is a huge team effort - one
of the most impressive United Nations agency
performances of all.

I want to home back in on why we are here in the
Security Council, listening to this briefing. I want to
put the question to Mr. Morris as to what he expects
from the Security Council on this. He is saying that,
increasingly, WFP is looking at symptoms, not causes,
and dealing with the outflow of misery from hunger
and other related problems. That means, as he says,
that the Programme is looking at more than food issues
and increasingly less able - I take this as implicit in
what he is saying - to deal with the causes of what is
happening.

And yet, the causes are, as I gather from his
report, as much structural as they are emergency, or
due to bad luck or bad climate. Therefore, the United
Nations system should be doing something about those
structural causes, as well as addressing the misery that
comes out of the lack of food and health worldwide.
Yes, it is production policy and the arrangements for
food production; yes, it is always never enough donor
activity; yes, we could do with twice as much money
and twice as many agencies doing it all; but it also has
to do with the interplay with health problems,
particularly HIV/AIDS; with peace and security on the
ground; with governance; and with long-term problems
and short-term problems.

We can go on analysing, and Mr. Morris's oral
and written statements do that; but in the written
version, the seven proposals, as well as the six he
mentioned orally at the end of his presentation, are not
really the responsibility of the Security Council, as
such. They are a responsibility of the United Nations
family, the donor countries and the Governments on the
ground. Yet, Mr. Morris ended by saying how critically
important the peacekeeping and diplomatic aspects are.

I would like him, perhaps, to give examples of
what the Security Council could actually do. There are
three things in my mind. One is, of course, conflict
resolution. He has pointed to Angola and Sierra Leone
as having got better; Ethiopia/Eritrea as not yet better
enough; and perhaps Cote d'Ivoire and other places
getting worse. Liberia is still a problem and other parts
where there are rebellions and wars are still difficult.

Secondly, there is the problem of politicization
and of governance. Perhaps that, too, is an area where
the Security Council can play a role.

The third area - one we have not really talked
about yet, but one we ought to discuss among ourselves
and with our sister organizations - is coordination. If,
behind this picture of starvation and misery, there is
not just climate, agricultural policy and what is
happening on the ground in the agricultural area, but
also health and governance and wars and all sorts of
other things, should not the interplay between WFP and
the Security Council be looking at the coordination of
the response? It is not all our business to get into these
areas, but it is our business to do part of it and
therefore to work with others in doing all of it. Does he
not see a crying need for better coordination within the
international and the United Nations systems, much of
which may come back to the governance problem?

Mr. Morris mentioned Zimbabwe because it is the
one area of Southern Africa which is getting so much
worse than the others. He did not say "unnecessarily",
but he did not point to a climatic or a coincidental
reason. There are things there that, from a human
perspective, could go better; ditto in some other parts
of Africa, where the right policies could make this
immediately better. To what extent does Mr. Morris
believe that the Security Council is making a
difference? Since he only has a few further minutes left
with us today, what would he like us specifically to do,
until he comes back to talk to us about it again, to
make what he sees, from the WFP viewpoint, start
improving, rather than continue to go worse?

