I thank Special Representative Fall for his continued efforts aimed at bringing lasting peace and stability to the Central African region. We very much appreciate his consistent and frank communication with the Security Council. Before I continue with my statement today, however, I would also like to extend the condolences of the United States to the people of Burundi on the untimely passing of President Pierre Nkurunziza. The disturbing news of his death comes as he was poised to step down at the age of 55 to allow the peaceful transition of presidential power in his country. During the seven-day mourning period, we hope the people of Burundi know that they are in our thoughts and prayers. The United States is encouraged to hear of improving and deepening coordination among Central African States on such issues as the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, combatting cross-border armed groups, and reform of the Economic Community of Central African States. At the same time, we are especially concerned about the impact of COVID-19 in Central Africa. The effects of the crisis on the economies of the region - most notably, those dependent upon oil revenues to support growth - underscores the region's vulnerability to global shocks. The United States is committed to supporting COVID-19 response efforts in the subregion, and we share the concern regarding the ability of national health systems to prevent the spread, especially in countries already experiencing humanitarian crises. Therefore, we have committed more than $1 billion for emergency health, humanitarian, economic and development assistance specifically aimed at helping Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations fight the pandemic. Included in that amount is approximately $100 million exclusively for Central African countries. Today, the United States would also like to direct the Council's attention to the situation in Cameroon, where the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reports there are nearly 680,000 people displaced in the North- West and South-West regions of the country owing to the conflict there. We are encouraged to learn that some armed groups in Cameroon have responded to the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire. Unfortunately, the COVID-19 pandemic will only worsen the country's deeply concerning humanitarian crisis, and we urge full humanitarian access be provided to public health responders. We are also deeply concerned about the death of journalist Samuel Wazizi, who was held for over 300 days in military detention. It is important that there be an independent investigation into his death and that the results be made public. Looking forward, we welcome the reporting of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall on the electoral developments that will play out during the remainder of 2020 and into 2021. As we all know, elections can have an outsized impact on security, so we appreciate his efforts to relay those developments in a timely and comprehensive manner.
