Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zerrougui for her insightful briefing. I
also extend our appreciation to the President of the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo, Monsignor
Marcel Utembi, and the representative of Rien Sans
Les Femmes, Ms. Solange Lwashiga Furaha, for their
highly informative updates.

We reiterate the importance of implementing the
31 December 2016 political agreement by all parties.
In that regard, we welcome the recent announcement
by President Joseph Kabila not to run for re-election,
which is an important step towards a peaceful transition
of power.

We also note the importance of organizing fair,
transparent and inclusive elections as scheduled. This
nation-owned process should be held with respect for
the sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We welcome the efforts of the national authorities
and the Independent National Electoral Commission to
prepare the elections in accordance with the electoral
calendar, including the finalization of the voter register,
as well as the list of candidates for presidential and
legislative elections. We positively note and encourage
further interaction of the Commission to settle disputes
with all the participants in the political process.

We call on the Congolese authorities to continue
implementing measures to create conditions conducive
to holding credible elections, including the meaningful
participation of women. Further efforts must be made to
establish a constructive and inclusive inter-Congolese
dialogue, to achieve political progress and to build
confidence in the electoral process, including its
technical elements. We welcome the committed
determination of the Government to assume full
responsibility for funding the elections. We encourage
national authorities to continue cooperating with the
Commission to provide the necessary resources.

At the same time, we note the readiness of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to provide logistical assistance in preparing for the
elections, and we call for increased cooperation between
the Independent National Electoral Commission and
MONUSCO. It is very important to eliminate in good
time the potential procedural, technical and logistic
difficulties, which can jeopardize the results of both
the political and electoral processes. We commend
MONUSCO for providing considerable assistance in
preparation for the elections. It is also important for
the Congolese authorities to take all the necessary
measures to ensure security during the elections, with
the support of MONUSCO.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is entering
a decisive phase that will determine its future. In
that regard, we call on all regional and subregional
organizations, as well as neighbouring States, to
continue to promote the political and electoral process
to ensure favourable conditions for holding timely
and peaceful elections, which will have positive
consequences for stability throughout the region.

