Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): On behalf of
my country, I warmly welcome the presence here earlier
today of Mr. Nasser Judeh, Minister for Foreign and
Expatriates Affairs of Jordan, and congratulate him on
his country's election to the Security Council and on
assuming its presidency for this month. I also take this
opportunity to welcome the newly elected members
and express appreciation for those that have completed
their work on the Security Council. I offer my gratitude
to Jordan's presidency for the timely convening of this
open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Djibouti on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
In my national capacity, I would like to inform the
Council that, while chairing the OIC in 2011 and 2012,
Kazakhstan, supported by all OIC member States, did
its best to contribute to the peace process in the Middle
East and to overcome disputes between the various
parties to the conflict. One of the strategic goals
of Kazakhstan's chairmanship of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation was to support Palestine's
aspiration to take its rightful place as a full Member
of the United Nations. Under Kazakh leadership, the
OIC dispatched its first-ever delegation to the Holy
See to raise the issue of Palestinian sovereignty over
the property of the Catholic Church in the occupied
territories. We have also actively promoted the
Palestinian cause in a number of international forums,
and now my country, in its national capacity, is eager
to continue to contribute to the international action in
that direction.

From the very beginning of the conflict in Syria,
my country has expressed support for all possible
opportunities to arrive at a mutually acceptable
formula for achieving peace between the parties. We
see that the conflict continues to rage, despite relentless
international efforts to halt it and to reach an acceptable
solution based on international law, as demonstrated by
the sincere determination of all parties concerned. The
entire world, including my country, looks forward to
achieving a balanced and widely agreed solution at the
peace talks.

Kazakhstan welcomes the start of the process to
eliminate Syria's chemical weapons stockpile, and
hopes that there will be no delay beyond the end of June
deadline for the total removal of all such materials. We
believe that the Syrian Government will extend its
full and constructive cooperation in this respect to the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations. We
are confident that those joint steps of the Syrian
Government and the multilateral community will
serve as yet another political and practical measure to
mitigate tensions in the region.

The persistence of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
continues to threaten regional and international peace
and security, and its negative implications are not
confined to that region only, but are felt well beyond
and around the globe. Kazakhstan supports a peaceful
settlement of the problem based on international law,
including compliance with the pertinent Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We
support the efforts of the Quartet to restore the Israeli-
Palestinian negotiation process to identify borders
based on the principle of the peaceful coexistence of
both States.

Kazakhstan will continue to render its support to the
stabilization process in the Middle East as an integral
part of establishing peace and security in the region.
We recognize the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and the creation of an
independent State of Palestine within the 1967 borders,
peacefully coexisting with Israel. We also advocate its

efforts to obtain full-fledged membership of the United
Nations.
My country condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, and in this regard supports the
aspirations of all the peoples of the region to live in
security. Kazakhstan hopes that the efforts of the
sponsors of the peace process, the international and
regional organizations, and the good will of the
participants engaged in the negotiation process will
lead to the achievement of a lasting and just peace in
the Middle East.

