Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): In my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report to the
Council on progress made in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) since the last meeting on 28 May
2014.

I would like to begin by noting that this month,
as an exception to the established practice of joint
briefings by the three Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and 1267 (1999),
it has been decided that the 1540 Committee would
brief the Council separately. This is due to the specific
circumstance in which the other two Committees have
already briefed the Council at the open debate on
counter-terrorism on 19 November (see S/PV.7316).
Today's separate briefing will not constitute a precedent
for the future.

Looking back on the work of the 1540 Committee
this year, I would like to once again express my
appreciation for the support given by the Security
Council in the open debate on resolution 1540 (2004)
on 7 May (see S/PV.7169). The strong support for
resolution 1540 (2004) and this Committee, expressed
in presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7 and the
individual statements of more than 60 Member States,
provided an important impetus for our work. The
presidential statement also set out some of the key
areas that the Committee should focus its efforts on in
the years ahead. This provides a valuable guideline for
our preparations for the comprehensive review to be
conducted by the end of 2016.
Guided by the presidential statement and the
Committee's thirteenth programme of work, we
continued to give high priority to encouraging reporting
from those States that have not yet submitted their first
reports. With the support of our Group of Experts, the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs and its
regional offices, three special meetings were held in
Pretoria, Libreville and Lome', respectively, to engage
the non-reporting States. Through these meetings and
other events, we have engaged directly with 18 of the 21
non-reporting States.

Since the lastjoint briefing in May (see S/PV.7184),
1540 Committee members and experts have continued
to participate in various outreach events, bringing
the total so far this year to 59. Seven more events are
scheduled for the remainder of this year. The value of
direct interaction with States, in particular visits to
Member States by their invitation, was demonstrated
once again. For example, as a direct result of the visit
to Malawi, that State submitted its first report to the
Committee, reducing the total number of non-reporting
States to 20. The visits to China last month and to the
United Kingdom earlier this month also provided good
opportunities to promote the Committee's understanding
of these States' implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and to identify effective practices.

Other direct interactions with States since our last
report have included national round tables with 1540
stakeholders in Cambodia, Colombia, Grenada, Peru
and Trinidad and Tobago. They have helped in the
identification of assistance requirements for capacity-
building and in the development of voluntary national
implementation action plans. We have had some
valuable regional and subregional events in partnership
with relevant international organizations. For example,
our experts recently participated in three regional
events on nuclear, chemical and biological security
with INTERPOL in Thailand, Ethiopia and Tajikistan.

Last month, I participated in the Regional
Workshop on Promoting Full Implementation of
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1540
(2004) held in Seoul, organized by the Government of
the Republic of Korea in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA).
That meeting engaged representatives from more than
30 countries in Asia and other regions, as well as 10
relevant international and regional organizations. The
event provided a timely opportunity to discuss ways
to strengthen the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in the Asian region, as well as to exchange views
on the future strategies ahead of the comprehensive
review to be conducted by the end of 2016.

As part of the efforts to reach out to the private
sector, I participated last week in an international
conference in support of implementing resolution
1540 (2004), hosted in Wiesbaden by the Government
of Germany with the cooperation of the European
Union and UNODA. This was the third event in what
is called the "Wiesbaden process", led by Germany,
aimed at enhancing dialogue with industry in support
of resolution 1540 (2004). The conference provided an
excellent platform for the sharing of effective practice
among diverse sectors of industry, including nuclear,
chemical and biological security, as well as transport
and export control.

Facilitating matchmaking between assistance
requests and offers remains a priority for the Committee.
Improving the effectiveness of its matchmaking role
will be one of the key areas that the Committee will
focus on in preparing for the 2016 comprehensive
review. As of today, a total of 83 Member States and 13
international organizations have notified their points
of contact. The Committee will continue its efforts
to encourage more nominations of points of contact
and to energize their role. In addition, we also plan to
develop a broader e-mail contact list including not only
the points of contact, but also civil society, including
representatives of industry, academia and the media.
We plan to regularly update these contacts on the
Committee's activities through quarterly newsletters.

Looking ahead, the 1540 Committee must begin its
work on the comprehensive review of implementation,
as called for in resolution 1977 (2011). We will shortly
start developing a plan for the conduct of the review,
which will be included in the Committee's fourteenth
programme of work to be submitted to the Security
Council by 31 January 2015. Much of the work I have
outlined would not have been possible without financial
support through contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund, such as those of Andorra, the European
Union, Kazakhstan, Norway, the Republic of Korea
and the United States. These contributions are vital to
the effort to enhance the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

I would like to conclude by reiterating the
Committee's commitment to seeking the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As this will
be my last briefing to the Security Council as Chair
of the 1540 Committee, I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Council members, the Group
of Experts and members of the Secretariat for all their
wonderful support during the two years of my country's
chairmanship of the Committee.

