Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
Nigeria's appreciation to the Chinese delegation for
convening this important and timely meeting on
Somalia.

I warmly welcome Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed to the Council and thank him for
sharing his Government's strategic vision with us. Let
me also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
remarks and tireless efforts to promote peace in
Somalia. I also wish to thank Ambassador Diarra,
Special Representative for Somalia of the Commission
of the African Union, for his incisive assessment of the
situation in Somalia.

Nigeria is encouraged by the priorities that Prime
Minister Mohamed has outlined to move Somalia
beyond its security, political and socio-economic
challenges. With the official transition mandates set to

11-2583]
terminate in August, Somalia is now at a critical
juncture. We should therefore work towards achieving
a consensus on the remaining transition tasks agreed
under the Djibouti Agreement with a view to
cementing recent gains in the post-transition period.
Nigeria believes that the full implementation of the

transitional tasks - especially stabilizing Somalia,
delivering a new constitution and undertaking political
reconciliation - will lay a solid foundation for a

peaceful post-transition era in Somalia.

However, these goals can be realized only
through concerted international support for the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG). The
appointment of the 18-member Cabinet by the Prime
Minister was a positive step. The Government should
be strengthened to become more effective, accountable
and responsive to the needs of the people of Somalia.
On its part, the TFG must prioritize forging political
alliances and achieving wider reconciliation. It should
also demonstrate a willingness to work closely with
local institutions in accordance with the Transitional
Federal Charter of the Somali Republic. In addition, it
should enhance its relationship with both Puntland and
Somaliland, and do all it can to maintain its power-
sharing agreement with the Ahlu Sunnah Wal J ama'a.

The growing insecurity in southern Somalia and
the merger between Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam are
of grave concern. Stabilizing Somalia's security
environment is vital to strengthening the Government
and to building State capacity and institutions.
Consequently, increased support is required if Somali
forces are to fight piracy and insurgency and extend the
TFG's authority throughout the country.

Nigeria reiterates its flrm support for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). AMISOM
should be supported to an extent commensurate with its
operational mandates. If recent military gains are to be
extended, there is a need for greater progress in the
deployment of 4,000 troops in accordance with
resolution 1964 (2010). We still believe that the
Council's endorsement of an increased AMISOM. force
strength to 20,000 is necessary to strengthen Somalia's
security capabilities.

We fully back the commitment of the African
Union Peace and Security Council to the rehatting of
AMISOM. as a United Nations force, in accordance
with the Security Council's statement of intent
expressed in resolution 1863 (2009), and call for the

11-2583]
establishment of a timeline for its deployment. Nigeria
reiterates the need for the support package for
AMISOM. to be identical to that provided to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Parity between
reimbursement rates for AMISOM. contingent
personnel and United Nations contingent personnel is
also essential, and we appeal to donors to emulate the
United Kingdom by making uncaveated contributions
for the refund of donors' contingent equipment.

The fragile socio-economic environment in
Somalia and the absence of effective governance
structures are the bases of the piracy problem. We
therefore share the sense of urgency expressed by the
Special Adviser during his most recent briefing to the
Council (see (S/PV.6473) when he called for swift
action to address the threat of piracy in Somalia. We
also agree with his recommendations concerning the
judicial and correctional components of the counter-
piracy strategy. In that connection, we call for the swift
adoption of anti-piracy legislation in Somalia and
throughout the region. Clear standards for the
transportation and detention of pirates will aid the
transborder prosecution of maritime lawlessness.
INTERPOL and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) should be included in developing
local prosecutorial capacity, a Somali coast guard
authority and a UNODC-supported training office for
local authorities.

The mounting allegations of illegal fishing and
toxic dumping lead us to call for the establishment of
an independent international investigation. Many
Somalis view such activities as a legitimate
justification for piracy. Consequently, we believe that
such an investigation would present a major
opportunity for international intervention to address the
intertwined roots of Somalia's instability - a
sentiment expressed in statements issued in 2008.

Notwithstanding the strong partnership between
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations in Somalia, the
international community still needs to pay more and
greater attention to the views of the African Union on
Somalia. We therefore reiterate the African Union
Peace and Security Council's request for increased
funding for AMISOM. from United Nations assessed
contributions, for the imposition of a naval blockade
and a no-flight zone over Somalia and for the effective
implementation of sanctions.
In conclusion, we salute the gallant men and
women of the military forces of Uganda and Burundi
for their efforts and commitment to the cause of peace
in Somalia. We also salute the dedication of
international aid and humanitarian workers in the
country. The work of these important actors can be
underpinned by a concerted international effort to bring
about sustained peace in a unified Somalia.

