Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF for
their briefings; but most of all, I would like to thank
Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for their moving remarks.
We, unfortunately, meet here yet again to discuss
the horror of children in armed conflict. Every year,
many of us end our remarks with words of hope for a
better future for the next generation and then reconvene
the next year to find the state of children in the world in
an even more dismal predicament.

As the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2019/509) on that topic unfortunately outlines, 2018
was yet another record year for the number of children
killed and maimed in the context of armed conflict. We
support the focus in this year's report on highlighting
and condemning the recruitment of children by terrorist
groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and others. We also welcome recent efforts here
at the United Nations to support the reintegration of
child soldiers and the creation of the Global Coalition
for the Reintegration of Former Child Soldiers to
support such efforts.

In our region, children continue to be plagued
by violence, with 1,854 child casualties reported in
Syria and 1,689 in Yemen. In our immediate vicinity,
we witness the daily exploitation of Palestinian youth
by Hamas and other terrorist groups. Children in
Gaza are manipulated and used as human shields in
violent protests organized and funded by Hamas at the
security fence border in Israel. They are encouraged to
fly incendiary kites that burn the fields that feed the
families of Israeli children. They are educated using
textbooks that incite violence and hatred, rather than
being taught tolerance and co-existence. They hear
their leaders calling for the killing of Jews. That is no
less than child abuse and no less than the most flagrant
violation of international law.

In that vein, we note the Secretary-General's
recognition of the disturbing phenomenon of the
recruitment of Palestinian children by Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad. We also note his call
for Palestinian actors to refrain from encouraging
children's participation in violence. However, we still
feel that more should be said about the way children
are cynically and dangerously used and manipulated
in that context by Hamas and other Palestinian
terrorist organizations.

In the south of Israel, meanwhile, we have witnessed
yet another year with massive school cancellations
due to Hamas's rocket fire that targets those very
Israeli academic institutions. In recent months, we
have had days in which over 300,000 pupils have
missed school due to massive rocket attacks from the
Gaza Strip. As the Secretary-General's report notes,
we have seen rockets and incendiary devices explode
in or near kindergartens and school playgrounds. We
have witnessed direct rocket attacks on Israeli private
homes, which have left Israeli children - including
teenagers, toddlers and infants 4 seriously injured. We
have seen a drive-by shooting ofa pregnant mother - a
heinous act of violence that was praised by the Hamas
leadership - which led to the premature birth and
eventual death of the newborn infant, Amiad Yisrael
Ish-Ran. We were disappointed that this year's report
yet again does not include a clear condemnation of the
continued targeting of Israeli civilians by rockets and
mortars, and we hope to see language to that effect in
future reports.

I end my remarks yet again with our sincere
hope and prayers that when we reconvene in 2020
to discuss children and armed conflict, we will have
made significant progress in keeping children safe.
We appreciate the efforts of Member States and
international bodies that are trying to improve the fate
of children globally, but clearly more needs to be done.
We must all adopt a zero-tolerance policy on incitement
to violence and stop the abuse of social media to spread
hatred, particularly among children. We must teach
tolerance and coexistence, not prejudice and hatred,
and we must all condemn the terrorist groups that drive
the conflict and bring about the maiming, injury and
death of children.

