Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me first of all join
my colleagues in welcoming the Vice-President of the
Republic of Iraq, Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi. I listened very
attentively to his remarks, which I believe gave us all
important elements to consider. I should like also to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Qazi, and the charge d'affaires of
the United States, Ambassador Wolff, for their
informative and very interesting and exhaustive
briefings today.

I wish also to take this opportunity, as this is

Italy's first statement in the Council on this subject, to

commend the important role that the United Nations,

through the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq

(UNAMI), is playing in contributing to the
reconstruction and stabilization of the country.

We are well aware of the limits to United Nations
action emanating from the security situation, and we
truly appreciate the risks run by United Nations
personnel - both international and local staff - every
day in their work. We believe that the United Nations
presence in Iraq is of fundamental importance, and we
hope that conditions in Iraq will allow for its growth.

Let me convey our sincere congratulations to the
Iraqi Government on the success of the Iraqi initiative
to convene the 10 March meeting in Baghdad. That
was definitely a meaningful event in terms of the
promotion of stability in Iraq, and we hope that it will
mark a turning point on the road to the true pacification
of the country. We deem it of the utmost importance
that neighbouring countries fully play their role in
actively supporting the new Iraq. But, since the
exercise is aimed at garnering broad regional and
international consensus, we believe it appropriate that
the follow-up of the meeting, particularly at the
ministerial level, be extended to other countries that
are particularly involved, such as, for instance, the
Group of Eight (G-8) countries.

At the national level, I wish to reiterate that Italy
is ready to make its contribution, as it has already done
as a member of the Preparatory Group for the
International Compact, to all initiatives and in all
political forums deemed useful by the Iraqi
Government.

The current situation in Iraq, despite renewed
efforts by the Multinational Force and the Iraqi
security forces, remains quite sensitive. The violent
sectarian conflict between Sunni and Shiite extremists,
ably exploited and fomented by Al-Qaida terrorists and
foreign agents who want to keep the country in a state
of chaos, hinders the efforts of the Iraqi Government to
achieve national reconciliation.

Although international support is critical to the
successful stabilization of Iraq, it is clear to us that the
key to success lies, ultimately, in the hands of the Iraqi
Government and people. In that framework, Italy has
repeatedly underscored to the Iraqi leadership, and
most recently to Foreign Minister Zebari, that a

political process of national dialogue and reconciliation
is needed for the stabilization of the country. In that
context, we hope that the Iraqi Government will adopt
effective and immediate measures to foster the goal of
national reconciliation. Among those measures I would
recall the drafting of a new law on de-Ba'athification
and on the reinsertion of members of the former Iraqi
army who were not implicated in any crime into the
new security forces. It is now more crucial than ever
that the Iraqi Government adopt those measures, as
announced, without delay, and that it provide for a
general amnesty for those members of armed groups
who disband and disarm.

In the framework of the political process to which
I have just referred, we believe that, as has been stated
on several occasions by the Secretary-General and by
Ambassador Qazi, the review of the Constitution is of
the utmost importance. Concrete economic
development measures, including measures aimed at
the development of the private sector, are also needed.
The approval of the hydrocarbon law and, more
generally, the revision of the management of natural
resources in the federal framework, which is linked to
the constitutional review, are also fundamental steps.

At the national level, Italy is increasingly
involved in helping to reconstruct Iraq. Since 2003,
Italy has contributed, through projects and actions,
more than €240 million to international efforts in the
civilian area. As proof of our desire to step up our
support for the reconstruction of Iraq, on 23 January in
Rome we signed a bilateral friendship, partnership and
cooperation agreement that set out guidelines for
building a privileged relationship between our two
countries. Italy has pledged assistance credits of up to
€400 million over three years.

Italy, also as a member of the Preparatory Group,
is supporting resolutely the process of the International
Compact with Iraq. By taking into account the
economic, political and security aspects, the Compact
may prove to be a significant tool available to the Iraqi
Government for the stabilization and reconstruction of
the country. It is fundamental, however, that the Iraqi
authorities actually implement the measures indicated
in the final report.
In that respect, I wish to welcome the initiative of
the Secretary-General to convene tomorrow's high-
level meeting on the International Compact, at which
Italy will be represented by its Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Intini. We sincerely hope that, also
thanks to tomorrow's meeting, we will soon be able to
witness the official launch of the Compact.

