I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing and welcome Foreign Minister Selim and the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Ethiopia to the Security Council. The dispute surrounding the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, if not resolved to the satisfaction of all parties, could lead to further tensions in the region. As my European Union colleagues have already said, every effort must be made to avoid an escalation. I therefore call upon the parties to act responsibly. I welcome the efforts of the Sudanese Government to relaunch the negotiation process, as well as the involvement of South Africa, the United States and the European Union in those talks. The African Union has a major role to play in facilitating and supporting those negotiations. In that regard, the discussions held among the parties last week, led by President Ramaphosa, are a step in the right direction. They must continue in a constructive spirit in order to reach an agreement. We encourage their continuation in that framework and call for their early conclusion, in accordance with the spirit that prevailed in the recent discussions among the Heads of State and Government. A mutually beneficial agreement would make it possible to turn the dam into an opportunity for development and prosperity for all the peoples of the region, rather than a factor of tension and division. We call on all parties to respect international law and related conventions, as well as the Declaration of Principles adopted by the three parties in 2015. France also encourages the Secretary-General to use his good offices in support of those efforts. As we have just celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations, conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes must be at the heart of the work of the United Nations. Finally, we solemnly call upon Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan to exercise restraint and show their sense of responsibility. Indeed, it is through dialogue - and dialogue alone - that we will be able to avoid escalation and resolve this dispute. I therefore call on each of the parties to refrain from any action that could undermine this objective and the continuation of the discussions.
