Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
important debate on the child victims of non-State
armed groups. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Leila Zerrougui, and all the briefers for
their thought-provoking and bald statements. I welcome
the fact that the Council has heard from a wide range of
voices today to help inform our discussion, including
from a former child soldier and the community of
non-governmental organizations.

Since we last met to discuss this issue (see S/PV.7259), a number of high-profile and abhorrent
abuses have been committed against children by
non-State armed groups. In Nigeria, Boko Haram sent
three young girls to their deaths in suicide bombings. In
Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant filmed
children taking part in arbitrary executions of prisoners,
and in Pakistan in December 132 children were brutally
murdered in their school by the Taliban. Those are just
three of many recent examples. It is such shocking acts
of violence that illustrate the scale of the challenge that
faces us and show that we must redouble our efforts to
prevent them happening in future. Today I will focus on
three ways of doing so - by ensuring accountability,
fostering reintegration and promoting action plans and
inclusive peace processes.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) plays
an invaluable role in the fight against impunity. The
Court's conviction and sentencing of Thomas Lubanga
for recruiting and using child soldiers in conflict sent
a very clear message that perpetrators will be held
accountable even if many years have elapsed since they
committed their crimes. Action through the ICC has
not always been possible. Despite reports of the deaths
of more than 11,000 children in Syria, last year the
Council failed to agree on a draft resolution referring
the situation there to the ICC (S/2014/348). But that has
not deterred us from other efforts to document human-
rights violations committed by States and human-rights
abuses by non-State actors, in readiness for a time
when perpetrators can be held to account. The Security
Council, the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and civil society must therefore use all the
tools available to ensure accountability for violations
and abuses committed against children. The expansion
of the listing criteria for resolution 1612 (2005) to
include abductions is another step that will enhance the
international community's ability to hold perpetrators
to account, and more action plans with non-State
actors will give the United Nations valuable metrics for
measuring whether progress is being made.

We welcome the release this week of as many
as 250 child soldiers by the Cobra Faction in South
Sudan. We commend the efforts of UNICEF to secure
their freedom and call for the release of the remaining
3,000 child soldiers in the Cobra Faction over the
coming days. But we must recognize that their release
is only the first step. The trauma for those children
is far from over, as Mr. Nzita told us this morning.
Children formerly associated with armed groups are
often marginalized by their communities, making
reintegration more difficult. Moreover, without
successful rehabilitation and reintegration, children are
left vulnerable to re-recruitment. In that context, we
must also ensure that children associated with armed
groups are not arbitrarily detained and have access
to rehabilitation and long-term stability following
their release. I emphasize the importance of the Paris
Principles on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups in ensuring that children are treated
as victims, not perpetrators.

While the picture may often seem bleak, many
non-State actors have shown some willingness and
commitment to working with the United Nations to end
violations and abuses committed against children by
entering into action plans and committing to protecting
children in peace processes. More than half of the
action plans signed by the United Nations, and half of
those that have been successfully implemented, have
been with non-State actors. We urge all listed non-State
armed groups to agree on concrete, time-bound
action plans designed to end violations committed
against children and secure their release. As seen in
the Philippines, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, non-State
actors' involvement in peace processes can also provide
the momentum for ending the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. We support the integration of child-
protection provisions, including children's release and
reintegration, into all peace and ceasefire agreements.

There are clear steps for non-State actors and
the international community to take in order to stop
the exploitation of children in armed conflict, but in
doing so we must not lose sight of the role that States
themselves play in enabling and even supporting the
growth of violent non-State actors. The breakdown of
good governance, the abuse of the rule of law and the
denial of basic security allow such groups to flourish,
leaving some 15 million children living in countries
embroiled in major conflicts. Whether such violence
occurs in Syria, Yemen or eastern Ukraine, the Council
must do its utmost to end it, to protect children and to
give a strong voice to those who are most vulnerable.

