Mr. Mugerwa (Uganda): Iwish to congratulate you,
Sir, and the delegation of Pakistan on ably discharging
the responsibilities of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We thank you for organizing
this important debate focused on a multidimensional
approach to United Nations peacekeeping. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing this
morning.
This debate is being held at a time when the
nature of United Nations peacekeeping is undergoing
significant changes, with operations becoming
more complex and multidimensional. The nature of
peacekeeping mandates has also changed, as missions
are increasingly deployed under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, are incorporating the
protection of civilians and are requiring more robust
and clearer rules of engagement. At the same time,
efforts to resolve conflicts by peaceful means are
being put to the test by new threats to global peace and
security, including terrorism, piracy and transnational
organized crime. The humanitarian consequences of
violent conflicts for innocent civilian populations,
including women and children, are alarming.

It is therefore essential to continuously focus on
how to improve the capabilities and effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations through a
multidimensional approach, with greater coordination
among all actors in order to ensure coherent and
timely responses. Uganda would like to emphasize the
following four points.

First, it is crucial to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations and those authorized by the
United Nations, such as the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia and, recently, the African-
led International Support Mission in Mali, have clearly
defined mandates, objectives and command structures
and adequate resources based on a realistic assessment
of the situation on the ground. It is our view that each
mission should take into account the needs and priorities
of the country concerned, through consultation with
national authorities and other relevant stakeholders at
the earliest possible stages of mission planning.

Now more than ever, United Nations peacekeeping
operations should also be more adaptable to emerging
challenges, with the requisite resources and capacities.
We therefore stress that the existing shortages in some
missions, including of air assets such as helicopters in
a number of missions, should be urgently addressed
if increasingly complex and multidimensional
peacekeeping operations are to be effectively carried
out. As we have stressed before, the credibility of
the United Nations will be greatly undermined by
ineffective peacekeeping capabilities anywhere around
the world. Unfortunately, I think there are a few
incidents that can be pointed to in that regard.

Secondly, we call for enhanced engagement and
cooperation among the Security Council, the troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat in
addressing the challenges of peacekeeping in a spirit of
partnership, cooperation and mutual trust.

Thirdly, the challenges of multidimensional
peacekeeping, as we have seen in recent times, clearly
require a collective effort. The ongoing efforts by the
United Nations to strengthen partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations on matters of peace,
security and development are commendable. We call
on the Security Council to continue to support regional
initiatives and to strengthen their capacity to contribute
to efforts to maintain international peace and security.
We have seen the important role and contribution of
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region in
peacekeeping and conflict resolution.

Fourthly, as the 2005 World Summit recognized,
development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The chances
for promoting durable peace in conflict or post-
conflict countries are bolstered through tangible peace
dividends such as the provision of basic services and
an improvement in the standards of living of affected
populations.

Incorporating peacebuilding activities and tasks,
such as support in building national capacities and quick-
impact projects, during the early stages of peacekeeping
is therefore critical for success. We also underscore the
need for closer coordination among affected countries,
peacekeeping missions, United Nations country teams
and development actors in laying the foundations for
durable peace, stability and development. In particular,
greater attention needs to be given to building national
capacities and institutions in critical areas such as
security sector reform, law and order, the judiciary and
the civil service, in order to enable a smooth transition
when peacekeeping missions depart.

Finally, Uganda pays tribute to the selfless men
and women who serve in United Nations peacekeeping
missions around the world, often in dangerous and
hostile situations, for their dedication and courage.
We remember and honour those who have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the search for peace and in serving
humankind.

