Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate, and to endorse, in advance, the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Today I would like to focus on three main themes
that should, from my country's Viewpoint, be priorities
for the international community and our Organization.

The first is violent extremism, which feeds the
foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon. I would like to
begin by thanking the United Nations and Switzerland
for having organized a high-level conference on this
subject in Geneva on 7 and 8 April. It produced fruitful
exchanges, as the Secretary-General just highlighted.

Just who are these individuals who go to Syria
and Iraq to join the ranks ofjihadist groups, foremost
among them Da'esh? They are young people, with
varied profiles - men, women, converts, minors,
and so on, from more than 100 countries. In France,
this phenomenon has reached extremely alarming
proportions, with 600 individuals present in the area,
including 217 women and 18 minors. To adapt to this new
face of the threat, we have taken some important steps.

In April 2014, the French Government adopted
a plan to combat terrorist networks and violent
radicalization. An interministerial committee is
responsible for coordinating the strategy to prevent
and treat radicalization. The Government has also
established a territorial mechanism to monitor persons
that have been reported and to assist families in order
to respond appropriately to each case. Finally, the law
of 13 November 2014 introduced into our law several
major innovations. It instituted a ban on leaving the
territory and a prohibition on entry into and residence in
national territory for foreigners not residing in France
that constitute a danger to national security.

At the international level, it is essential that the
United Nations remain committed to stemming the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters and to preventing violent
extremism. The full implementation of resolution 2178
(2014) and following up the Secretary-General's Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism are the two
primary axes of that action. The Secretary-General's
Plan in particular aims to unite and better coordinate
efforts that we all undertake, Member States and United
Nations, at the national, regional and international
levels to prevent radicalization, which is an essential
aspect of the fight against terrorism. That Plan makes
concrete the strategic role of guidance and coordination
that the United Nations should play in this area.
I take the opportunity provided by this debate to
announce that in September, France will co-organize
with UNESCO a seminar in Paris on the prevention of
violent extremism through education. Preventing the
radicalization of youth will also be one of the topics
discussed at the sixteenth Summit of la Francophonie,
in Madagascar in November 2016.

The second priority for us all is the fight against
terrorist financing and the full implementation of
resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015). The funding
of Da'esh was greatly affected by the strikes of the
coalition, forcing the group to decrease the salary that it
pays its fighters. However, we will manage to drain the
finances of that organization only through increased
international mobilization. We call on all our partners to
implement the United Nations resolutions and to adopt
robust measures. I welcome the holding, at this very
moment, ofajoint meeting ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, on
terrorist financing, with the presence of the President of
the Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering.

At the national level, France has a plan to combat the
financing of terrorism. The plan has three objectives.
to reduce anonymity in the economy in order to better
trace financial transactions; to improve monitoring,
through the mobilization of financial actors in the fight
against terrorism; and to strengthen the capacity to
freeze assets held by the actors of terrorism.

France is also fully mobilized in the fight against
the trafficking in works of art and antiques. We have
drawn the attention of antique dealer associations to the
trafficking of works of art from Syria and Iraq and to the
fact that such trafficking may contribute to the financing
of Da'esh. Customs has enhanced the surveillance of
imports of cultural property, particularly items from the
Middle East. The President of the Republic announced
at UNESCO the introduction by France of a customs
control of the importation of cultural property and the
creation of safe havens in France to hold endangered
cultural property. These provisions have been included
in a bill currently being debated in Parliament.

Finally, the third area of work, combating
terrorist propaganda, which is undertaken pursuant
to resolution 2253 (2015), is another fundamental area
where mobilization of the international community
is indispensable. The ease with which terrorists use
the Internet and social networks so as to spread their
messages of hate is particularly worrisome. We stress
that any initiative in this area should respect the
freedom of expression. Upholding human rights and the
rule of law, as well as education, inclusion and social
harmony, will be key factors in the long term in any
strategy to prevent or of fight violent extremism. It
is our shared responsibility to ensure that combating
terrorism, which is so crucial to the safety of our fellow
citizens, necessarily goes hand in hand with upholding
human rights.

Given a threat of this scope, we have no other
choice but to strengthen international cooperation.
Specific progress is possible, as was demonstrated by
the adoption today of the passenger name registry by
the European Parliament. In each of these areas, the
United Nations has a great added value to provide, be
it in the creation of standards, strategic guidelines or
mobilizing the international community. The review of
the United Nations global strategy in May would be a
time to continue these discussions on how to strengthen
international cooperation in counter-terrorism and
preventing violent extremism. France will play its full
part in these debates.

