Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this important
meeting on the Sudan. Let me also thank Under-
Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing on the
preparations for the referendums to be held in the
Sudan on 9 January 2011.

Nigeria welcomes the presence here of former
President Benjamin Mkapa, whose new role will be to
chair the Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in
the Sudan. We have great confidence in his ability to
discharge the duties entrusted to him. Let me also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, State
Minister at the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs of the
Sudan, as well as Mr. Pagan Amum, Secretary General
of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM). I
thank them for their respective perspectives.

The various accounts we have heard this morning
are not only reassuring, they also provide affirmation
of the willingness and commitment of the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) vis-a-vis their
obligations. Indeed, the statements suggest that the
preparations for the conduct of free, fair and credible
referendums are on track, in particular in southern
Sudan. The conclusion of the voter registration
exercise was therefore a significant milestone, for
which we commend both the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau.

In the current circumstances, there is an
obligation to encourage the parties to the CPA to
dissipate the climate of fear and distrust and create
confidence in the referendums, which are just 24 days
away. The first step towards achieving that is for the
parties to cease all hostilities and military activities, in
particular the recent bombings in the Kiir River Valley.
The parties to the CPA, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/National Congress Party and the SPLM,
must redouble their efforts and remain committed to
the full implementation of the Agreement.

The negotiations launched on post-referendum
arrangements following the memorandum of
understanding of 23 June, with the help of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Thabo Mbeki, should by now be producing
substantive outcomes. Indeed, the four working groups
set up to organize the negotiations should intensify
their engagement on border demarcation, citizenship,
wealth-sharing, economic cooperation, grazing rights
and security.

The appointment of the Abyei Referendum
Commission and the commencement of the popular
consultations in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states are also important, in particular as both
processes are provided for in the CPA. We urge the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission to
expeditiously complete the printing of ballot papers for
the exercise in a transparent manner in order to bolster
confidence in the process. It is important that clarity is
achieved as soon as possible on the post-referendum
status of southerners in the north and northerners in the
south. The rhetoric should be turned down.

Both parties have an obligation to seek an
equitable and mutually beneficial mode of peaceful
coexistence, either in unity or separately. The United
Nations and the international community have a
prominent role to play in ensuring free and fair
referendums and a suitable outcome. It is also critical
that we define the framework for interaction and
dialogue between the north and the south before the
referendums are held. We urge the parties to remove all
restrictions on the movement of the personnel of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

On Darfur, Nigeria welcomes the intensification
of the discussions to reach a peace agreement. It is
encouraging that the final peace agreement between the
Sudanese Government and the rebel Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) will be signed on
19 December. We commend Joint Chief Mediator
Bassole in that regard and urge both the LJM. and the
Sudan Liberation Movement, led by Abdel Wahid
el-Nur, to rejoin the peace process. We are pleased that
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is speeding up the necessary steps to establish
the ceasefire commission and the joint monitoring
mechanism.

Finally, we thank Member States that have
committed their troops and those that have provided
logistical and technical expertise. That will go a long
way in helping to solve some of the logistical problems
currently confronting the preparations for the
referendum in the Sudan.

