Mr. Toure (Mali)(sp0ke in French): Like the
delegations that have spoken before me, I wish to offer
Mali's sad condolences to India and Pakistan following
the earthquake that struck those two countries.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report of 16 January 2001, and to welcome Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in East Timor, and thank him for his
very instructive statement. My thanks also go to Mr.
Mark Malloch Brown, Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Mr. Klaus
Rohland, Country Director of the World Bank for East
Timor, Mr. Harri Holkeri, President of the fifty-fifth
session of the General Assembly, Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, who is responsible for foreign affairs in the
Transitional Cabinet of East Timor, and Mr. Luis
Valdivieso, Adviser ofthe International Monetary Fund
(IMF), for their statements.

The United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) is the first governance
operation in United Nations history. Its main objective
is to give the Timorese the bases ofa viable democratic
State and to provide them with the tools essential for
its functioning in a reasonable period of time. I wish to
reaffirm my delegation's support to UNTAET for its
remarkable efforts in the political, administrative and
economic fields, in East Timor.

As emphasized by the Secretary-General in his
report, among the most important political elements in
these past six months has been the fact that more and
more Timorese want independence for their country
before the end of 2001. The will of the Timorese
people is in keeping with the aim of the international
community, clearly stated in resolution 1272 (1999): to
lead East Timor to independence in a period of two or
three years. That is why my delegation, while
supporting the actions carried out within the context of
political transition by UNTAET and the National
Council, asks them to comply with the political
timetable, which will ultimately lead to the
establishment of republican institutions. We have no
doubt that UNTAET will succeed in taking up the
challenge of organizing transparent, honest, free and
democratic elections.

From a security viewpoint, the infiltrations of
militia groups from West Timor, although they have
diminished, is still a source of major concern for my
delegation. We believe that the dismantling of these
militias by the Indonesian authorities will certainly
ensure the security and safety of refugees in the West
Timor camps and of international personnel.

In this respect, we express satisfaction with the
decision taken by the Indonesian authorities in West
Timor and local chiefs to encourage the rapid
repatriation of East Timorese refugees currently living
in West Timorese camps. From a humanitarian
standpoint, my delegation is of the View that
everything should be done to ensure that international
humanitarian organizations can return to West Timor to
bring support to the thousands of refugees who are
caught in a situation over which they have no control.
In order to do this, security conditions must be
improved and reinforced through bilateral cooperation
forged between UNTAET and the Indonesian
Government. It is imperative that the international
community do everything possible so that appropriate
resources are made available to humanitarian
organizations for the benefit of refugees.

At the legal level, it is important to address the
shortcomings ofjustice in East Timor. We believe that
justice and national reconciliation will be critical to the
future of an independent East Timor. Justice must serve
as a foundation for national reconciliation. Without
justice there is no reconciliation. The mobilization of
the appropriate resources by the international
community will also enable the justice system to
appropriately carry out the mission assigned to it.

My delegation supports the idea, stated in
paragraphs 50 and 51 ofthe Secretary-General's report,
of an international presence in East Timor after the
country accedes to independence, in particular to
provide it with financial and technical assistance and
assistance in the area of security.

In conclusion, I would like again to pay a
heartfelt tribute to UNTAET for its positive work in
East Timor. It is crucial to maintain the momentum of
international support for East Timor's transition to
independence. That support is fundamental for the
success of United Nations efforts in East Timor.
Therefore, my delegation favours the extension of
UNTAET's mandate for 12 months, until 31 December
2001.

