Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and
Director Susannah Sirkin for their briefings, which,
unfortunately, are extremely alarming.

We usually use expressions such as "greatly
concerned" with regard to the current situation in Syria,
but the situation is far from being usual. As we speak,
we are witnessing a deadly escalation of the conflict
in north-west Syria. As we speak, military strikes
are destroying the safest spaces, including camps for
internally displaced persons and markets.

Any military operation should be fully in line with
international humanitarian law and human rights law to
prevent harm from coming to the thousands of civilians
trapped in the middle of the fighting. The protection
of civilians and unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance are not a choice but the legal obligation of all
sides to the conflict. Those who do not comply should
be held accountable.

Hundreds of civilians have lost their lives and
more than 440,000 have been newly displaced. The
continued presence and activities of United Nations-
1isted terrorist groups in the area contributes to the
suffering of civilians, but combating terrorist groups
cannot justify violations of international humanitarian
law, and attacks on medical facilities constitute a
serious violation. Such actions have to stop, especially
given the fact that the majority of strikes occurred under
the de-confliction mechanism. Attacks on densely
populated areas resulting in hundreds of dead civilians
are unacceptable and must stop as well.

We just heard from Ms. Susannah Sirkin
that non-governmental organizations have been
documenting attacks on health-care facilities and the
deaths ofmedical personnel since the start ofthe conflict.
Every day we learn about the destruction of civilian
infrastructure in Idlib. Sadly, we have to underline that
that is a scenario that has already occurred in Syria,
Aleppo and eastern Ghouta. Civilians from those areas
were evacuated mainly to Idlib. They expected at least
a minimum level of protection. Unfortunately, there
is none.

I once again underline the importance of ensuring
that the de-escalation zone in Idlib established at the
initiative of Russia and Turkey is fully respected. It is
absolutely crucial to prevent a full-scale humanitarian
catastrophe. All parties to the conflict should spare
no effort to ensure the full implementation of that
agreement on the ground.

Finally, I want to stress our concern about the tragic
state of health-care facilities in Syria. Most of them are
not functional, and those still operating are too poorly
equipped to provide care to patients with injuries and
further support to persons with disabilities. In our
opinion, the international community, especially the
Security Council, should vigorously advocate health
care for and the protection of civilians, especially
women, children and persons with disabilities.

The situation is extremely worrisome in the north-
eastern and north-western parts of Syria, given only the
examples of Al-Hol and Rukban camps, where people
are still waiting for the third humanitarian convoy,
and Raqqa, where it is practically impossible to lead a
normal life.

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. Therefore,
I would also like to stress the importance of reaching a
political agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). A
political settlement is urgently needed, as it remains
the only way to achieve sustainable peace under such
extremely dire circumstances.

