Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): I should
like to express our sincere thanks to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate on the activities of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States, between 1 January and 31 December 1994
(ICTR).

As everyone is aware, the periodic evaluation of
the activities of the two Tribunals provides us an
opportunity to assess the progress made in combating
impunity. Congo would therefore like to reiterate its
gratitude to Presidents Fausto Pocar and Dennis Byron
and Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and Hassan Bubacar
Jallow for the reports they have just given us, which
provide us a broad overview of the work done, and
especially for their steadfast personal commitment to
accomplish their heavy workloads.

In considering those various reports and
assessments, my delegation has reached several crucial
conclusions with regard to both the current work of the
Tribunals and their subsequent work, in particular with
regard to the end of their respective mandates in
accordance with the completion strategy established by
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). With regard
to the work of the Tribunals to date, we note several
positive aspects, in particular the resolute
determination to carry out their activities in a very
speedy manner. Evidence of that is clear from the
numerous rulings that have been handed down, the
arrests of those presumed guilty of the crime of
genocide and serious violations of international
humanitarian law and the referral of cases to States for
judgement and sentencing. In that regard, my
delegation would like to congratulate the Presidents
and Prosecutors of both Tribunals, as well as all their
staff, for the results they have been able to achieve, not
only in rendering justice but, above all, in being able to
promote a return to national peace and reconciliation in
two countries that have been so torn apart. I note with
satisfaction the persistent efforts of the two Tribunals
to bring about a significant reduction in the number of
cases being heard. To date, as mentioned in the
briefings this morning, 106 of the 161 accused have
received final judgements by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has
completed proceedings for 35 accused. At the same
time, efforts were deployed to strengthen the Rwandese
judiciary system.

Whatever the difficulties encountered, all of those
elements represent significant progress in the area of
international criminal justice. The results achieved will
always remain a source of inspiration for the United
Nations and the entire international community.
However, several areas of concern persist with regard
to the good functioning of the two Tribunals and the
completion of their work within the desired deadlines.

It is indeed extremely urgent that we deal with
concerns that have been highlighted in the reports and
in the presentations made this morning, particularly the
issue of the arrest of indictees who are still at large,
and who receive support from various sources. In that
respect, several matters that have been mentioned
highlight the lack of urgency on the part of certain
States to meet their international obligation to
cooperate in the arrest of those under suspicion for the
most serious crimes. The fact that four main accused in
the former Yugoslavia - Karadzic, Mladic, Zupljanin
and HadZie - still remain at large and that 14 Rwanda
fugitives are still at large gives the frustrating
impression of incomplete work.

I share, in that regard, the disappointment
expressed by the Prosecutors with regard to the
behaviour of certain States. Congo deplores that lack of
cooperation and reaffirms that the fight against
impunity must involve us in a common cause if we
want to achieve better results. The Council must
therefore take into account the demands of justice and
fight against impunity and ensure that we bring strong
pressure to bear on Member States that are not inclined
to cooperate actively with the International Criminal
Tribunals.

Moreover, the requirement for States to cooperate
with the Tribunals should also go hand in hand with
diligence by those States in enabling those acquitted to
return home. That is also a requirement of the rule of
law. Let us not lose sight of the fact that the Tribunals
were not created simply to provide justice to the many
victims of the serious crimes committed in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, but also to fight
against impunity, build peace and promote the rule of
law.

As highlighted in the reports under consideration,
the work of the two Tribunals is currently undergoing a
necessary acceleration, with a View to implementing
the Completion Strategies in 2008 for first-instance
trials and 2010 for appeals. This is therefore an
important point in time, and, in my delegation's
opinion, we should intensify our consideration of the
matter, including on the flexibility that the Council
could show in the event that the Tribunals are unable to
complete their work within the established deadlines.

My delegation would like to express its concern
with regard to the various difficulties encountered in
the relocation of witnesses, the carrying out of
sentences and the retaining of the staff necessary for
completion. We support the idea of creating a loyalty
bonus to encourage officials to remain on board until
the work is completed.

It is thus extremely that States make available to
the Tribunals sufficient human and financial; resources
to enable them to fully implement their completion
strategies.

As we said a few days ago, we welcome the
appointment of Mr. Serge Brammertz as Prosecutor of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991. We
would also like to express our profound gratitude to
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, whose dedication, courage and
determination to bring about the arrest of indictees at
large deserve the full recognition of my delegation. We
wish her every success in her future activities.

