Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries have aligned themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, the Slovak Republic and
Slovenia. Iceland and Norway have also aligned themselves
with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the inauguration of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation on 11
April, which marks one of the most important steps in the
peace process initiated at Lisbon in 1991 and renewed at
Lusaka in 1994, and which sets Angola on the promising
path of development for the benefit of all Angolans. We
would like to congratulate the Angolan people and express
our best wishes to the new Angolan Government for the
further consolidation of the peace process. Moreover, we
should like to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, whose
most timely Visit to Angola was a major factor in achieving
this breakthrough, as well as to his Special Representative,
Maitre Blondin Beye, and the three observer countries for
the indispensable role they have played in the formation of
the new Government.

The Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola
(MPLA), UNITA and the other parties can and must now
walk the last mile to the full implementation of the Lusaka
accords and national reconciliation together. In view of the
extremely difficult road which led to the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation, continued confidence-
building between its components will be necessary. In this
context, an early meeting between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi seems to be an important step. It is also to be
borne in mind that much remains to be done in order to
achieve the same unity of administration at the provincial
and national levels as has been achieved at the central level.

With the establishment of the new Government, the
way is now open for the full completion of important tasks
such as the normalization of the State administration
throughout the national territory and policy discussions
with the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank. Rapid progress is called for in the incorporation of
UNITA troops into the Angolan army and the National
Police, as well as in the area of demobilization. We
welcome the launching of the rapid demobilization
programme last Saturday. The 27,000 soldiers, who left
the quarterng areas as deserters and absentees, should
return as soon as possible and be demobilized. The
outstanding political tasks must now also be completed.

The European Union and its member States have
provided significant political, financial, material and
personnel support for demining activities in Angola. We
hope that the planned transfer of the responsibility for
support of the national mine- clearance programme from
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) to the United Nations Development
Programme will take place soon in order to secure the
future of the programme. We therefore look forward to
the early signing of the project document concerning the
development of a national mine-clearance capacity in
Angola.

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
intention to complete the phased drawdown of
UNAVEM's military units by the end of August of this
year. At the same time, we feel that the United Nations
still has a role to play in support of the peace process.
Accordingly, we concur with the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III
until 30 June 1997, on the understanding that the
operation would gradually proceed with the transition
towards a United Nations observer mission in Angola to
be formally established on 1 July 1997. In addition to the
completion of the remaining military tasks, the observer
mission would focus on political, police and human rights
aspects, as well as on humanitarian and public
information programmes aimed at consolidating the
national reconciliation process. We attach particular
importance to the deployment of human rights officers
and of police observers, who would monitor compliance
with the peace accords, including freedom of movement
throughout the country.

Once again, we would like to commend the staff of
UNAVEM. III, United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations, who perform their work in
often trying conditions. It is important that their safety
continue to be assured both at present and during any
future United Nations presence in Angola.

 

During his visit to Angola, the Secretary-General
launched the United Nations consolidated appeal for 1997,
which includes humanitarian needs as well as a basis for
rehabilitation and reconstruction. The new Government can
rest assured that its efforts in the reconstruction of a
reconciled Angola and in the framework of the peace
process will meet with a willingness on the part of the
European Union to cooperate actively. With international
assistance, a successful consolidation of the peace process
and good governance can certainly be achieved.

The PresidentzThe next speaker is the representative
of Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

