Mr. Hoxhaj: Allow me to start by thanking you,
Mr. President, and the Council on behalf of the
Government and the people of the Republic of Kosovo
for your continuing interest in Kosovo.

For more than a decade, the Council has been
meeting four times a year to follow developments in
Kosovo. Before that, Kosovo was a subject of the
Security Council's deliberations - at times, much
more than four times a year - in the 19905 due to
violence and war crimes committed by former Serbian
Governments. There were some difficult sessions here,
when there was little progress reported and no hope in
sight for final peace in the Balkans.

I am glad that in the last three years we made
significant progress, and recently we have been able to
report good news. The situation has stabilized and the
people of the region have become more concerned
about the problems of economic transition and
European integration than about scars of the old
conflict.

The United Nations and the Security Council
have contributed to our progress as well. I would like
to use this opportunity to thank the previous Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Lamberto
Zannier, for years of dedication to the people of
Kosovo. We also welcome Mr. Farid Zarif, the new
Acting Special Representative, to Kosovo. His long
experience in the United Nations will be important as
Kosovo seeks a new relationship with the United
Nations.

Our strategic national interest is for Kosovo to
become a member of the European Union and of the
United Nations. This is the vision of most people from
all ethnic communities in Kosovo, and this is the
mission of our Government.

Today's meeting of the Council is dedicated to
the events of the reporting period in Kosovo. Important
processes unfolded in the last three months that may
finally bring an end to the last remaining major Balkan
challenge. That challenge is the relationship between
Kosovo and Serbia, two of the last States to emerge
from the drama of former Yugoslav wars that were
started by Slobodan Milosevic and his regime.

This reporting period was one of highs and lows.
Firstly, I am happy to report to you that there has been
clear progress in the Republic of Kosovo in all fields of
economic, social and political development. But at the
same time, I must voice grave concern at the escalation
of rhetoric and violent acts that are coming from
Belgrade and its illegal structures in the north of the
Republic of Kosovo. Belgrade finances, leads and
controls these structures. These are the biggest
challenges Kosovo faces at the present moment.

On the positive side, I would like to inform the
Council that Kosovo today is a functional, multi-ethnic
State with a diverse society and with the most stable
political landscape in the Balkans. The new
Government created after the elections last year under
the leadership of Prime Minister Hashim Thaci moved
ahead with its programme and is committed to further
improve the life of the people.
The President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, the
first woman President in the Balkans, has reinforced
her role as a non-partisan head of State and has
performed her duties with distinction. The Assembly of
the Republic of Kosovo, during this time, has focused
on reforming the Constitution and the election law,
which reflects the agreement between the

governmental and opposition parties. This is another
proof of the political maturity of Kosovo.

The International Civilian Office led by
Mr. Pieter Feith, which oversees the implementation of
Ahtisaari Plan, has recently concluded that Kosovo has
almost completely finished the entire process of
building democratic, transparent and multi-ethnic
institutions that serve all citizens. The Republic of
Kosovo has invested €150 million in the last three
years to implement the Ahtisaari Plan, including the
creation of new municipalities and new mechanisms
for protection of minorities. As a result, there has been
a distinct drop of inter-ethnic incidents, while
interaction between state and minority citizens has
increased, in the last three months.

The economy has also benefited from the
political stability. In August, International Monetary
Fund mission to Kosovo projected strong growth in the
gross domestic product of six per cent for 2011, with
foreign direct and public investments reaching
"fervent" levels. Kosovo also remains the least
indebted country in the region. We have continued with
substantive infrastructure investments this summer,
with the new highway to the Adriatic coast that will
also link Kosovo with Albania and Montenegro, as well
as with Serbia.

There has been noted progress on the rule of law.
This progress has happened due to close cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of Kosovo
and EULEX. We are pleased that the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo has pointed out in the latest report
that:

"Kosovo police demonstrated improved
professionalism by conducting a number of
successful operations against arms smuggling,
trafficking of human beings, corruption and
money-laundering" (5/2011/514, para. 30).

The European perspective has begun to rapidly
shape political discourse in the Republic of Kosovo.
The visa liberalization process and obtaining a
contractual relationship with the European Union
remain the top priorities for Kosovo. The European
Commission has noted significant progress on its two
conditions for Kosovo for a visa liberalization
dialogue: the readmission and reintegration processes.
One of the principal conditions is integrated border
management, so the Kosovo Government will continue
to implement policies that will open European Union
borders to visitors from Kosovo but close them to
smugglers and criminals.

The Republic of Kosovo reports significant
successes in foreign policy as well. The President, the
Prime Minister, the new Deputy Prime Minister,
Mr. Behxhet Pacolli, as well as other members of the
Government and Parliament have had important visits
and meetings in international forums.

Since my last report to the Council, the rate of
recognition of Kosovo's independence by other nations
has increased. This is a result of the new strategy of the
Government of Kosovo. We take this opportunity to
thank the Governments of Andorra, the Central African
Republic, Niger, Guinea Konakry, Benin and Saint
Lucia for having recognized the Republic of Kosovo in
recent weeks. We also thank the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation for making an open call in Astana
in July on all its member States to recognize the
Republic of Kosovo.

I would like to inform the Council that we have
remained committed to increasing interaction and
dialogue with the entire region. Kosovo has played an
active part in the Regional Cooperation Council and
the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
This shows that Kosovo is indeed rapidly becoming a
new and responsible member of the international
community.

Our dedication to regional cooperation prompted
the Government of Kosovo to reach its first agreements
with Serbia in the ongoing technical dialogue. As
members may recall, the General Assembly has
welcomed the European Union's facilitation of the
technical dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. The
aim of the dialogue is to improve the daily life of the
people and regional cooperation, and to prepare both
countries for a European future. The freedom of
movement of people and of goods, and trade relations
have been discussed in the five rounds of the dialogue.
The two Governments reached their first agreements by
which, for the first time since 1999, the Serbian
Government has accepted the identity cards, license
plates and school diplomas issued by the Government
of Kosovo.

We were to meet one more time during the
summer, but the Serbian delegation refused to take part
in the meeting scheduled for the month of July. We had
hoped to reach an agreement on the most important
economic issue that has been troubling Kosovo -
Serbia's refusal to accept Kosovo customs stamps.
These stamps are considered status-neutral by both the
United Nations and the European Union. Kosovo was
expected to import goods worth €500 million from
Serbia in 2011, while Serbia flatly bans any goods
from Kosovo. More importantly, Kosovo goods are not
allowed to even transit through Serbia to other
European markets. This situation has lasted for three
and a half years. At the beginning of this year, we
warned the Republic of Serbia that it was
discriminating against our industries and farmers in
direct violation of CEFTA accords and UNMIK legal
opinion.

Serbia had accepted the principle that Kosovo
was a single legal space when it agreed to resolution
1244 (1999) in July 1999. Unfortunately, the
Government of Serbia instead began making
orchestrated noises about the partition of Kosovo, with
the Serb-majority northern municipalities going to
Serbia. Both President Tadic' and other senior officials
in Serbia have frequently proposed the ethnic division
of Kosovo.

I have to stress that such suggestions are very
dangerous because they provide an opening for ethnic
divisions within all units of the former Yugoslavia.
This forced us, with great regret, to take measures of
reciprocity against Serbian goods. This happened after
over three years of economic hardship caused by the
Serbian blockade against our exports. This also forced
us - with no regret at all - to take control over our
northern border crossings.

Let me be clear on this issue. We sent Kosovo
Police forces to our northern borders neither to disturb
citizens nor to attack them; we simply wanted to
reinforce measures of reciprocity in trade when all
attempts to negotiate the matter had failed. Our actions
were a legitimate exercise of the authority of the
Police. The authority for the Kosovo Police to operate
in northern Kosovo was accepted by Serbia itself in
2002, under Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Michael Steiner. The Kosovo Police in the
North has always operated in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), the Ahtisaari Plan and the
Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo.

As many UNMIK, EULEX and Kosovo Force
(KFOR) observers have reported, on 25 July Kosovo
Police were conducting an operation in a professional
manner. Road blocks were put in place by the illegal
parallel structures and members of the Serbian
Government. Unfortunately, Serbian Government
members entered Kosovo illegally several times to
make very inflammatory remarks.

What happened was, frankly, the biggest
challenge we have seen to peace in the Balkans in
many years. Serbian illegal structures used explosives,
automatic weapons and snipers to shoot at Kosovo
Police, EULEX police and KFOR. One Kosovo Police
officer was killed by these extremists and criminals,
who are financed by both Belgrade and smuggling
activities. I repeat - the Kosovo Police did not use
Violence. It was the Serbian Government that
committed acts of violence inside the territory of
Kosovo.

It was thanks to KFOR and Commander Buhler
that violence was stopped. He was able to broker a deal
that made possible the implementation of the legitimate
Kosovo Government's measures. We recall that this
agreement with KF OR enables full control of the
border posts, but at the same time parallel structures
still frequently block the roads.

The United Nations, the European Union, CEFTA
and even Serbia have all agreed previously that Kosovo
is a single customs area. While Serbia and Kosovo can
disagree on how to establish their mutual relationship,
no one in this Chamber can disagree with the fact that
Serbia has no legal right to finance and support its own
armed, paramilitary, security, intelligence and other
institutions in Kosovo. Over the past 12 years, the
Government of Serbia has invested over €6 billion to
maintain and control those illegal structures in Kosovo.
This has to stop because it violates resolution 1244
(1999), the Ahtisaari agreement and international law.
When these forces are used to attack Kosovo Police,
EULEX police and KFOR troops, this is a grave attack
upon the entire architecture of security established in
the Balkans in 1999.

Some of the greatest problems reported in the
Secretary-General report before us today have to do
with the fact that Serbia not only insists on supporting
criminal structures in Kosovo, but also is actively
forbidding the integration of Kosovo Serbs.

On the basis of the Ahtisaari Plan, Kosovo Serbs
enjoy a wide range of preferential treatment, positive
discrimination and self-governance in certain sectors.
Their integration across the country has happened and
is a success story. Today, the majority of Serbs living
in Kosovo are integrated at the central and the local
levels. That shows that Kosovo's multi-ethnic
democracy is responsive to the needs of the citizens.
Serb minority participation in the Government is strong
and genuine. One deputy prime minister, three
ministers, three deputy ministers and 12 Members of
Parliament represent the strong interests of the Serb
minority in Kosovo institutions.

Kosovo has proved that it can deliver to the
minorities. The new municipalities, such as Gracanice,
Novoberde, Ranillug, Partesh and Shterpce, have
managed to become fully functional. That shows the
full involvement of and economic benefits for the local
Serb population. That has happened due to the strong
commitment of local Serb politicians, led by Deputy
Prime Minister Slobodan Petrovie.

On the other hand, Zubin Potok, Leposavic' and
northern Mitrovica have never had proper and free
elections. That is the only corner of Europe where
criminal structures keep the local population hostage to
extremist aims. That has to change. The situation has
resulted in an area that exists outside the application of
Kosovo law and is under the control of Serbian illegal
structures. It has become a black hole, where criminals
of all ethnicities can flourish and where there is no
legal certainty for any citizen. It is a smugglers'
paradise in all sectors of the economy, where criminals
and smugglers profit and ordinary citizens live in very
bad conditions.

We call on the Security Council not to tolerate
efforts to challenge the legal order established after the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). The Kosovo
Government is committed to ensuring that the rule of
law is implemented within all its territory. We shall not
use force, nor do we need to; but we shall use our full
determination.

Here, let me emphasize that Kosovo is and will
be a free nation for all Kosovars, whether they be
Albanian, Serb, Roma, Turk, Bosniak, Croat,
Montenegrin or other. We do not want to impose any
rule in the North other than the rule of law. For Serb
political representatives to make the most of the very
broad political affirmative rights under the Ahtisaari
Plan is a matter of their choice. However, they should
at least be allowed the freedom to choose, and the
Ahtisaari Plan is the best framework for that. We will
continue to support the Kosovo police, KFOR and
EULEX in making sure that Kosovo makes more
progress in the rule oflaw.

As we have said many times, Pristina is the party
most interested in fully clarifying the allegations
brought by Dick Marty. We are pleased that the
investigation team is now well in place, and in that
context we welcome the nomination of Mr. John Clint
Williamson as the lead prosecutor for the EULEX
special task force. Let me affirm that the Government
of Kosovo will fully cooperate with EULEX as an
independent arbiter of justice in the case. As I have
noted in my intervention, Kosovo is a country of law,
dedicated to justice for victims and punishment for
criminals.

I have tried to be as brief as I can. I wish I could
have been briefer. The world has many pressing needs,
and other countries need the Council's immediate
attention. Kosovo's challenges are great, but they also
provide an important window of opportunity. Now that
the status issue is behind us, one can see that dialogue
between the two countries can become a generator of
goodwill and good solutions.

We are happy to see that a coherent international
effort to move away from the situation of a frozen
conflict and a status quo is taking place. I repeat,
status-quo, frozen conflict and partition are not
acceptable at all. There is no return to the situation that
existed before 25 July.

After 12 years, Serbia must dissolve parallel
structures and should start coming to terms with the
new independent nation as a neighbour and partner.
The Kosovo Government will redouble efforts to
provide democratic representation in all Kosovo, from
the very grass-roots politics at the municipal level. Our
institutions are open to all those who seek political
change through institutional means, including Kosovo
Serb politicians from the North.

I hope that the Security Council will recognize
the progress in the Balkans and will support both sides
engaging in a dialogue. That will confirm the most
basic principles of rejection of Violence and respect for
the rule of law in the entire territory of the Republic of
Kosovo.

