Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Mr. President, your
initiative to hold this open briefing concerning
HIV/AIDS is much appreciated. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and Dr. Piot,
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), for their very
comprehensive and illuminating briefings.

HIV/AIDS infection continues to increase
worldwide despite the efforts of the international
community. In response, Japan this month hosted the
International Congress on HIV/AIDS in Asia and the
Pacific. At that meeting, participants confirmed that
the Asian region is also confronted with the threat of
HIV/AIDS.

Resolution 1308 (2000) is proof that
comprehensive and integrated policies are necessary in
all relevant areas. This year is the fifth anniversary of
the adoption of that resolution. My Government
believes that it is important to assess the state of
implementation at this stage.

Japan thinks highly of the efforts made to date by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and UN AIDS. We expect that not only will they reduce
the risk of HIV transmission to peacekeepers, but that
those efforts - which is to say, appropriate action
being taken by peacekeepers who have an accurate
understanding of HIV/AIDS and a high awareness of
gender and human rights issues - will also have a
positive impact upon the countries in which they are
carried out.

Concerning the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS, which the General Assembly adopted in
June 2001 (resolution S-26/2, annex), we regret that it
is not likely that the goals for 2005 will be met.
Member States should be encouraged to carry out
comprehensive strategies that include education,
prevention, counselling and voluntary testing, care and
treatment and steps to counter the discrimination and
stigma often borne by those affected with HIV/AIDS.

Japan has spared no effort to fulfil its obligations
in that regard, including by providing enhanced
training to our peacekeepers. We are pleased to inform
the Council that, on 30 June 2005, our Prime Minister,
Mr. Junichiro Koizumi, announced that Japan had
decided to increase its contribution to the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria by half a
billion dollars.

Finally, we would like to thank the delegation of
Greece for preparing the draft presidential statement,
which we fully support.
