Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, called for the
convening of this urgent meeting to discuss the latest
grave developments in the Gaza Strip. We thank the
members of the Council for responding quickly to our
call.

Jordan rejects and condemns in the strongest terms
the repeated aggressions waged by Israel on the Gaza
Strip. We denounce its war on the Palestinian people
and the most recent developments following the launch
of the land invasion against the Gaza Strip last night.
Jordan denounces the disproportionate, unjustified
use of excessive force and the indiscriminate targeting
of innocent civilians - the sons and daughters of the
Palestinian people. Has humankind becomejaded as the
world has become accustomed to seeing dead children
in Gaza, dead children on the beaches of Gaza and dead
children among the remains of their destroyed homes?

Israel's aggression has claimed more than 270
martyrs to date, as well as more than 1,500 injured. The
numbers continue to escalate. The United Nations has
reported that more than 80 per cent of the Palestinian
casualties are civilians. More than 20 per cent are
children. More than 1,600 Palestinian homes have been
obliterated. Tens of thousands of Palestinians have
left their homes in northern and central Gaza. More
than 18,000 have sought refuge in the schools of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. More than half of the people
of Gaza are living without water. Many schools and
health facilities have been destroyed, thereby escalating
the suffocating human suffering in the Gaza Strip.

Jordan calls on Israel to immediately end its
military operations. We call on Israel to withdraw
its forces from the Gaza Strip. Jordan calls for a
complete de-escalation and ceasefire and an end to the
targeting of innocent civilians anywhere, as well as
for their protection. We call for respect for the rules of
international humanitarian law. In that regard, Jordan
supports the Egyptian initiative towards ceasefire and
de-escalation, that has been tabled.

Jordan has strengthened the capacity of the military
field hospital that has been operating in Gaza for years.
We have accelerated urgent medical assistance to the
Strip. Jordan has also opened its doors to the waves
of Palestinian wounded. We call on the international
community to provide urgent humanitarian assistance
to the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.

Under the leadership of his majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein, Jordan is working substantively through
intensive contacts with the leaders of the region and the
world, to reach a ceasefire agreement. We stress that
the only solution to guarantee a definitive end to such
Israeli aggression would be a political solution through

the resumption of comprehensive, serious negotiations
based on the two-State solution. That would include
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
on Palestinian land, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on the relevant international resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative, in order to ensure security and
stability for all the States and peoples of the region.

