Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling today's
briefing and for your leadership on what I think we
all believe was a timely and valuable mission of the
Security Council to Haiti. I would also like to thank all
of our colleagues on the Council whojoined us in Haiti,
since the participation of all 15 members underscored
the Council's consistent and unanimous commitment to
Haiti's stability, prosperity and democracy.

The timing of the mission proved serendipitous for
the Council's engagement on Haiti's troubling situation.
Haiti's failure to hold overdue parliamentary elections,
attributable in part to its failure to enact an electoral law,
resulted in a lapsed Parliament on 12 January, when the
terms of all the members of the Chamber of Deputies
and half of the Senate's remaining 20 members ended.
That development has left President Martelly running
the Government under executive authority. While that
circumstance is anticipated and permitted in Haiti's
Constitution, and has unfortunately happened on
multiple occasions in the past, the loss of the principal
check on presidential power has provoked renewed
anxiety inside and outside Haiti about the health of the
country's democracy.

Against that backdrop, we met with President Martelly
and a number of his ministers, the 10 remaining seated
senators and a range of opposition political leaders. Our
message to all was consistent: all sides must redouble
their efforts to engage in a constructive dialogue and
come to an agreement on a framework for free, fair and
inclusive elections as soon as possible, which is in the
best interests ofthe Haitian people. We were encouraged
by President Martelly's commitment to limit his use of
executive authority, to ensuring the continuity of the
State and to organizing elections. Also encouraging
was his stated determination to stress inclusiveness
and consultation in managing State affairs, as reflected
in his formation of a multiparty Government under
a Prime Minister drawn from the opposition. The
commitment of many opposition parties and leaders to
work with the President to find a way out of the political
stalemate and put the good of the Haitian people first,
notwithstanding their differences, was also heartening.

Checks and balances in Haiti are key, and even
more important since the lapsing of the Parliament.
The Council conveyed our view that the perceived
legitimacy of policies and institutions hinged on the
perception that they are derived from broad segments
of society and have broad buy-in.

We had an unexpected opportunity to meet with
Haiti's new provisional Electoral Council, installed
the day of our arrival. Drawn from civil society,
the provisional Council is charged with developing
a framework for the elections crucial to Haiti's
stability. We were impressed with the Electoral
Council's seriousness of purpose and commitment to
independence, and we offered its members our full
support. We also met with leaders from Haitian civil
society, in particular women's groups who reminded us
of just how much work remains to ensure justice and
equality for all Haitians, as well as reminding us of
civil society's critical role in the continued stabilization
and development of Haiti. They too can count on our
continued support and attention, as we told them when
we met.

In Port-au-Prince and Cap-Haitien, we had multiple
opportunities to meet with the leadership of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and see first-hand the critical work the Mission is
carrying out in support of its mandate - a Mission that
has stuck with the Haitian people through thick and
thin. From supporting the Haitian National Police to
pushing for solutions to the problem of lengthy pretrial
detention, the Mission is helping ensure a better future
for the Haitian people.

Let me again thank and commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Sandra
Honore, her team, including troops and police, and
all of MINUSTAH'S troop- and police-contributing
countries for all of their support for Haiti's stability and
development.

Our moving visit to Haiti's national memorial
for all who lost their lives in the earthquake, which
struck five years ago this month, reminded us of
the extraordinary scale of the devastation Haiti has
endured and the tremendous suffering it caused. For
those who have not seen the memorial, it is marked by
a large piece of rubble that stands as a stark symbol of
all that was destroyed on that day. Yet, in spite of the
significant challenges that persist, on our trip we saw
evidence everywhere of the incredible resilience and
determination of the Haitian people, of rubble that has
not only been cleared, but of new structures that have
been put up in its place and new hopes that have been
raised with them. The Haitian people will continue to
have our support as they work to rebuild their country
upon that hope.

