Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Bolivia for convening today's meeting,
and would like to thank Mr. Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU);
Mr. Kaberuka, African Union High Representative for
the Peace Fund; and Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, for their briefings.
As the continent with the world's greatest
development potential, Africa is an important force in
our efforts to achieve world peace and promote shared
development. In the past few years, we have seen the
countries ofAfrica commit to cooperation, self-reliance,
unity and coordination and to actively promoting the
resolution of African issues in African ways. They have
strengthened and developed their collective security
mechanisms and achieved outstanding results in dealing
with the conflicts in Liberia and cote d'Ivoire, thereby
making important contributions to the maintenance
of peace and security in Africa and the world at large.
China heartily commends those efforts.

Some parts of Africa are still facing severe
political, security and humanitarian challenges.
Terrorist organizations such as Boko Haram, the Lord's
Resistance Army, Al-Shabaab and others are still a
threat to security. Transnational organized crime in
the Sahel and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea are still
rampant. The international community must continue
to enhance its attention and support through continued
assistance aimed at improving Africa's peace, security
and development capacities.

In view of the evolving state of peace and security
in Africa, the United Nations and the African Union
have been actively exploring the ways and areas in
which they can deepen their cooperation. Last year,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2320 (2016),
designed to enhance that cooperation. In April, the two
organizations signed the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security. A few days ago, the Secretary-
General submitted a report to the Security Council
(S/2017/454), as did the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, supporting autonomous African
Union peace operations. China would like to commend
the Council for focusing on finding solutions to African
issues and supporting capacity-building for peace
and security in Africa. We hope it will continue that
momentum and focus its future cooperation efforts on
the following areas.

First, the Council should fully respect the role of
African countries in settling their own problems and
ensure that it is a dominant one. The African Union and
Africa's other regional and subregional organizations
have unique advantages and a wealth of experience
in resolving hotspot issues on the continent. Looking
at the success achieved by the Security Council and
the African Union in addressing many such issues,
we believe that African countries have the ability
and wisdom they need to handle their problems
appropriately. The Council should fully respect
African proposals and ideas, as well as the sovereignty
and views of countries hosting peace operations, and
enhance its cooperation and coordination with the AU
and subregional organizations with a view to creating
political synergies.

Secondly, the Council should work to continually
improve the cooperation mechanisms between the AU
and the United Nations. While our Organization has
been increasing the closeness of its cooperation with
the African Union in responding to issues in problem
areas in Africa, both sides must further improve
that cooperation and coordination by making the
mechanisms more effective and emphasizing key areas
such as conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict reconstruction. They should work to gradually
improve joint planning, decision-making, assessment
and reporting, and to jointly implement early-warning
procedures for crises, strategic assessments, the
creation of mandates, deployments and other efforts.
The goal will be to ensure that strategic coordination
between the United Nations and the AU and other
regional organizations can be implemented in each
particular area at various stages and levels, so as make
cooperation more efficient.

Thirdly, the Council should take concrete measures
to help the African Union improve its capacity-building.
The AU's autonomous peace operations have become
a very important route by which the international
community can respond to conflicts and crises in
Africa. They represent a significant complement to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and play
a major role in maintaining peace and stability on
the continent. Owing to its difficulties in obtaining
financial resources, equipment and technology, the
African Union has been struggling with the challenge
of sustaining effective autonomous operations.
China therefore welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendations for supporting those operations.

We believe that the United Nations should listen to
the needs and wishes of the AU by helping it speed up
its development of its standby and rapid-reaction forces,
counter regional terrorism and establish sustainable,
stable and predictable financing mechanisms for its
peace operations. We hope that the Security Council
and the Secretariat will listen seriously to African
countries' views and concerns and will regard African
priorities as their own, working with all possible speed
to provide the necessary financing, equipment and
resources for African peace operations in support of
the efforts of the countries and regional organizations
concerned to maintain peace and security.

China has always worked actively to implement
cooperative efforts with African countries in the area of
peace and security. President Xi J inping has outlined five
pillars and 10 cooperation plans aimed at building the
Sine-African relationship that cover peace and security
issues. We have committed to providing military aid
amounting to a total of $100 million by 2020 in support
of the AU's standby and rapid-reaction forces. The
China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust
Fund is now operational and will have a lifespan of 10
years. It will help the United Nations focus on peace
and development projects in Africa.

Currently, China has 2,600 peacekeepers deployed
to seven missions, including Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. China has
dispatched escort vessels to the waters off the Somali
coast and the Gulf of Aden in an effort to help regional
countries fight piracy. We are ready to work together
with the rest of the international community to fully
promote cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union so as to achieve peace, stability and
development on the African continent.

