Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I am speaking on behalf
of the group of 37 States endorsing the Safe Schools
Declaration. The list of countries aligning themselves
with this statement is included in a written version.

The Safe Schools Declaration is an intergovernmental,
political commitment supporting the protection and
continuation of education in armed conflicts. That
includes a pledge to use the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict. Since the first International Conference
on Safe Schools, held in Oslo in May 2015, 70 States
have endorsed the Declaration. Education is a human
right and precondition for development. Continued
access to safe education is essential and helps protect
children from the impact of armed conflict. It ensures
that no generation become lost, and greatly contributes
to a country's ability to recover from conflict. Attacks
on schools not only deprive girls and boys of learning
opportunities, but can put them at risk of injury and
death, and increase the risk of recruitment, forced
labour, sexual abuse and child and forced marriage.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2017/821).
We convey our deep concern about the ongoing
grave violations against children in conflict. We are
particularly concerned about attacks and threats of
attacks on schools, teachers, and students, which
are occurring in too many countries. We welcome
the Secretary-General's recognition that endorsing
and implementing the Safe Schools Declaration is
a positive step towards improving the protection of
children. Moreover, we support the observation, made
by the Special Representative on Children and Armed
Conflict in her presentation of the annual report of
the Secretary-General to the General Assembly, that
the increasing support for the Declaration reflects
a growing international consensus that preventing
the military use of schools is essential to avoiding
disruption to education.

The Safe Schools Declaration provides a
framework for action and cooperation to increase
the protection of education during armed conflict. It
includes commitments to improving reporting and data
concerning attacks on education facilities, providing
assistance to victims of attacks, and developing conflict-
sensitive approaches to education. States also commit
to investigating allegations of violations of applicable
law and to prosecuting perpetrators, where appropriate.
At the Buenos Aires Conference on Safe Schools
in March this year, representatives of more than 80
States discussed those important issues. Ministries of
Defence, Education and Foreign Affairs and members
of armed forces shared their experience and expertise
in a bid to find constructive solutions. Representatives
of endorsing States outlined concrete steps that they
have taken to implement the commitments contained in
the Declaration.

We call on all States to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration and to benefit from the exchange ofpositive
experiences of its implementation.

