The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Permanent Representative of Italy.

As the Secretary-General has reported, the security
situation in Haiti and the capacity of the Haitian National
Police to meet its challenges have improved somewhat.
This is an encouraging development, since recent history
has taught us that in Haiti there is a close connection
between political stability, the Govemment's ability to
safeguard public order, and respect for human rights. We
must therefore strongly praise the efforts made by the
Government of Haiti fully to restore democracy in the
country. Significant results have already been achieved by
the Haitian Government.

In this regard, the Italian delegation notes with
pleasure the statement by the Permanent Representative of
Haiti, Ambassador Pierre Lelong, to whom I wish to
express my appreciation for his valuable contribution to our
deliberations.

We must also be grateful to Canada and the United
States for their meaningful contributions to restoring peace
and promoting reconciliation in Haiti.

 

The role played by the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH) in the phase of democratic
transition was of course also of crucial importance. The
democratically elected President, Rene Preval, has been
able to count on the presence of the international force to
guarantee public order and start the training of the Haitian
National Police, which will have to handle internal
security on its own when UNSMIH is withdrawn. Italy
fully supports the extension of the mandate for six months
and the provision for the possibility of an additional
two-month extension to be subsequently decided by the
Security Council.

In this delicate phase of consolidation of the
democratic process and system, there are still threats to
political stability. It is to strengthen the results thus far
achieved through the commitment of the international
community that the Security Council approves the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Support
Mission. By 31 March, the Council will carefully consider
the nature of a subsequent international presence in Haiti.

The international community should facilitate the
strategic relationship that Haiti must establish with
international financial institutions, whose support is
indispensable to the economic rehabilitation of the
country. A better standard of living is fundamental to
consolidating democracy and respect for human rights in
Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution in
document S/ 1996/ 1002.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
 

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1086 (1996).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its

consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 11.171.

