Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Germany for its initiative in convening today's
meeting. I welcome Vice-President Riek Machar Teny-
Dhurgon of the Republic of South Sudan to today's
meeting. I also thank him for his statement. I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and
Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of the
Sudan, for their statements.

On 9 July, the Republic of South Sudan officially
proclaimed its formation. The Chinese Government
and people would like to extend our warm
congratulations. Their present progress was achieved
through a great deal of assiduous effort. In promoting
the peace process between South Sudan and the Sudan
and in implementing the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), the leaders and peoples of those two
countries have shown exceptional wisdom, courage and
unwavering will. The birth of the Republic of South
Sudan gives expression to the common desire and
autonomous choice of the people of that State. It is a
major result of the peace process in the Sudan; it will
promote lasting peace and stability in the region and is
of great historical significance.

The Chinese people and the people of South
Sudan share a deep traditional friendship and a
common desire to strengthen friendly exchanges. On
the day when the Republic of South Sudan was
founded, President Hu Jintau of China sent a message
of congratulation to President Kiir of the Republic of
South Sudan. China has already established diplomatic
relations with the Republic of South Sudan, beginning
a new chapter in the relations of the two countries.
China will establish and develop a long-term, healthy,
stable, friendly and cooperative relationship with the
Republic of South Sudan on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence.

China supports South Sudan's application for
membership of the United Nations. We look forward to
the historic moment when South Sudan becomes the
193rd Member State. We look forward to strengthening
a comprehensive cooperation with South Sudan within
the framework of the United Nations. We sincerely
hope that the young Republic of South Sudan will
continue to register new accomplishments in its efforts
at State-building and development so as to become a
positive force in maintaining peace and stability and
the promotion of common development. China will
continue to provide its assistance, within its capacities,
to South Sudan's development and reconstruction.

South Sudan is facing many challenges
immediately after its formation. We appeal to the
international community to continue to support South
Sudan's efforts to achieve political stability, and to
provide effective assistance for its economic recovery
and development. We support the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan to strengthen communication and cooperation
with the Government of South Sudan and to contribute
to the maintenance of peace and stability and the
promotion of development in South Sudan.

Both the Sudan and South Sudan are at a new
phase in their history. They share a common history,

and their economies and cultures are closely linked, as
are peace and development in both countries.
Continued tolerance, mutual understanding and
strengthened cooperation between the two countries
represent the only option to achieve peaceful
coexistence and common development. We hope that
the two countries will continue to focus on the overall
situation of peace and the well-being of the two
peoples in finding appropriate solutions to the
outstanding issues of the CPA through dialogue and
negotiation.

China welcomes the good offices of the African
Union in resolving the outstanding issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan. China supports the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel led by
Mr. Mbeki in playing an important role in this regard.

The Government of the Sudan has demonstrated
its political resolve to facilitate the peace process
between the South and the North and has made
tremendous efforts in this regard. The international
community should normalize its relations with the
Sudan soon so that its people can enjoy peace, dignity
and development at an early date. It is our sincere hope
that the Sudan and South Sudan, with the support and
assistance of the United Nations and other international
partners, will be good neighbours, good partners and
good brothers forever.

