Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Allow me first to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his presence at the beginning
of this meeting devoted to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. For the Congolese people who are
following our discussion, his presence is a reassuring
testimony to his personal commitment, and the
commitment of the United Nations, to the
establishment of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Like earlier speakers, I wish to welcome in our
midst today Mr. Javier Solana, the Secretary-General of
the Council of the European Union, High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy. His detailed and instructive statement enabled
us to come to further conclusions deriving from his
recent visit to the Great Lakes region, conclusions
which can serve as guidelines and signposts for the
future work of the Council.

I wish also to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno
and Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi for their briefings on
current developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

There is no question that the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a challenge to us
all, to the international community, to Africa, and to
the Congolese themselves. The Congolese people want
peace, development and to benefit from their vast
natural resources. Sadly, since independence, the
history of the Congo has been marked by situations and
crises which have constantly undermined this profound
hope.

All the major actors on the political scene in the
country consequently have the pressing task of
realizing and living up to the hopes placed in them by
their compatriots who are caught up in a whirlwind of
violence, plunged into lassitude and gripped by
unspeakable poverty.

It is now incumbent upon them to choose, the
paths of dialogue and consultation rather than the
language of weapons, which has already proven its
limitations.

From this point of view, my delegation welcomes
the recent political developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo which became possible upon the
signing, on 17 December 2002, in Pretoria, of the
global and all-inclusive transition agreement and then,
on 2 April 2003, in Sun City, the final act of the inter-
Congolese political negotiations. The signing of these
acts by the various parties to the conflict marked the
advent of a new age for the Congolese people, an age
conducive to sustainable economic and social
development based on peace and stability.

With this purpose in mind, the promulgation of
the transitional constitution on 7 April 2003, the
signing by the Congolese parties of the Memorandum
on the army and security on 29 June 2003, and the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
30 June 2003, are, without question, significant
milestones in achieving these objectives.

We welcome the setting up of the Government of
National Unity and transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and in particular, the swearing-
in yesterday, 17 July 2003, in Kinshasa, of the four
vice presidents: Yerodia Abdoulaye Ndombasi, Jean-
Pierre Bemba, Arthur Z'Ahidi Ngoma and Azarius
Ruberwa.

I take this opportunity to pay a well-deserved
tribute to Amos Ngongi Namanga, who has brought
devotion, skill and personal commitment to the cause
of peace in that fraternal country and has thus made a
significant contribution to the advent of this decisive
stage in the history of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We note with particular satisfaction that the
swearing in of the four vice presidents took place in the
presence of the President, in Kinshasa, and to the
acclaim of the Congolese people, who were relieved
and reassured by this development.

The fact that certain members of the Government
have still not been sworn in, is an indication of the
volatility and mistrust that still mark the political
climate in Congo.

Mr. Solana has already spoken to us of the state
of ambiguity deliberately maintained by certain
factions. We are convinced this is the last manifestation
of that situation and is only an isolated incident,
because we are aware of the patriotism of our
Congolese brothers. We know that the parties taking
part in the Government of National Unity and
transition clearly grasp the historic importance of the
process in which they are engaged.

For its part, the international community, while
lending its full support to this process, is monitoring
the Congolese parties vigilantly. In that connection,
Cameroon would like to commend the European
Union, and France in particular, for the quality and
effectiveness of their efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in recent weeks.

Operation Artemis, which was authorized by
resolution 1484 (2003), has made it possible for Bunia
and the district of Ituri to be liberated from their
nightmare to once again become liveable places.
Evidence of that is provided by the return of a
significant number of refugees - to date numbering
over 8,000 - who had fled the fighting.
The deployment of the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force is a clear example of what the
international community can and should do to help
contain a conflict and to limit its humanitarian
consequences as well as all types of violations of
human rights. It is now important that the handover
with the Force, set to take place on 1 September, be
carried out in a diligent and orderly manner, so that the
advances made by Operation Artemis in the area of
security can be sustained. In that connection, the
arrival early this week of the first Bangladeshi
elements of the Ituri brigade is a positive sign that
gives us cause to hope that there will not be a security
vacuum in Ituri.

As Mr. Solana stressed earlier, the force that will
take over from Operation Artemis must be given a
robust mandate so that it can act as effectively as
possible in emergency situations on the ground. In
addition, such a mandate would have the advantage of
being a deterrent in itself. The Secretary-General had
suggested that option to the members of the Council.
My country supported that option straightaway - and
with good reason. Cameroon has always advocated
establishing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) under Chapter VII of the Charter.
We welcome the fact that consensus in the Council has
finally emerged in that regard. That will make it
possible for MONUC to effectively play the role
expected of it by the Congolese people.

The deployment of MONUC under a strengthened
mandate will, among other things, make it possible to
effectively address the peace process in Ituri, the Kivu
provinces and Kinshasa. In Ituri in particular there is
an urgent need to support the Interim Administration,
which is experiencing difficulties in enforcing its
authority. MONUC will be able to support it by, among
other things, by strengthening police capacities. In
North and South Kivu, MONUC will need to monitor,
and work hand in hand with, the verification mission
established following the signing on 19 June at
Bujumbura of the Act of Engagement for the Cessation
of Hostilities between the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie-Kisangani/Mouvement de
liberation (RCD-K/ML) and RCD-Goma, and
following the meeting that took place between those
parties at Beni on 26 June.

It appears that consensus is also emerging in the
Council concerning the establishment of an arms
embargo on the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. MONUC will also be called
upon to implement that measure.

It must be acknowledged that the efforts of the
Congolese people and the international community to
reach political consensus and to restore security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be successful
only when neighbouring States actively and
unreservedly commit themselves to peace in that
country, as well as in the Great Lakes region in general.
With respect to the behaviour expected of those States,
it is all of Africa that is involved. Accordingly, we urge
them to fully respect the principles of international law
set out in the Charter of the United Nations. We also
call upon them to exert their influence upon the
Congolese movements close to them so that the latter
will continue to be positively engaged in the transition
process that has now begun.

In a 1996 joint communique signed by the then
Secretary-General, President Paul Biya of Cameroon
called for the convening of a conference on the Great
Lakes region aimed at finding a solution to the crisis
that was then beginning. We continue to believe that
the holding of such a conference would greatly
contribute to improving relations among those States
and make possible the establishment of an environment
conducive to trade and prosperity based on trust and
solidarity.

Beyond peace lies development. The European
Union has led the way in the area of development by
providing the new transitional authorities financial
assistance as part of a rehabilitation programme for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, the
United Nations initiative in Ituri aimed at coordinating
the activities of its agencies and their partners in the
area of humanitarian assistance is part of the same
pattern. This will enable all potential donors active in
the region to develop their assistance through the Ituri
Administration. We strongly encourage such
contributions, and we appeal to the donor community
to provide the new authorities in Kinshasa with
increased support for their economic recovery efforts.

It cannot be said enough: in order to help the
Congolese people to build upon the peace process and
bring about national reconciliation, the international
community must resolutely aid that people in the
urgent and difficult task of rebuilding the country. That
is why Cameroon proposes that development issues be
decisively included in MONUC's mandate and that a
post of assistant special representative responsible for
such issues be created in the context of that Mission. It
should be recalled that such a post exists in the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone. Making economic
issues part of United Nations missions is so essential
that the recently concluded Security Council mission to
West Africa proposed establishing in Liberia the post
of assistant special representative responsible for
economic issues. Cameroon believes that this is not a
matter of merely establishing a new post; it is an issue
of involving MONUC in the necessary harmonization
and coordination of development strategies. Bearing in
mind the key role played by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in that regard, as we
understand it, the UNDP Resident Representative and
Coordinator of the United Nations system might also
hold the post of assistant special representative of the
Secretary-General in charge of development issues.

I would like to conclude by recalling the
conclusions of our public meeting held last week on
respect for human rights in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I would like once again to reiterate the need
for better respect of human rights in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo now that transition is on track.
We cannot decry enough the massive violations of
human rights that have taken place during the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
especially in Ituri. The issue of child soldiers should be
given particular attention by both the transitional
authorities and the international community in order
that steps be taken to end that practice. More generally
speaking, impunity must be confronted.

