Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by expressing my delegation's
warm congratulations to Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye on
his appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). I thank him for the excellent
quality of his briefing on the situation in the Central
African Republic and assure him of Cote d'Ivoire's
full support in fulfilling his duties. We would also
like to thank Mr. Matias Bertino Matondo, African
Union Special Representative, and Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
Managing Director for Africa, European External
Action Service, for their in-depth briefings. Lastly, we
welcome the participation of Ambassador Ambroisine
Kpongo, Permanent Representative of the Central
African Republic.

The signing on 6 February of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic represents a genuine source of hope
for the Central African people and the international
community. It can be seen as a prelude to the restoration
of lasting peace, security and stability in our brother
country, despite the multiple challenges that are the
Secretary-General rightly points out in his report
(S/2019/498).

Among the challenges to be met, we note the
reluctance of armed groups to translate commitments
to which they freely subscribed into concrete action, a
reluctance that is demonstrated by, among other things,
the continuation of illegal activities contrary to the
spirit of the peace agreement across a large part of the
national territory, including all kinds of trafficking,
the levy of illegal taxes, the creation of obstacles to the
restoration of State institutions and violence against
civilians. In that regard, my delegation condemns the
recent violence perpetrated by armed groups in the
north-west of the country, as well as the attacks on
schools, hospitals, humanitarian personnel and thejoint
patrols of MINUSCA and the Central African Armed
Forces. In its capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic, cote d'Ivoire
notes that those serious acts correspond perfectly to the
designation criteria for persons or armed groups to be
sanctioned, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of resolution 2399 (2018).

However worrying they may be, these challenges
should not overshadow the significant progress that has
been made in operationalizing the peace agreement,
including the creation of mechanisms to promote
the implementation of its relevant provisions. We
were pleased to see the establishment of monitoring
and implementation mechanisms at the national and
regional levels, the inauguration on 15 May of the
executive follow-up committee, the establishment
of a legal framework for the Unites spe'ciales mixtes
de securite and the recent deployment of the Central
African Armed Forces in Kaga Bandoro.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that protecting civilians
is an absolute priority. We therefore encourage the
Government and the signatories to the peace agreement
to continue their efforts to implement the provisions
relating to the Constitution and the operationalization
of the Unites speciales mixtes de securite as quickly
as possible. That should also include implementing
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme and restoring State authority
throughout the national territory.

Besides this, in view of the persistent challenges, it
is urgent that the international community, the friends
of the Central African Republic and the facilitators and
guarantors of the peace agreement, that is, the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central
African States, combine their efforts to achieve the
full implementation of the agreement. In that regard,
we commend the joint mission to Bangui in April of
the African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations aimed at generating international support for
the peace agreement.

Subregional cooperation should also play an active
role in all initiatives to restore peace and stability to
the Central African Republic, through mechanisms
such as the mixed commissions for cooperation among
the States of the region. The mixed commissions have
the advantage of serving as appropriate frameworks for
developing joint solutions to common political, security
and humanitarian challenges. My delegation welcomed
the relaunch on 6 May of the mixed commission for
cooperation between Cameroon and the Central
African Republic.

We want to emphasize the importance of
national ownership, an inclusive peace process and
accountability in the process of emerging from the
crisis, and we therefore commend the creation of
local peace and reconciliation committees. We also
encourage the involvement of civil society, including
women and young people, in the process, in line with
the recommendations of the International Support
Group on the Central African Republic. In that regard,
my delegation is pleased with the start of public
consultations aimed at establishing the truth, justice,
reparations and reconciliation commission, as provided
for in the peace agreement.

Preserving the achievements of the peace
agreement undoubtedly depends on the holding of
peaceful elections in 2020 and 2021. All Central African
political and social actors should contribute to fostering
a peaceful atmosphere, without which free, transparent
and inclusive elections are impossible.

We commend MINUSCA on its important
participation in the Central African Republic peace
efforts, and it should continue to play an active role
with the range of tools at its disposal. In that regard,
we concur with the concerns of the Government of the
Central African Republic and its international partners
about the limited scope of MINUSCA's mandate for
electoral support, and we will be interested to see the
Secretary-General's recommendations on that issue.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate Cote d'Ivoire's
full support for MINUSCA and for President
Touadera, whose commendable efforts, leadership and
determined personal commitment should contribute to
the return of lasting peace and stability in the Central
African Republic.

