Mr. Padilla Tonos (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The people and the Government of the
Dominican Republic would like to express their warm
feelings of solidarity and affection for the Iraqi people,
who have long been deprived of their freedom and
faced uncertainty with regard to their security. The
continued failure on the part of the Iraqi Government
to comply with Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 1441 (2002), has brought the
situation to a critical point, dividing the international
community, including the members of the Security
Council, at a time when, ideally, a concerted decision
could be reached leading to the shared objective of the
complete, effective and peaceful disarmament of Iraq
in strict conformity with the United Nations Charter.

The Security Council is considering a draft
resolution introduced by Spain, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America, which would
reaffirm the need for the full implementation of
resolution 1441 (2002); appeal to Iraq immediately to
take the decisions necessary in the interests of its
people and the region; and establish a deadline by
which Iraq must demonstrate full, unconditional,
immediate and active compliance with its obligations
to disarm, pursuant to resolution 1441 (2002) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The Government of the Dominican Republic
supports that draft resolution because it believes that it
contains valid elements that, when subjected to
thorough analysis and negotiation in the Security
Council, would make it possible for the Council to
reach a consensus decision facilitating a peaceful
resolution of the Iraq crisis in conformity with the
Charter and within a viable and reasonable time-frame,
avoiding the use of force and preventing division in the
United Nations and the international community, which
would be undesirable.

The Dominican Republic also believes that in that
way, we would send the Government of Iraq a united
and definitive message, calling on it to comply
immediately with its overriding obligation to disarm, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, thereby
preventing events from unfolding that might have very
serious consequences for the lives, security and well-
being of the Iraqi people, the people of the region and
the whole of humanity.

The Dominican Republic is a small, profoundly
peace-loving country, and it may be that its views will
not be decisive when the Security Council comes to
take a decision. However, we would like to invite the
members of the Council, in particular the permanent
members, to consider the following reflexion.

Peace embodies one of the most deep-rooted
aspirations of human beings in all parts of the world.
Those involved in war yearn most ardently for peace;
in time of peace, the fear of losing it and the need to
defend and preserve it are most strongly felt. But
genuine peace, as expressed so well by Pope John
XXIII in his famous encyclical Pacem in Terris, must
be based in truth, justice, solidarity and freedom.

Let us not deceive ourselves: the absence of war
does not constitute peace. The Security Council must
face up to its responsibilities. The diplomatic skills that
have been demonstrated here during the Iraq crisis
should be applied not to divide the members but to
arrive at a common decision for the benefit of
international order, peace and the United Nations.

