Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join other
colleagues in welcoming the three Ministers for
Foreign Affairs to this important meeting. I should
also like to thank the briefers from the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) for their account and for the work they
and their teams do on the ground. The United Kingdom
joins others in welcoming this opportunity for the
Security Council to receive an update on the situation
in eastern Ukraine. As other speakers have done, we
also stand in solidarity with the Ukrainian people.

The fighting in eastern Ukraine has continued
unabated since 2014. The Under-Secretary-General set
out some compelling facts about what is happening on
the ground. But, for me, one of the most shocking facts
was that there have been over 100,000 violations of the
ceasefire. That is 100,000 too many, but 100,000 is an
extremely large number. We should just think about
what that really means for the people on the ground.

Not only the conflict but also the resulting
humanitarian situation, as the Assistant Secretary-
General said, and the potential for long-term
environmental damage are among the many reasons
that the topic of Ukraine needs to be on the Council's
agenda and to be repeatedly discussed here. It is notjust
about Ukraine, although that is the subject of today's
meeting. I want to express my agreement with what my
Swedish colleague said about Ukraine, Georgia and the
rules-based international order.

The situation on the ground remains highly
volatile, as we heard. The deterioration in the security
situation along the line of contact in Donetsk serves to

underline the total failure of the latest recommitment to
the ceasefire. Ijoin others in repeating the appeals for
respect for the laws of war. Despite being agreed by the
Trilateral Contact Group on 26 March, it was only 10
minutes before Russian-led forces shelled Avdiivka, and
they did so with weapons proscribed under the Minsk
agreements. I think that demonstrates the complete
disregard that the Russian-backed separatists have for
the ceasefire and for attempts to grant some relief to
the civilian population of eastern Ukraine. I would like
to once again urge all those involved to recommit to
the ceasefire at the Trilateral Contact Group meeting to
take place on 30 May.

The United Kingdom also remains extremely
concerned by the threats posed to civilian infrastructure
and the potential for long-term environmental damage.
Many speakers today highlighted the Donetsk water-
filtration station, and I would like to add our voices to
that point. We are also concerned by the threats from the
separatists to turn off the pumps at the Yunkom mine.
Flooding of the mine risks contaminating the water
table with radiological waste. More generally, I would
like to urge Russia to intervene with the separatists to
avoid actions that would cause environmental damage
and which could have a huge humanitarian impact
on the civilian population for years to come. Support
and respect for the safe zones around key civilian
infrastructure is crucial if we are to prevent further
humanitarian suffering.

And let us not see repeated the past winter, where
despite international humanitarian assistance, as the
Assistant Secretary-General said, food insecurity
doubled from 600,000 to 1.2 million people.

A number of speakers mentioned Crimea. We share
the view that the annexation of Crimea four years ago
by Russia is illegal and in violation of the first principle
of international law. General Assembly resolutions
68/262, 71/205 and 72/190 reaffirm the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine and the absence of
any legal basis to change the status of Crimea. The
resolutions characterize Russia as an occupying
Power. They note the primary responsibility of States
to promote and protect human rights. And they call on
Russia to uphold all of its obligations under applicable
international law. Despite that, Russia continues to
ignore calls in the General Assembly for the Office

of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to visit Crimea, most recently in December
last year.

We heard from the OSCE and the United Nations
how millions of Crimeans remain outside the
monitoring mechanisms of the United Nations, which
means that there is no one who can easily help them. We
call on Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, to uphold the international rules-based system
and respond positively to the General Assembly's calls.

I would now like to turn to Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7. I thank the Dutch Minister for his statement
and for the important role the Dutch are playing, along
with other members of the Joint Investigation Team,
in pursuing justice for the victims and their families.
Of the 298 victims, there were 10 British nationals.
We commend the Joint Investigation Team for its
professional, impartial and independent investigation.

Like other colleagues, my Foreign Secretary is on
record as saying we now have clear evidence that the
missile that brought down Flight MH-l7 belonged to
the Russian Army. The United Kingdom fully supports
the Netherlands and Australia in their request to the
Russian Federation to accept State responsibility for
its part in bringing down Flight MH-l7 and to engage
with them in bilateral negotiations. All States Members
of the United Nations, including Russia, need to fulfil
their obligations under resolution 2166 (2014) to provide
any requested assistance to the investigation.

Since 2014, over 10,300 people have been killed and
25,000 injured in Ukraine. Approximately 3.4 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance,
particularly along the line of contact. There are real risks
of an environmental disaster. If Russia truly cares about
the people of the Donbas, it should end the fighting that
it started, withdraw its military personnel and weapons
and cease support for the separatists, in line with its
obligations under the Minsk agreements. And it should
show political commitment, as Ambassador Apakan
highlighted, to engage constructively and in good faith
in negotiations to deliver long-term peace.

