Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): During our meeting in
May when the momentous resolution 2286 (2016) was
adopted, Ms. Liu said that we should make the resolution
save lives (see S/PV.7685). We could not agree more.
Yet, now in September, we must admit that the goal is
still out of reach. Tragically, Syria is the worst example
of attacks against medical facilities. According to
the World Health Organization, almost every day
hospitals, clinics and ambulances are being targeted in
that country. So far in September there have been two
especially hideous attacks against medical facilities in

Syria: one on a humanitarian convoy, on 19 September,
and another one the very next day on a medical mobile
unit in an opposition-controlled area of Aleppo. This
morning we learned of yet another bombing, that of
two hospitals that provide badly needed services to the
people of eastern Aleppo. Frankly, we are speechless.
We join the call made by other delegations around this
table on the Syrian regime and its Russian ally to stop
these barbaric acts.

In Yemen, medical facilities have also become
a frequent target of airstrikes. Unfortunately, the
situation is not much different in Afghanistan, where
in the past three months alone there have been eight
attacks against health-care facilities.

It is against this appalling backdrop that we must
urgently consider how to make resolution 2286 (2016)
work. In this regard, we took note ofthe recommendation
of the Secretary-General to enhance the protection of
medical and humanitarian personnel.

We would like to emphasize that international
humanitarian and human rights law has sufficient
provisions providing legal protection to medical
and humanitarian personnel and related facilities.
Nevertheless, quite often these provisions are not
respected and are violated by parties to armed conflict.

In that light, we would like to underline the
following recommendations made by the Secretary-
General.

First, there must be enhanced documentation of
acts of violence against medical personnel and facilities
in armed conflict. The collection and public recording
of data on attacks on health services is a key element
in developing an effective preventive system. Thus
we would like to echo the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to Member States that they enhance
their support for United Nations monitoring and data-
collection efforts.

Secondly, we must ensure that independent and
effective investigations are carried out into serious
violations of international law against medical
personnel and facilities in armed conflict.

In this regard, we deem it necessary to hold
Security Council briefings on country situations where
medical care is under attack. Such briefings should,
in our view, include information on the investigative
steps that the relevant Member States have taken. In
addition, the recommendation to the Council on the
possible establishment of international fact-finding
missions or commissions of inquiry deserve our most
careful consideration.
Thirdly, we must ensure accountability for acts of
violence against medical care in armed conflict.

It is of the utmost importance that those responsible
for such war crimes be held accountable. We share the
view that where domestic accountability mechanisms
are insufficient, Member States should cooperate fully
with existing international criminal justice institutions,
including the International Criminal Court, to combat
impunity and to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law.

