The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

We thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
and Mr. Said Djinnit, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, for their briefings,
and commend both of them for their efforts. With
regard to Ms. Zerrougui's briefing, we want to highlight
the ongoing progress and commitment demonstrated
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
through its publication of the voting rolls and the lists
of candidates for the presidential, national legislative
and provincial elections.

We also welcome the efforts to hold transparent,
credible, inclusive and timely elections conducive to
a peaceful transfer of Government. We commend the
Government and the Independent National Electoral
Commission for taking the decision to have the country
finance its elections, which we see as evidence that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is on the right
path and has the capacity to meet this major challenge.
The international community must continue working
with the country in that regard in order to strengthen
the Government's capacity to deal with the various
challenges surrounding the coordination and logistics
for the upcoming elections while respecting its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

We reiterate that the parties must implement
the confidence-building measures enshrined in the
agreement of 31 December 2016, and we once again call
for the agreement's full and complete implementation.
The Government and the opposition must work together
in order to make progress on this. In that regard, we
commend regional organizations and the Special
Envoy for their collaborative assistance in preparing
for the elections, and we encourage them to continue
their cooperation with the Independent National
Electoral Commission.

We condemn the violence perpetrated by the
armed groups in various parts of the country that are
chiefly responsible for the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. We encourage the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to take new measures to put an end to
the threat posed by the armed groups - complying,
as appropriate, with both national and international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law - and with the support
of MONUSCO, within the framework of its mandate.
In that regard, we welcome MONUSCO's efforts and
encourage it to continue its work in coordination
with the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Lastly, we want to express our solidarity with the
victims of the Ebola outbreak, and we commend the
Congolese authorities, the international community,
MONUSCO and the World Health Organization for
their swift response to that humanitarian health crisis.

With regard to Mr. Djinnit's briefing, Bolivia
supports the political initiatives and recommendations
in the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region (S/2018/886). We welcome
the cooperation between Rwanda, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda in repatriating
former combatants and their dependents, as well
as the cooperation between the Congolese forces
and MONUSCO.

We also commend the work of the Special Envoy
and his Office and their efforts to reduce the illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources, which
we consider one of the root causes of the conflicts in
the region and which is why it will be crucial for the
Congolese Administration to bring about structural
change that can stabilize and strengthen the rule of
law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. IfI may
comment on that, the problem is not just the illegal
exploitation or trafficking of natural resources, but
also the immoral distribution of the profits they bring.
As Mr. Djinnit put it so eloquently, it is essentially
a country's own citizens - in this case those of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - who should be
benefiting from those profits.
We also commend the Special Envoy's efforts
regarding cooperation on the judicial, economic and
humanitarian fronts and concerning gender equality
and the empowerment of women. We especially
applaud his role in building trust and in using his
good offices in the region, including his support to
the inter-Burundian dialogue and his chairing of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security of
the Southern African Development Community. We
also commend his role in the ongoing dialogue with the
African Union, among other measures in his purview.

Lastly, we call on the signatories to the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework to focus their
efforts and political will on making progress in its
implementation, by reinforcing confidence-building
measures through strategic partnerships and
strengthening dialogue in close collaboration with
regional and subregional partners.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

