Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I particularly wish to express our thanks for the oral
briefings and written reports from both Tribunals, from
Judge Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte
to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and from Judge Erik Mose and Prosecutor
Hassan Bubacar Jallow of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

Having been present in 1993 and 1994 at the
establishment of both Tribunals by this Council, I
welcome the result, the important work done by both
Tribunals both to ensure that justice is served and to
achieve the goal of national reconciliation within the
territories of their two respective jurisdictions. I also
welcome their important contribution to the
development of international criminal law and
international criminal proceedings applicable to similar
types ofjudicial situations. As could clearly be seen in
the reports and oral briefings, all that work is an
essential contribution to the International Criminal
Court, which is now beginning its enduring work in the
service of the international community.

As some colleagues have said, we are not here to
make long statements, but rather to see how we are
going to ensure that the completion strategies for both
Tribunals can be implemented in accordance with the
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the arrangements established for each Tribunal.
We welcome the fact that both Tribunals have
made undisputable progress in applying their
respective completion strategies.

We note that work has intensified in both
Tribunals, perhaps more so in the ICTR, possibly
because it had been further behind until quite recently.
There has been a considerable increase in the pace of
work done by the judges. We also welcome the fact
that steps are being taken to refer cases of
comparatively lower importance to national
jurisdictions in due time, once those jurisdictions have
been properly prepared to take them on with full
guarantees that justice will be served in accordance
with international norms.

We stress that it is essential that the purpose for
which the Tribunals were established be carried out
effectively. That means that the completion strategies
should not inadvertently become mere exit strategies at
any cost: exit strategies which do not ensure that those
who are most responsible for the serious events which
took place in the Balkans and in Rwanda are brought to
justice. That is an important point for both Tribunals,
but also for the States concerned. We are particularly
concerned by the fact that some countries are not
cooperating fully with the Tribunals. It is thus a
challenge for the Security Council, which should
remain very vigilant and demanding on this point, as
well as for the United Nations and the entire
international community.

My delegation's second general observation is
that both Tribunals should retain their respective
strategies under continued assessment. If need be, they
should be reviewed and adapted as deemed
appropriate, as we note the ICTR has done. The
Council should be informed of any changes that are
made.

Thirdly, and like previous speakers, I wish to
highlight the need for all States Members of the United
Nations to pay their contributions to the budgets of
both Tribunals, fully and on time. We recall and
underscore that those contributions are obligatory
under the United Nations Charter.

In any event, we support the appeals that have
been made to lift the recruitment freeze in both
Tribunals, in particular with respect to posts deemed
essential for the legal work and for the implementation
of the completion strategies. On this point, we propose
that, in addition to receiving reports from each of the
Tribunals, we should also receive periodic reports from
the Secretariat, since the recruitment freeze stems from
the Secretariat. We would like the Secretary-General to
tell the Security Council why that decision was taken,
and why it is not now possible to lift the freeze, either
partially or fully. As we can see, the freeze is
beginning to seriously affect the implementation of the
completion strategies.

We would like also to express our interest in the
ideas that have just been put forward by the German
delegation. First, in order to show its continued interest
in the proper implementation of the Tribunals' statutes
and completion strategies, the Security Council should
continue the mandate of its working group on this
issue. Also, there might be periodic visits to the
headquarters of the Tribunals to provide an opportunity
for more direct and detailed discussions with their
leaders.

In conclusion, I have a few specific questions to
put to the Presidents and, perhaps, the Prosecutors of
the two Tribunals. First, in today's briefings, we heard
no detailed information on measures that the Tribunals
have adopted in order to increase the number of
countries which have agreed to accept those convicted
and sentenced to prison terms, either by signing
agreements for the enforcement of sentences or in
some other way. The Tribunals are invited to do this in
paragraph 8 of resolution 1534 (2004).

We are pleased to note that, as the representative
of the United Kingdom has informed us, an agreement
has just been signed between the United Kingdom and
the ICTY, but we recognize that only a very limited
number of countries have so far agreed to have
sentences carried out in their respective territories. My
country is among them, with respect to the ICTY. We
would like to know more about efforts to increase the
number of countries which have agreed to enforce
sentences in their countries. This is particularly
important as the Tribunals move forward with their
completion strategies.

My second question again refers to both
Tribunals, but more specifically to the ICTY. It relates
to measures that might be taken to maximize continuity
in the participation of ad litem judges, in particular
those who have already been assigned to a Chamber
and who are already dealing with specific cases, so as
to avoid changes in the composition of the Trial
Chambers, which might negatively affect the trying of
cases and hence the completion strategies. Here, I
would like to join the representative of the Philippines
in welcoming the fact that the election of permanent
judges of the ICTY took place well in advance. We
consider that that is a positive factor for the completion
strategy because there is great continuity among the
permanent judges. We wonder whether measures are
being considered to ensure that the same will take
place for the ad litem judges as well.

