Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I would ask you to convey to the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation
our deepest sorrow at the deaths of your compatriots in
the recent air disasters.

France fully endorses the statement to be made
shortly by the representative of the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union.

We express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2004/634) and to Mr. Jean
Arnault, his Special Representative, for his outstanding
briefing this morning.

As we meet today, there is no doubt that we must
consider a number of concerns related to the situation
in Afghanistan. Previous speakers have observed that
the report of the Secretary-General notes that progress
in security-sector reform remains too slow, that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
has been inadequate, that counter-narcotics efforts have
not been as successful as we would have liked, and that
the human rights situation remains poor.

Among such concerns, one must be highlighted:
the deterioration of the security situation in recent
weeks and months. The reasons for this are
undoubtedly many: the increase in factional conflict,
the resurgence of the Taliban and perhaps instances of
major criminality. Whatever the reasons, it is
humanitarian and United Nations personnel who are
the victims of this increased lack of security. Here, we
wish again absolutely to condemn such Violence. A
major international organization has been forced to
withdraw from Afghanistan. We respect its decision. A
discussion about the reasons for its withdrawal has
begun. In my view, the best way to conclude that
discussion would be to pursue the guilty parties with
determination, to arrest them and to bring them to
justice. It is very important that justice be done,
especially in the case of those odious individuals
responsible for crimes against humanitarian personnel
and United Nations staff.

In that context, the Special Representative chose
to underscore the success - even if it is relative
success, it is still very important - in the registration
process and the preparations for the presidential
election. We believe that Mr. Arnault was right, and we
believe that those elements are of great importance for
the following three reasons.

First, as others have said before me, it is clear
that the determination and the courage shown by the
Afghans themselves in carrying out their civic duties
are the best response in the face of cynical and
pessimistic factors that might sometimes prevail in our
analysis. It is clear that it is the resistance of Afghan
men and women to the pressure and violence of those
wanting to stop them from exercising their rights as
citizens that best testifies to the determination of the
Afghan people to emerge from the current situation and
rebuild the country. At the same time, I should note
that what has been done and what is going to be done
are remarkable demonstrations of the technical
capacities and the courage of the United Nations
Mission and other actors that have contributed to this
success.

Secondly, we believe that the manner in which
the registration process has unfolded defines the next
task - an immediate task for the international
community - which is to ensure the proper holding of
the presidential election and, beyond that, the
legislative elections. Naturally, I subscribe to the
comments of the Special Representative and other
speakers on the importance they attach in this context
to creating the best possible security conditions. It is up
to all of us to strengthen our efforts in this sphere.

I note that France, for its part, has enhanced its
military presence in Afghanistan through the
deployment of the European Corps and the Franco-
German brigade. A French general is now at the head
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
We have also increased our staff within ISAF itself. We
have done likewise within the framework of the
coalition, and we are enhancing our efforts in the third
training course for officers of the Afghan army. Our
military personnel will number between 1,000 and
1,500 in coming days.

Finally, a third reason to underline the electoral
process is the great importance of the presidential
election. We believe that with the presidential election
a very important page will be turned in today's
Afghanistan. We believe that these elections will mark
the beginning of the end for those forces attempting to
thwart the progress and the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. We believe it is important to note that a
certain number of efforts and programmes the
international community has undertaken for many
months now - we recognize their limits and know that
they have not had all the impact we would have
wished - will at that time start to have an increasing
impact and to gain increasing traction once this
important page has been turned. That page is quite
simply, as Mr. Arnault said, the page of the
establishment of a legitimate order that Afghans have
accepted in order to take charge of their country.

In conclusion, my country enthusiastically
supports the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jean Arnault. We believe that he has been
a messenger of hope today. We are confident that this
hope will come to fruition if the international
community as a whole continues to rally together and
mobilize its assistance of Afghanistan.

