Mr. Lamani (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I should
like to thank you sincerely, Mr. President, for allowing us
to speak in this debate.

Having heard the complete, detailed report presented
this morning by Mr. Prendergast, we feel deep anguish at
the suffering of the Afghan people, which is living in
such a difficult situation because of the exacerbation and
continuation of fighting between the warring parties -
fighting that goes hand in hand with the deterioration of
living conditions, loss of human lives, destruction of
goods, poverty and famine prevailing in all parts of
Afghanistan, in addition to forced mass displacements,

 

violations of human rights and discrimination against
women.

The Conference of the Council of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, held from 28 June to 1 July 1999 in
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, reaffirmed that there can be
no military solution to the Afghan crisis. In resolution
26/11 S, paragraph 4, the Council invited the Afghan
parties to refrain from using force and to resume the path
of dialogue. The same resolution, in paragraph 2,
emphasized the importance of resuming negotiations
without delay and without preconditions under the auspices
of the United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) with a View to establishing a
representative, multi-ethnic government on a broadened
basis.

The continuation of war and the worsening of fighting
are undoubtedly fuelled by the supply of weapons and
military equipment to the warring parties. The United
Nations and the OIC have reaffirmed in many resolutions
the need to put an end to the flow of arms in Afghanistan
and the need to refrain from intervening in the internal
situation in Afghanistan.

Furthermore, the Ouagadougou conference reaffirmed
the importance of strict respect for the principle of non-
interference in Afghanistan and that the main responsibility
for a peaceful settlement resides with the Afghan people
themselves.

Nonetheless, the crisis, which is characterized by
instability and a growing culture of drugs and their
export, has become a major source of concern to the
international community.

I would like to reaffirm the importance of supporting
initiatives aimed at finding a peaceful solution. The OIC
and its Secretary-General are prepared to support every
effort to put an end to this tragedy. We await the day
when harmony, reconciliation and unity will prevail so
that the Afghan people can develop its resources and
direct its energies towards the reconstruction of the
country and its economic and social development.

Before concluding, I would like to commend the
constant efforts of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations. We also commend the tireless and sincere efforts
of Mr. Brahimi, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Afghanistan. I had the honour of
accompanying him on one of his missions. May God give
him good health and a prompt recovery.

It will not be easy to have Afghanistan emerge from
its crisis. This necessarily will involve respect for local,
regional and international commitments, as well as all
relevant resolutions.

