Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We thank him as well for always
being as objective as possible. We understand how
difficult the job is. I believe this must be said, although
it might sound trite.

Let me start by expressing our deepest sorrow and
sympathy in connection with the loss of lives in the
recent outbreak of violence. We recall with appreciation
the statement issued by the Secretary-General, who
called on both sides to refrain from taking any action
that would further escalate the situation. Violence must
be condemned and also, as the Secretary-General said:

"The sanctity of religious sites should be respected
as places for reflection, not violence".

This sentiment was also echoed by the Quartet,
which, in its statement of 22 July, noted the particular
sensitivities surrounding the holy sites in Jerusalem and
the need to ensure security, thus encouraging Israel and
Jordan to work together to uphold the status quo. We
are pleased that all concerned seem to have played their
role in reducing the prevailing tension, and one hopes
the situation will continue to be controlled. However,
the danger should not be understated.

All this makes it self-evident that unless the
underlying problems are solved peacefully, the kinds
of reactions that took place over the past week are
likely to happen again and again, eventually getting
to a point of no return. That is why preserving the
possibility of finding a solution through the two-State
formula is absolutely critical. There is no other viable
option. All arguments to the contrary are unrealistic
and inconsistent with a firm commitment to seek a just
and democratic solution to the problem.

It is indeed unfortunate that the outbreak of violence
in Jerusalem overshadowed some of the modest but
positive steps taken recently, which have the potential
to de-escalate tensions and contribute to advancing
understanding between Israelis and Palestinians. Here I
am referring to the agreement recently signed between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority, which the Special
Coordinator mentioned earlier, to increase the electricity
supply to J enin. This is in addition to another agreement
signed between the two sides that deals with addressing
the issue of the water supply. It is positive developments
such as this that demonstrate that the two sides can
indeed cooperate, giving us reason not to lose hope
in the quest for a lasting solution to the long-standing
dispute between Israelis and Palestinians. These two
very hard-working and intelligent peoples, who have,
as the Special Coordinator said, an inextricably linked
history cannot allow peace and the possibility ofliving
side by side as equals to elude them. This is our hope.

We welcome the meeting of the Middle East Quartet
that took place on 13 January aimed at discussing
current efforts to advance Middle East peace as well as
the deteriorating situation in Gaza. We believe that the
continuous engagement of the Quartet with Israelis and
Palestinians as well as other key regional stakeholders
is absolutely essential to efforts to resolve the crisis.
As far as the Israeli-Palestinian dispute is concerned,
Ethiopia's position has always been very clear. As much
as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace and
security, we also support the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and the right
of Palestine to exist as a free and independent State.

Let me reiterate that we think that the goal of two
States living side by side in peace and security is the
only viable option to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute. Any obstacle to this goal should be addressed
so as to pave the way for progress in the peace talks.
While it is the parties that should show the flexibility
to engage in direct and meaningful negotiations so as to
reach a final settlement on all issues, we believe that the
international community, and particularly the Council,
should help and encourage the two sides to do so. It
is in this context that we support the initiatives that
have been under way to facilitate negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians with a view to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution. The efforts
of the Middle East Quartet and its road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative as well as the efforts of countries within
and outside the Council are very much appreciated and
should be encouraged to continue.

