On behalf of the three African countries that are members of the Security Council - namely, Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1), I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary- General for Peace Operations, very sincerely for his excellent presentation and sustained commitment to stabilizing the situation in the Sahel. We welcome and thank Mr. Ismael Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania, current Chair of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), for the honour he has bestowed upon us in taking part in the work of the Council today. The recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/373) highlights the security challenges posed by armed terrorist groups within the G-5 Sahel States, which are among the most economically challenged in the world. These have placed a burden on our populations, increasing the number of internally displaced persons to an alarming 1.4 million. The number of people in need of humanitarian assistance has also rocketed to 14.7 million. We express our grave concern at these trends and underscore the additional resources required to alleviate the conditions of those in need. In addition to those factors, the effects of climate change, particularly on pastoral activity essential to local economies, and of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic could further aggravate the already precarious situation of the populations of the Sahel. We deplore the fact that terrorist groups in the Sahel have ignored the Secretary- General's call for a humanitarian truce and sought instead to take advantage of the pandemic by continuing their murderous attacks and propaganda. It is undeniable that since the last report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/868), the security situation in the Sahel has deteriorated. The increasing asymmetrical attacks by armed terrorist groups have indiscriminately affected our defence and security forces and allied forces such as Operation Barkhane, as well, unfortunately, as our civilian populations, primarily women and children. In the face of this unprecedented violence, the G-5 Sahel countries, devoting between 15 per cent and 30 per cent of their budget to the defence sector, have pursued their dedicated efforts to eradicate terrorism with the unwavering support of their partners. Thanks to those efforts, on 3 March, as indicated in the report, the Joint Force freed six hostages following a particularly complex operation. That clearly demonstrated the military capacity of the Force and the tenacity and dedication of its soldiers. Additionally, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has been active in many red zones and carried out successful operations, either on its own or with the support of Operation Barkhane, depending on their nature. We welcome the fact that the complex situation prevailing in the Lake Chad region has improved significantly thanks to the excellent results of Operation Colere de Bohoma, led by the Chadian army, whose Commander-in-Chief, President Idriss Deby Itno, was on the battlefield himself. At the same time, the security arrangements of the G-5 Sahel have been strengthened with the recent establishment in Niamey, the Niger, of the joint command mechanism for all forces operating in the Liptako-Gourma triangle and the extension of the area of intervention of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force from 50 kilometres to 100 kilometres on both sides of the State borders. The three African members of the Council, together with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, appreciate the efforts of the international community and, in particular, those of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in support of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. The fight against terrorism has thereby been strengthened, in particular with the launch of the Coalition for the Sahel at the Pau summit on 13 January, and the prospect of the start of operations by Task Force Takuba, in which European special forces will be engaged. In this context, we also recall the communique of the African Union Peace and Security Council, issued at its 920th meeting, which welcomed the collaborative efforts towards realizing the deployment of 3,000 troops to the Sahel for six months. We likewise welcome the continued determination of the Economic Community of West African States and the West African Economic and Monetary Union to combat terrorism and achieve peace, security and stability in the Sahel. This showcases the resilience and resolve of regional organizations on issues affecting their member States. We call on the international community to intensify its support for the fight against terrorism by strengthening the military capabilities of the G-5 Sahel States, assisting with the restoration of State presence and authority in areas under terrorist threat and also by supporting economic and social development efforts in the affected areas. We wish to reiterate the legitimate request, often expressed by the G-5 Sahel States, that the Joint Force be placed under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. That would undoubtedly bolster the efforts of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, as well as regional and continental efforts, and strengthen the impetus for the fight against terrorism in the Sahel. We are encouraged by the fact that despite the multiple challenges faced by the Joint Force, efforts have been made by the G-5 Sahel States to advance the women and peace and security agenda by agreeing to adopt a gender-sensitive approach to force-generation efforts, which is a clear recognition of the need for the greater participation of women in operations. In that context, we call on the relevant United Nations agencies, in particular UN-Women, and the international community to provide the support necessary to optimize those efforts. Keeping the issue of the Sahel high on the international agenda is of the utmost importance, even more so as we face this unprecedented COVID-19 crisis. As was recalled during the fourth extraordinary session of the Conference of Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, held on 15 December 2019, it is important that a Marshall Plan be put in place to support development actions in the Sahel. As we approach the renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA, which is closely linked with the operations of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, the A3+1 cherish the hope that this renewal will strengthen the framework of that cooperation in a practical and sustainable manner. It is against that background that the A3+1 is of the view that emphasis should be placed on optimizing the current support mechanism so that it reaches the Joint Force's battalions with fewer constraints while strengthening its capacities and competencies. Complete operational support should be provided to the Joint Force, both tactically and strategically. In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm here the firm commitment of the G-5 Sahel States to respect for international human rights law and international humanitarian law as well as the commitment to their implementation of the human rights and international humanitarian law compliance framework. The fight against terrorism, whether in the Sahel or elsewhere, should not place a burden on civilian populations or be a source of additional fear for them. On the contrary, it should free them from the grip of criminal terrorists, whose attacks caused more than 4,000 deaths in 2019 alone in the region. In the pursuit of this asymmetrical war, if, unfortunately, doubts and suspicions of abuses or inappropriate behaviour are noted with regard to the civilian population, everything should be done, with professionalism and determination, to identify the perpetrators of such acts and bring them to justice. The effectiveness of our response in our common fight against terrorism in the Sahel lies in our ability to develop a robust, coherent and integrated strategy to address the security, humanitarian and development challenges.
