Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to address the Security
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

Since my last briefing to the Security Council, on
24 August last year (see S/PV.8031), there have been
several important developments in the country. The
situation in Guinea-Bissau is rapidly evolving, and the
PBC is following it closely.

At the most recent Summit of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), held
in Abuja on 16 December, the Heads of State and
Government gave a 30-day deadline for political actors
of Guinea-Bissau to implement the Conakry Agreement.
The situation was discussed again by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the African Union,
held in Addis Ababa on 27 January, in the context of its
thirtieth ordinary session.

After 15 months as Head of Government, Prime
Minister Umaro Sissoco Embalo tendered his
resignation to President Jose' Mario Vaz, who accepted
it on 16 January. On 31 January, Artur Da Silva took
office as the new Prime Minister. The Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Togo, Robert Dussey, led two
ECOWAS missions to Bissau this year. On 1 February,
the ECOWAS mission issued a final communique
stating that the nomination of a Prime Minister by
consensus, as determined by the Conakry Agreement,
had not taken place and that the ECOWAS Commission
would start applying sanctions against those who
create obstacles to a political solution. On 4 February,
ECOWAS issued a decision listing 19 names that will
be subject to sanctions, consisting of the exclusion
from the activities of the community, a travel ban, and
the freezing of assets of the sanctioned persons and
their families.

The Guinea-Bissau configuration is actively
engaged in following the situation in Guinea-Bissau and
in providing support for the country through different
initiatives. I am also in permanent contact with the
Brazilian Ambassador in Bissau, who maintains
excellent relations with national authorities, political
actors and United Nations representatives. I would
remind Council members that Brazil was one of the
first countries to recognize Guinea-Bissau in 1974. In
that same year we opened an embassy in Bissau.

In 2017, I organized a working breakfast with
the members of the PBC and four ambassador-level
meetings of the Guinea-Bissau configuration. We
issued three press statements last year on the situation
in the country. I also briefed the Security Council on
two occasions, on 14 February (see S/PV. 7883) and on
24 August.

Between 25 and 28 July 2017, I conducted my
first visit to Bissau in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration. I met many political
actors, including President Jose Mario Vaz, then-Prime
Minister Sissoco, a number of ministers, members
of all parties in the Parliament, and representatives
of the United Nations. On my return, I stopped in
Lisbon, where I met with the Executive Secretary of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
Ms. Maria do Carmo Silveira.

On 15 December 2017, the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) approved six new projects for Guinea-Bissau,
totalling $7 million, to be implemented between January
2018 and June 2019. These projects are designed to help
stabilize the country by providing support to the media
and the justice sector, as well as support for national
reconciliation efforts and the participation of young
people and women in peacebuilding and in politics. The
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC discussed and

supported these projects in a meeting held in November
last year.

The PBC will continue to support Guinea-Bissau
not only through the PBF, but also through consultations
with different partners, including the World Bank
and other international financial institutions. In this
context, I am planning a visit to Washington in the
coming weeks in order to talk to representatives of the
World Bank about possibilities for cooperation with
Guinea-Bissau.

On Monday, 12 February, I convened a meeting
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC to
discuss the most recent developments in the country.
On that occasion, we heard a briefing from the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs and Head of the
Department of Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his presence there. It was a positive sign
of engagement and trust in the role of the PBC. It also
showed his commitment to contributing to a solution to
the current impasse in Guinea-Bissau.

During that meeting, the participants had the
opportunity to discuss the recent developments in the
country, including the decision of ECOWAS to impose
sanctions. They underlined the need for dialogue
and mentioned the role of the region, including the
importance of the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement. Member States also commended the
work of the PBF in Guinea-Bissau. Many participants
stressed the relevance of respecting the constitutional
framework in organizing elections. Member States
welcomed the non-involvement of the armed forces in
the political crisis. Many delegations mentioned the
positive presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau (ECOMIB). Delegations also supported the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS),
which is expected to happen by the end of this month,
and underlined the importance of the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Modibo Toure.

Finally, I also would like to inform the Council that
it is my intention to visit Guinea-Bissau in the coming
months to consult with a broad range of stakeholders
on how the PBC can support peacebuilding efforts in
the country and help the political actors find a solution
to the current impasse. The exact date of the visit will
depend on developments on the ground and will be
scheduled in consultation with local authorities.

I would like to recall that Brazil is currently the
Chair of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP). As was done when I previously
briefed the Council, the CPLP has endorsed my remarks.

I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming that the PBC will continue to make every
effort to support Guinea-Bissau and I would like to
outline the following recommendations in that regard.
I reiterate the support of the configuration for the
Bissau six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement
as the framework for the resolution of the crisis. I call
upon the authorities of Guinea-Bissau and key political
actors to show leadership and determination by engaging
in actions that would lead to the implementation
of those agreements. I take note of the efforts of the
region to resolve the political impasse in the country. I
stress the importance of holding free and fair elections,
in accordance with the Constitution of Guinea-
Bissau, and call upon the international community
to support that process. I underline the importance
of renewing the mandate of UNIOGBIS for another
year, as recommended by the Secretary-General. I also
recognize the effective, preventive and deterrent role of
ECOMIB. Finally, I would like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo
Toure, for his efforts to help ensure an enabling political
environment in the country.

