Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Allow me, first of all, to
express my appreciation for the comprehensive
briefing provided by the Secretariat on the situation in
Bougainville. Japan is very pleased to note that, in the
period since the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville was reorganized into the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) last
December, the Mission has continued its activities in
an efficient and effective manner. Let me also take this
opportunity to say that we highly appreciate the
positive role that Ambassador Noel Sinclair played as
the head of the United Nations Mission in Bougainville
until the end of February this year.

The Bougainville peace process has entered its
final and most critical stage, both politically and
militarily. The current tasks are to formulate the
Bougainville constitution and to collect and destroy
weapons. We understand that the constitutional
Commission is currently working on the constitution's
final draft. It is our hope that the Commission will be
able to finalize its work quickly and report to the
Government of Papua New Guinea with a view to the
Government's speedy endorsement of the draft
Constitution.

Japan welcomes the report that, through the
voluntary cooperation of the people of Bougainville,
80 per cent of collected weapons have already been
destroyed. We are somewhat worried, however, about
the report that a considerable number of weapons were
recently stolen from a Government weapons repository.
Although we understand that such a theft is an
exceptional occurrence, we wish to express our hope
that the weapons disposal work will be completed
expeditiously so that there will be no recurrence of that
kind of unfortunate incident.

My Government would also like to emphasize
that, as the expiration date of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville is
fast approaching, it is essential for the people of
Bougainville to exercise their ownership by
accelerating the peace process. On that point, we have
been pleased at how positively the people of
Bougainville have responded to the work of weapons
disposal. Japan, for its part, intends to continue to
extend the bilateral assistance in the areas of education,
public health and transportation infrastructure that it
began to carry out last October. It is our hope that that
bilateral assistance will improve daily life and
strengthen the economy so that the people of
Bougainville will be able to stand on their own feet.

The mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville is scheduled to expire at the
end of June. For the sake of the consolidation of peace
in Bougainville, we are fully aware of the necessity of
a long-term commitment, including economic
development assistance on the part of the international
community. At the same time, however, Japan
maintains the position that the mandate of any United
Nations political mission should be limited to the
period deemed necessary to complete the mission's
assigned goals. We therefore strongly hope that, in the
period between now and the end of June, UNOMB will
further intensify its work so that it will be able to fulfil
its mission as completely as possible in the time
remaining.

