Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
presentation and the United States Ambassador for his
briefing. I should also like to welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of Iraq.

Today, Iraq continues to face immense political,
security, humanitarian and economic challenges that
carry considerable risk, both for the region and for the
international community as a whole.
I should like to address four points. The first
concerns violence. As noted in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/266), the number of violent

08-3196]
incidents increased once again during the first quarter
of 2008, despite a number of improvements at the end
of 2007. Violence remains at an excessively high level
and is maintaining insecurity and a deteriorated
humanitarian situation. The 2.5 million internally
displaced persons are a particularly fragile population
exposed to violence, and they must be immediately
assisted in coping with it.

The conditions for the return of the 2 million
refugees will also depend on the improvement of
security conditions throughout the country. In that
connection, we commend the actions of the
neighbouring States that have received a number of
them. France will continue to play its part in
international efforts, particularly through its
contribution to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

The recent fighting in Basra and its environs has
been a source of great concern. France, like the
Secretary-General, believes that all actors concerned
must maintain the current decrease in violence and
must avoid any provocation. The legitimate objective
of a monopoly on legitimate violence by the sovereign
Iraqi State can be attained only in a peaceful manner,
through dialogue and cooperation.

France is convinced that improvement in the
security situation also depends on progress made at the
political level. It is urgent that the relaunching of the
political dialogue and national reconciliation process
be translated into action. Of course, it is primarily up
to the Iraqis to define, in a spirit of openness, an
equitable sharing of power and resources, which are
conditions for a return to civil peace. Major legislation
such as the law on hydrocarbons and electoral reform
must be adopted without delay. Likewise, the
constitutional review process must be effectively
implemented. France fully supports the actions of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
to contribute to that process.

At the national level, France has proposed, if the
Iraqis consider it useful, hosting a meeting for all Iraqi
officials who feel that there is a need to relaunch the
political dialogue in a neutral setting far from the
pressures on the ground and with the broadest possible
participation. As Bernard Kouchner indicated during
the recent Kuwait conference, such an exercise could
certainly take place within the framework of the French
presidency of the European Union.

However - and this is my third point - the
neighbouring States also have an important role to
play. The conference held in Kuwait on 22 April made
it possible to highlight the importance of the
neighbouring-country process, which France fully
supports. It is essential that every neighbouring State
show a sincere will to contribute to the return of
stability in Iraq. France believes that the current
momentum must be followed up by specific decisions,
tangible measures and constructive commitments. The
restoration of normalcy thus depends on the presence
of diplomatic missions in Baghdad. Likewise, any
direct or indirect intervention by a neighbouring
country in Iraq can only lead to greater instability and
risks for all. Here again, UNAMI's efforts to create an
ad hoc mechanism to support the neighbouring-country
process, under the auspices of the Iraqi Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, are fully supported by France.

France also wishes to welcome the first results
achieved on the ground by UNAMI, thanks in large
part to the personal commitment of Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, whom we commend for his courage,
perseverance and effectiveness. This effort must be
supported in the various areas covered by the Mission's
mandate. In addition to the aforementioned topics, I am
thinking of the difficult issues of disputed internal
borders and the implementation of article 140 of the
Iraqi constitution, regarding which UNAMI's patient
efforts have already made some progress possible. I am
also thinking of UNAMI's election-related activities.
As emphasized by the Secretary-General, it is
important that the Independent High Electoral
Commission receive all the support it needs from the
Iraqi authorities. Finally, I am thinking of UNAMI's
activities aimed at the promotion of and respect for
human rights in Iraq, in particular with regard to
detainees. France and the European Union will
continue to assist in unifying the rule of law in Iraq,
which could contribute to the full and complete
implementation of human rights.

In conclusion, I would recall that France is also
involved on a bilateral basis in the political and
humanitarian areas and in cooperation in the fields of
governance, health, education and training. France has
opened an embassy office in Erbil and plans to open
another in the south of the country when security
conditions permit. We are planning to develop a chain
of medical treatment facilities. We wish to be present
in Iraq wherever security conditions enable us to be,
using local intermediaries if necessary. The French
Minister for Foreign Affairs has shared his intention to
pay another visit to Iraq. Thus we shall accompany the
diverse Iraqi people on the path of peace, which they
deserve after so many years of difficulties.

