Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I join others in thanking
Lithuania for organizing this important Security Council
meeting. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General and his team for his report
(S/2015/289) and the analysis and recommendations
contained therein. I would also like to align Slovenia
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union and add that we support the early
adoption of the draft resolution on the subject of small
arms prepared by the Lithuanian presidency.

The Secretary-General's report identifies the
widespread availability of small arms and light
weapons as a key enabler of conflicts around the world.
Today, we are aware that the illicit trade in small arms
has a wide range of humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences that pose a serious threat to peace, safety,
security, stability and sustainable development in the
affected societies. In many cases, vulnerable social
groups - mainly women, girls and children - suffer
disproportionately owing to the attendant acts of
armed violence. The main reason for that is the illicit
trafficking in and, consequently, the wide availability
of small arms and light weapons.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights
the importance of the recent combined presence of
and linkages between transnational organized crime,
terrorism and violent extremism. In our view, today's
debate should try to answer at least two fundamental
questions. First, what should we, the States Members
of the United Nations, do to improve the present, dire
situation, and secondly, what should the Security
Council and the United Nations do in that regard? The
Secretary-General's report rightly outlines our key
task, one that we should undertake domestically. We
should include national export-control mechanisms and
stockpile management, ensure the physical protection
of arms and ammunition, notably of surplus stockpiles,
and adopt national practices aimed at the systematic
marking of small arms and light weapons, which should
enable the international tracing of those weapons.

In that context, I would mention the particular role
that we assign to dialogue with the armaments industry.
In most cases, the arms industry tries to behave as
all legitimate businesses do: they try to provide new
employment, invest in development and pay taxes. That
is especially important in times of social and economic
crisis, which we still witness. However, in our view, the
sensitization of and constant dialogue with the industry
is necessary. Producers need to take their share of
the responsibility and adopt so-called knowing-my-
customer policies. That is why Slovenia actively
supports the inclusion of industry representatives
among the participants in the first Conference of States
Parties of the Arms Trade Treaty, which is scheduled to
take place in late August in Mexico.

States that are in a position to do so should financially
support international projects relating to security-
sector reform; the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of fighters; and the destruction of small
arms and light weapons. We encourage and would
like to commend the activities of Conflict Armament
Research, a non-governmental organization that is
implementing a project called iTrace, with the support
of the European Union. Member States should also
adopt proper legislation and, above all, ratify the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) and the United Nations Firearms
Protocol. The ATT is an important international
instrument that we have at our disposal. Unfortunately,
only 67 States have become parties to the Treaty. The
universalization of the ATT is an important task for our
generation. A universal and fully implemented ATT is
the first prerequisite for preventing the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. Slovenia counts on the
three main international producers of small arms and
light weapons to accede to the ATT as soon as possible.

Internationally, we should also do more to avoid

duplication, making use of the synergies among the
various existing international processes in the field of
small arms and light weapons that take place within the
framework of the United Nations Arms Trade Treaty
and the United Nations Firearms Protocol. The first
opportunity for such a new approach will be the meeting
of the experts of the States participating in the review
process of the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will
take place in a few weeks here in New York.

That brings me to the second question. What can
the Security Council do to improve the situation? We
could not agree more with the proposal in the Secretary-
General's report stating that more attention should be
paid to the various sanctions regimes and international
embargoes adopted by the Security Council and to
streamlining them effectively in their implementation.
We also support the proposal to widen the mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping missions and add small
arms-related tasks.

In conclusion, I would like to underline Slovenia's
commitment to doing more to prevent the illicit
international transfers of small arms and light weapons.
I have no doubt that other delegations share our
commitment. Now it is time for the Security Council
to act and start leading the way forward. It is not a
question of what we should do, but rather what should
be our priority. What we need is a strong commitment
and political will to start working together effectively.

