Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Yesterday, a
demarcation line was drawn between war and peace in the
former Yugoslavia. After four years of bloody conflict,
which have inflicted immense suffering on the people of
the region, on a scale unparalleled in Europe since the
Second World War, we are finally poised to embark on
a new and promising stage in the unfolding peace
process.

We welcome the initialling in Dayton, Ohio, of the
General Framework for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and would like to pay a warm tribute to all those who
have directly and indirectly contributed to the efforts in
bringing peace to the territories of the former Yugoslavia.
It is due to their unfailing determination to sustain their
endeavours even in the face of difficult challenges that
the talks in Dayton came to a successful conclusion.

While the Agreement constitutes a milestone in the
efforts towards the attainment of a comprehensive peace
in the former Yugoslavia, it is to be recognized that the
solution to the conflict as agreed in Dayton is perhaps
less than what fairness and justice require. This is
especially true in view of the fact that some of the basic

 

elements contained in the Agreement reflect a virtual
recognition of the gains and losses as a consequence of the
war. We should be under no illusion that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the real victim of the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia.

That being said, it is our fervent hope that the parties
will make the Agreement work and that this Agreement will
lead to the achievement of the ultimate goal not only of
preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single State under
international law, but also of preserving the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as one nation.

The Council has before it today two draft resolutions
on the termination of the arms embargo and the suspension
of sanctions imposed by the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is incumbent upon the Council to decide
urgently on these two draft resolutions, which form part of
the overall agreement reached in Dayton.

Over the past four years, the delegation of Indonesia
has consistently called on the Security Council to
pronounce itself unequivocally on the non-applicability of
Security Council resolution 713 (1991) to the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The arms embargo imposed in
1991 on the former Yugoslavia had the unintended effect of
freezing the advantage in weapons in favour of the Bosnian
Serbs, who ruthlessly exploited it with harrowing
consequences in human life and suffering. The Government
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was thus
effectively denied its right to defend itself as enshrined in
the Charter. We therefore decided to join in sponsoring the
draft resolution on the termination of the arms embargo
imposed by Security Council resolution 713 (1991).

The tragic conflict in the former Yugoslavia cannot be
expected to provide an infallible general thesis on the
complex relationship between war and peace, between
diplomacy and warfare or even between swords and
ploughshares. But there are sufficient grounds to believe
that stark military imbalance in favour of the Bosnian Serbs
has helped to sustain their aggression and that the recent
revitalization of the peace process cannot be entirely
detached from the noticeably more determined response by
the international community to Bosnian Serb violations of
Security Council resolutions. It is therefore imperative to
ensure that such conditions of sharp military imbalances,
which have been so destabilizing in the past, are not
allowed to repeat themselves.

However, military balance or parity is clearly
something more complex than an objective or quantitative
fact. More often than not, perceptions and mental
constructs bear most heavily on a State's assessment of
the absence or existence of military balance. We are
familiar with the Vicious cycle of insecurity and arms
build-up generated by worst case scenarios of each other's
intentions and capabilities. The international community
must therefore seek to encourage mutual confidence and
trust among the parties concerned in the former
Yugoslavia. We have also come to appreciate that
long-term stability can only be realized through
confidence-building measures rather than by a massive
arms build-up undertaken to compensate for perceived
vulnerability and insecurity. In this regard, we note the
commitment of the parties set out in Annex lB
(Agreement on Regional Stabilization) of the Peace
Agreement, including the arms control agreement
contained therein, and hope that this instrument will
contribute toward peace and security in the region.
We are sensitive to the inherent limitations of
sanctions as an instrument to maintain or restore
international security. Nevertheless, as regards the
situation in the former Yugoslavia, it is our view that the
Council has succeeded in clearly defining the objectives
of the application of sanctions. The sanctions imposed by
the Security Council were not punitive measures designed
to inflict hardship and pain on the people of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, but were intended to encourage
the Government in Belgrade to modify its policy by
playing a constructive role in the peace process
commensurate with its influence in the region.

My delegation believes that the sanctions imposed
on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have contributed
to its adoption of a more realistic and balanced approach
to the peace talks. Rather than remaining peripheral to the
important considerations involved in the peace process, its
Government became far more actively engaged, as
demonstrated by its constructive input during negotiation
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The delegation of Indonesia welcomes the positive
role which the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has
recently played in the peace process and hence deems it
appropriate for the Council to suspend the sanctions
imposed against it. At the same time, however, we would
like to emphasize that the continuation of the suspension
of sanctions is contingent upon the fulfilment by the
authorities in Belgrade and by the Bosnian Serbs of their
obligations under the Peace Agreement. With regard to
the provisions contained in the draft resolution relating to

 

funds and assets frozen or impounded by the Security
Council resolutions, my delegation would like to underscore
the need for caution. It is our view that funds or assets
should not be unfrozen prematurely, inasmuch as such hasty
action may preempt a consensual agreement among the
successor States as to the disposition of such funds and
assets.

While my delegation is optimistic that the peace
process has the potential to lead towards meaningful
progress as a consequence of the agreements reached in
Dayton, we are also cognizant of the myriad challenges and
difficulties that flow from these agreements. Clearly,
various aspects of the agreements reached in Dayton still
require the Council's urgent and careful consideration
aimed at securing decisions which not only meet the
challenges and tasks emanating from the field, but are also
consistent with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.
With specific reference to the proposed international
force to implement the peace accord (IFOR), we feel that
the legitimacy and credibility as well as the ultimate
success of this force will, to a large extent, be influenced
by the process or manner by which the Council reaches its
ultimate decisions. Transparency, consultation and
consensus should be the minimum criteria in guiding these
critical and urgent decisions of the Council. We are
confident that through such a participatory process, the
decisions reached by the Council, including those relating
to the mandate and composition of the prospective IFOR,
will enjoy the level of support necessary for its success.

It is my delegation's view that the Security Council
should be fully exposed to all ongoing deliberations on the
subject of the formation of IFOR by being informed of
such discussions and, above all, by being directly involved
in this process at the earliest stage of the policy conception
and formulation. In this way, at the appropriate time, the
Council will be sufficiently prepared to engage its full
potential in future deliberations directed towards reaching
a decision on IFOR following the conclusion of a peace
agreement among the parties concerned.

Before concluding, I should like to convey my
delegation's fervent hope that the historic outcome of the
talks in Dayton and the subsequent formal signing of a
comprehensive settlement will usher in a new era, one
which would allow the healing process to begin, so that the
people of the region will be able to resume peaceful, secure
and productive lives.

In the light of these considerations, my delegation
will vote in favour of the two draft resolutions before the
Security Council. We expect that the adoption of these
draft resolutions will make a positive contribution to the
ongoing peace process by affirming the Council's
readiness to fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter in
an expeditious and effective manner.

