United Nations [Original: French] Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement of the European Union and with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security. Despite the significant progress made at the political level and on the ground, sexual violence in conflict persists. We cannot condone that. As the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/487) underlines, we must act very specifically on behalf of survivors to prevent sexual violence and make their needs the focus of our commitment. We must also tackle the structural root causes that perpetuate and fuel such violence. In that context, combating impunity and strengthening the access of survivors to justice and reparations are priorities. To give a voice to the victims, in March 2019 Her Royal Highness Grand Duchess Maria Teresa of Luxembourg invited some 40 survivors of sexual violence to Luxembourg to testify at the international conference Stand Speak Rise Up to End Sexual Violence in Fragile Environments. It was the first international event of its kind to focus on the plight of survivors. Luxembourg will continue its commitment both politically and in the context of its development cooperation and humanitarian action. In 2019, we allocated more than €13.2 million to the fight against sexual and gender-based violence. Luxembourg supported Dr. Mukwege's Panzi Hospital in the Democratic Republic of Congo. We also financed the construction of a regional centre for the medical and psychosocial care of women victims of violence, particularly sexual violence, in Senegal's Casamance region. We are a long-standing partner of Justice Rapid Response, and we have supported the work of the International Center for Transitional Justice in Colombia and Tunisia for several years. In 2020, Luxembourg continues to support the activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross to combat sexual violence, particularly by funding a research project on the prevention of sexual violence. As part of the implementation of the women and peace and security national action plan 2018-2023, Luxembourg is also co-financing a capacity-building project that focuses on gender, which is being implemented by NATO in Jordan. Luxembourg is convinced that the fight against sexual violence cannot succeed in a vacuum. It must be part of an integrated policy to combat gender inequalities and gender-based discrimination. In the context of its feminist foreign policy, Luxembourg applies a multidimensional approach to combating sexual and gender-based violence, based on the promotion of gender equality, the empowerment of women and the defence of human rights. In that context, we attach particular importance to the protection and promotion of sexual and reproductive health and rights, which are also an essential component of the survivor-centred approach. In its foreign policy, Luxembourg will continue to be committed to universal access to health and well-being in accordance with Sustainable Development Goal 3, including access to quality and comprehensive health services, information and widespread and affordable sexual and reproductive health education. We deeply regret the challenges to sexual and reproductive health and rights in multilateral forums. We must make every effort to overcome the restrictions on access to sexual and reproductive health care in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Both those issues risk having devastating consequences for women and girls and causing an unprecedented setback for women's rights in our time. In such situations of crisis and fragility, women and girls are even more vulnerable to the impact of sexual violence, necessitating prevention and awareness-raising efforts. Members can count on our commitment, and we count on the commitment of the Security Council to heeding the call of survivors and preventing sexual violence.
