Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank the Under
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for their respective briefings.

We would also like to add our voice in condemning
in the strongest terms the incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence against women near Bentiu, and
we call for the perpetrators of those egregious crimes to
be held to account as a matter of urgency. We hope that
the expressed commitments of the parties to combating
sexual and gender-based Violence will be translated
into action by conducting a thorough investigation into
the incidents.

The prolonged conflict in South Sudan has brought
about huge devastation in the country and exacerbated
the already dire humanitarian situation and the economy
there. Pondering over who to blame or dwelling on the
failures of past attempts to bring about peace will not
get South Sudan out of the quagmire it is in or bring a
sigh of relief to its people, who have suffered so much
for far too long. As the Secretary-General has rightly
pointed out in his 90-day report,

"the Revitalized Agreement provides an
unparalleled opportunity to end the conflict in
South Sudan" (S/2018/1103, para. 71).

It was concerted regional efforts and the dedication
of the parties to turning the tide that led to the signing
of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. That is
exactly why we have been stressing for quite some time
and reiterate once more before we finish our tenure on
the Council, that all of our collective efforts should be
directed towards ensuring the full implementation of
this revised Agreement.

We truly appreciate - in fact, we are extremely
grateful for - the steadfastness of the African Union
and the United Nations, including at the highest
leadership level, to work hand in hand with the region in
order to resolve the conflict. We have been advocating
throughout our tenure on the Council for the three
organizations to maintain their unity of purpose in the
search for lasting peace in South Sudan, and we would
be the first to affirm that the progress achieved so far in
the peace process would not have been possible without
that generous support. Maintaining that unity of purpose
still remains vital during the post-revitalization period.
The support of the two organizations should be extended
to the implementation of the revised Agreement as well.

It is unfortunate that the same cannot be said of
the Security Council. In recent memory the Council
did not heed the call of the region protesting the
timing of the imposition of an arms embargo on South
Sudan. We have all heard, either directly or indirectly,
including from the Secretariat, the repercussions of that
unfortunate timing. Yet again, the Council failed to
pronounce itself on the revised peace agreement. That
is very regrettable, and we have not seen a valid reason
for that. Ironically, the Council's members are the first
to demand its implementation and ask the region to do
more. That raises the question how it can be reasonable
for an entity to fiercely advocate the implementation of
an agreement when that entity did not go the extra mile
in welcoming the agreement in the first place.

Of course, we understand that there may have been
doubts among Council members with regard to the
commitment of the parties to the implementation of the
agreement, but being a bystander is not the solution. We
believe that the Security Council has a particular role
to play in supporting the implementation of the revised
peace agreement. The Intergovernmental Authority
on Development summit requested the support of the
Council with regard to ensuring the full deployment of
the Regional Protection Force and a further review of
its mandate so that it might be in a better position to
support the implementation of the revised agreement.
We still hope that the Council will respond positively
to that request.

As I said earlier, I would like to make it clear that
it was mainly the determination of the parties to be
flexible and accommodate one another that led to the
signing of the peace agreement. The positive trends
and developments that followed the peace agreement
have further strengthened our faith in the parties and
encouraged us to redouble our efforts in supporting
them to fully implement the revised agreement. We are
also encouraged by the confidence-building measures
being taken by the parties. However, time is not on
our side. The parties should accelerate their efforts so
as to compensate for the time lost. By implementing
the pre-transitional period tasks, as stipulated in the
peace agreement, the implementation matrix would
lay the foundations for a successful transitional period.
The longer the pre-transitional period, the smaller
the chances will be of making meaningful progress.
We hope that the parties will stay committed to the
agreement signed, and we encourage them to do so.

In conclusion, ensuring the further reduction of
conflict and the total cessation of hostilities is critically
important. That will facilitate the unhindered delivery
of much-needed humanitarian assistance. The parties
need to prioritize the implementation of the permanent
ceasefire on the cessation of hostilities, the protection
of civilians and humanitarian access. The restoration
of a permanent ceasefire is essential for unhindered
access to the affected population and the safety of
humanitarian personnel and aid delivery.

