Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I welcome the honourable
President of the International Residual Mechanism of
the Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor Meron, as well as
its Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz, and I thank them
for today's briefings on the work of the Mechanism. At
the outset, let me express our gratitude to and praise for
Judge Meron for all he has accomplished as President
of the Mechanism, and prior to that at the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would
also like to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius on his
appointment as President of the Mechanism as of
19 January 2019 and wish him every success in his
future endeavours.

Croatia fully supports the Mechanism in its mission
to bring to justice the most prominent perpetrators
of the horrible crimes committed during the 19905 in
the territory of the former Yugoslavia. A significant
number of Victims and their families still have not
received long-awaited justice, and we hope that the
work of the Mechanism will contribute to that. It is
therefore important to avoid any delays or setbacks
in the implementation of the Mechanism's mandate.
Croatia has not hesitated to do its part in ensuring
accountability. Many trials have been completed to
date and some are still ongoing. However, there are
war crimes cases that have not been fully investigated
or prosecuted yet. We owe it to the victims of those
atrocities to leave no judicial stone unturned. Croatia
thus continues to investigate and prosecute war crimes
committed in its territory since 1991 onwards.

At the same time, Croatia continues to pay great
attention to the remaining cases before the Mechanism.
They are of the utmost importance to the legacy of
accountability for aggression against Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the last decade of twentieth
century. We expect all ofthem to be completed within a
reasonable period of time, without any delays.

When it comes to the efficiency and time
management of proceedings, the work of ICTY, which
closed its doors a year ago, is not the best case to follow.
The Residual Mechanism must draw the necessary
lessons from the ICTY's shortcomings and ensure the
steady and unimpeded progress of all its proceedings.

The Mechanism's functions are clearly defined
and include the tracking and prosecution of remaining
fugitives, appeals proceedings, review proceedings,
retrials, trials for contempt and false testimony,
monitoring cases referred to national jurisdictions, the
protection of victims and witnesses, the supervision
of the enforcement of sentences, assistance to national
jurisdictions upon request, and the preservation and
management of archives. These are important tasks and
Croatia extends all its support to Mechanism's efforts
to meet them in full. At the same time, we expect the
Prosecutor, in fulfilling his functions, to focus squarely
on cases and tasks assigned to him by the Mechanism's
agenda and mandate.

Cooperation with the Mechanism, as previously
with the ICTY, as well as regional cooperation among
the States concerned pertaining to war crimes issues,
have no alternative. Croatia also attaches great
importance to continued constructive cooperation
with other States of the region. Nonetheless, it has to
be emphasized that meaningful regional cooperation is
not a one-way street. It requires trust among the States
concerned and goes hand in hand with the willingness
and sincere commitment of all States to prosecute war
crimes, without any double standards or exemptions
in relation to their nationals or members of certain
national groups.

We are deeply concerned over the spreading
practice of denial of past wrongdoings throughout
the region. That revisionism goes hand in hand with
the glorification of war criminals and the crimes
committed. All of this evokes the traumas of the past
and has destructive effects on the stability of the region.

The issue of missing persons remains at the top
of our agenda, with many cases remaining unsolved.
Cooperation among States of the region is a necessary
precondition for the successful completion of the
process of clarifying the fate of missing persons and
providing relief to their families. Certain small steps
forward have been made, but much more needs to be
done, and there is not one justified reason to delay the
identification of a thorough solution to this problem.
Serbia still shows no readiness to open its archives,
which would be a crucial step forward. We welcome
the role of the Mechanism in supporting the search
for missing persons, and in this regard we note the
cooperation established between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the International Committee of the Red
Cross following their recent signature of a memorandum
of understanding.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate, as I
have on many occasion before, that Croatia remains
firmly committed to development of good relations
and cooperation with neighbouring States, and we
strongly support their aspirations towards the European
Union, based on strict and full compliance with the
membership conditions.
