Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and your team
on New Zealand's assumption of the presidency of the
Council, and I wish you every success in this function.
I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson and Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
for their statements.

Chad welcomes the organization of this meeting
to commemorate the Srebrenica massacre and to pay
tribute to the victims. We express our solidarity with
the survivors and encourage the efforts at reconciliation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In July 1995, more than 8,000 Muslim men and
adolescents were massacred in three days in Srebrenica
during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, even though
the town had been declared a safe area by the United
Nations and a contingent of Blue Helmets was present
there. We should recall that the atrocity in Srebrenica
is the worst massacre committed in Europe since the
Second World War, and has been described as genocide
by international courts. The victims at Srebrenica
were targeted because of their identity, and the men
were brutally separated from the women and children
before being transported to previously chosen sites to
be coldly and methodically massacred in full view of
the whole world.

Those massacres weigh on our collective conscience
and will always do so. The international community
bears a crushing responsibility because of its silence
and refusal to act in the face of the atrocities. Even
today, the circumstances under which the population
of Srebrenica in the safe area was abandoned remain
unclear. It is important that we make an effort at
remembrance so that the truth can be established. We
therefore welcome the efforts of the Netherlands, which
has investigated the behaviour of its battalions during
the Srebrenica massacre and published several reports.

The genocide in Srebrenica, carried out less than a
year after that owaandan Tutsis in 1994, seriously calls
into question the tools at the international community's
disposal and its capacity to react to the precursors
of mass crimes. While the genocide in Rwanda in
1994 failed to draw the attention of the international
community, we must also note with regret that the world
also remained passive in the face of the preparations
for the Srebrenica genocide. This is an opportunity for
the whole international community to reflect on the
lessons to be learned from one of the darkest moments
in history, and to reaffirm its determination to prevent
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. The
international community should therefore continuously
assess the effectiveness of the tools at its disposal
and should put prevention at the heart of its efforts to
identify situations that could result in mass crimes.

The situation in Bosnia remains delicate, and
tensions between the communities are high. Lasting
peace and reconciliation in the country depend on
impartial justice for victims and their relatives.
Justice must be done to heal wounds and reconcile a
shattered society. We therefore welcome the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and encourage it to pursue and complete
its mandate. It is of course the responsibility of the
State concerned to continue and intensify its efforts
to promote and consolidate the momentum of national
peace and reconciliation.

We understand the dilemmas of cultural diversity
from our own experience, and we therefore encourage
the spirit of tolerance, the acceptance of differences
and respect for diversity. Of necessity, reconciliation
depends on recognizing the pain and suffering of
the victims of genocide. We therefore encourage the
implementation of measures designed to build mutual
trust with a view to genuine national reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence in the region.

The continuous commemoration of genocide and
the establishment of such memorials as the one at
Potocari are also important to the process. The only way
in which the horrors of the past will not be forgotten is
to commemorate them regularly so that they are never
repeated. Chad therefore voted in favour of the draft
resolution (S/2015/508) that was just put to the vote, but
which failed due to the veto of a permanent member. We
profoundly regret the use of the veto in circumstances
as sensitive as those having to do with combating mass
crimes, even though the draft resolution did no more
than set the genocide in its historical context, without
accusing by name any party whatsoever.

In conclusion, we believe that the responsibility to
protect must be reflected in substantive measures to
prevent the most serious crimes by learning the lessons
of the genocides in Rwanda and Srebrenica, to which the
international community responded with indifference.
Learning those lessons will require a greater sense
of responsibility, commitment and reactivity in the
prevention of mass crimes. Only strong determination
and a common willingness to fight together against
crimes of genocide and grave violations of human
rights will allow us to break with the past.

Humanitarian organizations also have an important
role to play in prevention, through awareness-raising. In
that regard, we would like to pay a well-earned tribute
to the humanitarian organizations present in Srebrenica
in 1995 for the assistance they gave to the population,
their condemnation of the forced displacement and their
calls of alarm regarding the possibility of massacres,
which were unfortunately not heeded. We hope that
those events will never be repeated.

