Mr. Annabi: The progress report of the
Secretary-General, which was issued on 29 November,
is before members of the Council.

The work of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) continues to be
based on its mandate implementation plan, which is a
consolidated strategic and operational framework for
the completion of UNMIBH's core mandate by the end
of 2002. Members of the Council will recall that this
plan was presented to the Council last year in an earlier
report of the Secretary-General and that it was also
made available by Mr. Jacques Klein, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, when he last
appeared before the Council a few weeks ago. This
plan identifies the objectives of the Mission and the
programmes and modalities to achieve these objectives.
The original tasks contained in the plan have been
refined into 66 specific projects. Of these, 43 have now
been completed and 23 are still ongoing. The report
provides the necessary details on this and perhaps
demonstrates that UNMIBH is well on track to
complete its core mandate by December 2002.

At the same time, important political and
operational challenges still lie ahead. Some of
UNMIBH's projects - for example, removing police
officers on the basis of their wartime record - face
political opposition. The legislation for the police
commissioner project is still opposed by nationalist
parties, mainly in Croat-dominated cantons. Voluntary
redeployment of minority police officers remains slow
and difficult. Continued support by the Security
Council and Member States that have special influence
with the parties, as well as by the High Representative
on the ground, will continue to be essential for
UNMIBH's success.
Some of UNMIBH's projects, such as the State
Border Service or the training of riot control units,
depend on securing additional financial assistance.
Donor assistance in this area remains badly needed,
although I understand that the recent bilateral donors
conference in Sarajevo made some progress in this
regard.

In addition, not all projects contained in the
mission implementation plan will have been fully
completed by the end of 2002, since they were
designed to establish ongoing mechanisms and
structures, such as those for minority recruitment or for
inter-entity and regional police cooperation. These
structures will require nurturing in a post-UNMIBH
setting. There will therefore still be a need for
continued monitoring and assistance in order to
preserve what has been achieved by the United Nations
over the past six years.

Given the many commitments that the United
Nations is facing, the Secretary-General believes that
perhaps regional actors should assume responsibility
for a follow-up mission, which should have the
capacity to preserve UNMIBH's accomplishments and
to bring to fruition those ongoing projects that will
have been left by UNMIBH. On the basis of the
experience we have gained and the lessons we have
learned - not only in Bosnia but also in Kosovo and
East Timor - we believe that it would be desirable for
such a mission to combine under one roof
responsibilities for the police, judiciary and penal
system. Our assessment is that this task could be
carried out by a smaller mission of approximately one
quarter of UNMIBH's present staff, including about
450 police officers.

We welcome the initial steps and assessments
made by the High Representative, the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in planning a post-UNMIBH international
police monitoring presence. The Special Representative
is cooperating fully with these organizations. UNMIBH
has provided them with its expertise and institutional
knowledge in order to facilitate their task, and
UNMIBH is ready to work very closely with the
organization that will assume the responsibility for the
post-UNMIBH period.

This issue is being discussed at the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board meeting,
which is taking place in Brussels as we speak. We hope
there will be more clarity on this matter in the near
future. This would be important in order to ensure
timely planning and a smooth and seamless transition
to a follow-on mission. We will, of course, keep the
Security Council fully informed of these developments.

