Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): My delegation associates itself with previous
speakers in thanking you, Madame, on convening this
meeting on cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations.

Having heard the briefing of Baroness Ashton,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union, whom I welcome, my
delegation wishes once again to stress the very
important role of the European Union in achieving the
objectives of the United Nations, in particular with
regard to international peace and security. In her
briefing, Baroness Ashton highlighted a number of
issues of topical interest in the field of peace and
security. I wish to address four of those issues: the
Sudan, Haiti, the Middle East - in particular the
question of Palestine - and Somalia.

Turning first to the Sudan, I congratulate the
countries of the European Union on their assistance to
United Nations efforts to restore peace and stability in
that country through their contribution to the work of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and to the
successful holding of the referendum on Southern
Sudan. We remain convinced that the establishment of
the new State of Southern Sudan will enjoy the
significant support of the European Union in meeting
the many challenges ahead.

Turning to Haiti, we commend the European
Union's support of the Haitian Government, especially
with regard to its efforts following the earthquake of
January 2010. We are confident that it will pursue its
efforts to help that country to rebuild itself
economically and to strengthen its institutions.

With regard to the Middle East, and more
specifically the Palestinian question, we commend the
European Union's involvement, in the framework of
the Quartet, in relaunching direct Palestinian-Israeli
talks to find a lasting negotiated solution to a conflict
that has persisted too long. The recent meeting held in
Munich, over which Baroness Ashton personally
presided, clearly demonstrates the consistent
commitment of the European Union to peace in the
Middle East and to the creation of a Palestinian State,
which we, too, call for wholeheartedly. I am delighted
by the similar views of the European Union and Gabon
on that issue. We call on the European Union also to
continue its support to the Palestinian Authority.

I cannot fail to mention the European Union's
efforts in Somalia, specifically with regard to
increasing the capacity of the African Union Mission
and of Somali security and defence forces. We also
share the European Union's views with regard to
addressing the issue of piracy off the Somali coast,
namely, that the approach to settling this issue must
take into account the general situation prevailing on the
ground.

In conclusion, Gabon would once again like to
welcome the role of the European Union in the work of
the United Nations in its pursuit of peace, justice and
well-being in the world.

