Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
It is with a great deal of interest and pleasure, Sir, that
we are participating in the debate that brings us
together here today, at your initiative. We thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and also thank the
President of the World Bank and the President and
Chief Executive Officer of Siemens, as well as our
colleagues, the President of the Economic and Social
Council and the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group for African Countries emerging from conflict,
for their statements, which have enhanced our
discussion.

It is a good idea for the international community,
through discussions such as this one, to analyse in
depth the kind of guidelines it has engaged in for the
role of business in crises and conflict. We have already,
as I have mentioned, a doctrine, a body of regulations
and principles contained in declarations, resolutions
and actions undertaken by international institutions. I
am thinking of what has been done in the case of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
by the International Labour Organization and the
Group of Eight industrialized democracies, what has
been done in the context of the European Union's
Green Book, what the World Bank is doing - these
activities are all most laudable. I am also thinking of
the Global Compact that the Secretary-General
initiated in 1999 and which he referred to this morning.

As for the Security Council, it too has taken into
account in several aspects, the role of private business
in the outbreak of conflicts as well as in conflict
management. This is quite natural because there is a
political economy of conflicts that makes up - even if
it is rarely explicit - the underpinning for many of the
decisions we take.

I refer, concerning the action undertaken by the
Security Council, to everything that was done by the

panels of experts which have made a great contribution
to highlighting the illegal exploitation of natural
resources as a critical factor in certain conflicts. I am
also thinking of various sanctions regimes, targeted
sanctions and embargoes, in particular the arms
embargoes established by our Council. Very often they
are designed to deprive those who would make profits
from conflict of the fruit of their evil work. Finally, I
am thinking of the fruitful cooperation that has been
established to clean up the diamond trade through the
Kimberley Process.

It seems to me, however, that all of these
measures - and this is why I am gratified by this
debate - are scattered and that, for the most part, they
respond on a case-by-case basis. Therefore, we must
ask ourselves whether we need to go farther and how
do we go farther.

To the question of whether we need to take
further steps my delegation answers in the affirmative,
because, as has been widely emphasized during this
debate, there is crucial interaction between economic
factors and crisis situations. We can try to go farther, as
was stated this morning, with regard to conflict
prevention, conflict management and post-conflict
situations. I believe - and this was also stated this
morning - that it is also in the interest of businesses
themselves to become involved in actions designed to
maintain or re-establish stability and the rule of law
and to assist States to find the road to sustainable
development. I think too that we need to bear in
mind - and here I am referring in particular to what is
taking place in West Africa - that the economy of
conflicts in Africa right now most often takes on a
regional nature.

If it is necessary to go farther, the question is,
how do we move on? My delegation would like to
associate itself with what has already been said in
contributing to our thinking, as much with regard to
conflict prevention as to conflict management and post-
conflict situations.

Regarding conflict prevention, I was most
impressed by what was said by the President of the
World Bank. I can only share his sentiments that giving
hope to people is the best way to avoid conflicts - to
give them work, to give them opportunities, he said. I
am most gratified to see the President of the World
Bank here today in the Council. I think that in a great
number of situations that are basically prevention and
post-conflict situations, there is the possibility for
significant cooperation between us and the Bretton
Woods institutions.

The Secretary-General's 1999 Global Compact
initiative, I think, is precisely along these lines. If
business shows respect for major international
standards in the area of human rights, international
labour law, non-involvement in the illegal exploitation
of natural resources or the illicit trafficking in
weapons, then that cannot but contribute to the healthy
economy and resources of a country and prevent crisis
situations.

Regarding conflict management, I have two
comments to make. The first is about an element that I
find of increasing concern, one concerning which we
cannot remain idle here. This is the development of
resorting to private operators in the implementation of
actions linked to peacekeeping, including security
issues, that classically are the responsibility of States. I
consider that that practice is sometimes excessive or
uncontrollable.

The second point I wanted to make regarding
conflict management is that it is up to the States - and
perhaps they do not all do this efficiently in accordance
with the provisions of the resolutions of the Security
Council - to take appropriate measures to ensure that
individuals in business act in accordance with the
embargoes enforced. We have a series of resolutions
imposing embargoes that are being flouted. States must
act to ensure that embargoes are respected.

Regarding post-conflict situations, the President
of Siemens referred first to security among the five
factors that are necessary for private business to be
able to intervene. It is clear; it is a matter of common
sense, and we note it daily here. It is important to
involve enterprises from the private sector in steps
undertaken in post-conflict reconstruction processes, in
particular through promoting certain international
norms in the public sectors of the countries involved,
and more generally through the economic restructuring
of those countries, including, as appropriate, activities
sponsored by multinational corporations - as is
planned, I believe, by the OECD. Finally, and more
specifically, private enterprises can help in the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or reintegration programmes.

I think that it is clear to everyone that for the
States involved in post-crisis situations it is extremely
important to develop a framework which is favourable
to the development of business and the local private
sector. Here, international organizations, in particular
United Nations agencies and the Bretton Woods
institutions, can and should make their contribution to
the synergy between political stabilization, economic
recovery and the strengthening of State structure in
post-conflict situations.

I was wondering what the priorities should be for
the Security Council today. It seems to me that first,
beyond mechanisms to monitor the implementation of
sanctions, it would be timely for the Council to
systematize its approach for taking into account
economic factors in conflict zones and crisis situations.
I wonder whether the means to do that should not be
the establishment of a mechanism using independent
experts with a mission to monitor the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and the role of illicit
trafficking in fuelling conflicts.

I think that the Security Council should, on a
daily basis, be extremely attentive to the mandate of
the peacekeeping operations and should in a systematic
fashion try to break the link which we see in many
crisis situations in illicit trafficking, in particular in
drugs and organized crime, bad governance, and
therefore the dislocation of those political systems
designed to ensure civil peace and prosperity. I think
that progress is now being made in drawing up our
mandates, and we should continue to act to those ends.
To sum up, these proposals for action perhaps
could contribute to the development of a global
partnership between the world of the private economy
and those organs which, in the United Nations, are
working for peace and security. In any case, we await
with interest the report of the inter-agency group
established by the Secretary-General that we heard
about earlier. My delegation is ready to consider
follow-up action that the Council could carry out
within the framework of its competence.

