Mr. Corr (Ireland): It is an honour, Sir, to have
you chair this meeting of the Council this morning. It is
also a reflection of the commitment of Norway to
Africa, in particular the Horn of Africa.

On behalf of my delegation, I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the leadership of
Ambassador Kolby during the Council mission to
Eritrea and Ethiopia, and to thank him and all his
colleagues in the Norwegian delegation. Ambassador
Kolby's wise approach, skill and dedication in leading
the mission, and in conveying to both parties the views
of the Council at this important juncture, were greatly
appreciated by all members of the mission.

I would also like to thank everyone in the
Secretariat who was involved, including in the
Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, and everyone in the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) for
their work in support of the mission. Finally, it is also
right to thank the leadership of both Governments for
their hospitality and support throughout the mission.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement that Spain will make shortly on behalf of the
European Union. The report of the Council mission
makes a number of observations that Ambassador
Kolby detailed earlier, and my delegation fully
supports all the observations and recommendations in
the report. Therefore, I would like to focus on just a
few points.

During the mission, it was quite clear from our
meetings with political and religious leaders, the
United Nations country teams, representatives of the
World Bank and civil society and non-governmental
organizations in both countries that the focus must now
turn towards the future, including the long-term
economic development of both Ethiopia and Eritrea.
For far too long, both countries have suffered from
food insecurity and underdevelopment. In addition to
the immediate suffering brought about by conflict, the
war absorbed meagre national resources, with
devastating impact on the populations of both
countries.

The fact that both Governments have committed
themselves to putting that past behind them, to building
a peaceful future through implementation of the
determination of the Boundary Commission and to
focusing on the pressing humanitarian and
development needs of their people is to be strongly
commended. It is our sincere hope that both parties
may see beyond their current differences to the myriad
advantages that neighbourly relations offer the
respective peoples, particularly in the border areas,
where normal life cannot be suspended indefinitely.
These two peoples and these two countries have
suffered enough. Wisdom is now putting their past
divisions behind them.

It is quite clear that the determination of the
Boundary Commission should be implemented quickly,
in a coordinated and orderly fashion. When signing the
Algiers Agreements, both parties rightly recognized the
assistance that the United Nations can offer in that
process. We strongly encourage both parties to
cooperate fully with UNMEE in developing, as quickly
as possible, a common understanding of the steps to be
taken and to elaborate the appropriate institutional
arrangements to ensure that stability prevails and that
further human suffering is minimized. In so doing, we
strongly urge them to accord maximum cooperation to
UNMEE, particularly regarding the security
arrangements. Clearly, it will be important that the
separation of forces, as achieved by the Temporary
Security Zone, continue. We encourage the
international community to take on its corresponding
obligations to support and encourage that process.

It is widely recognized that the demarcation
process will require a massive demining effort. While
primary responsibility for this task lies with the parties,
we would support the Secretary-General's considering
what practical role UNMEE could play to expedite this
work. After all, it is clear under the Algiers Agreement
that UNMEE's mandate will not be completed until
such time as demarcation is complete. Ireland is
prepared to consider any recommendations regarding
the UNMEE mandate that implementation of the
Boundary Commission decision will necessitate.

We warmly commend the dedication of the men
and women working with UNMEE and their
contribution to the peace process. In particular, I would
like to emphasize Ireland's full support for the untiring
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Legwaila, and the Force Commander, and
we encourage the parties to cooperate fully with them
in the coming period.

Finally, I would like to reaffirm Ireland's support
for and friendship with both Eritrea and Ethiopia. The
presence of more than 200 Irish troops at UNMEE and
our long-term commitment to development in the
region illustrate our confidence that both parties will
take this historic opportunity to turn away from a
difficult past and work together towards a better future
for their peoples.

