Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): The
subregion of West Africa has been threatened by
destabilization and is at a crossroads. Three United
Nations peacekeeping operations are presently
deployed, which shows the extent to which the Security
Council is concerned with the conflict situation in the
subregion. Through managing crises in the subregion,
elements of cross-border instability have progressively
been revealed. In looking at the scope of those
phenomena, there is no doubt that they threaten the
efforts being made to re-establish peace and security in
West Africa.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made on behalf of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ghana. We welcome him in our midst and
would like to say how pleased we are to see him
participating in today's debate.

The report before us enumerates a number of
relevant recommendations on the essential matters,
particularly three cross-border problems that are the
major problems - namely, the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, the phenomenon of child
soldiers and mercenaries, and the matter of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana and the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS have given us details
on those issues, so I will confine myself to making a
few observations.

The report stipulates correctly that the cross-
border problems which have been studied are more
symptomatic than causal in defining the reasons for the
cycle of conflict in the subregion. Therefore, while we
are pleased that those questions are being addressed
subregionally, we would like to emphasize that some of
their causes also have a subregional aspect. Suffice it to
recall that most of the countries in the subregion
belong to the group of least developed countries.
Focusing those recommendations on symptoms,
therefore, narrows the possibility of making long-
lasting reforms and restoring peace and security in
West Africa. We insist on that aspect because the
proliferation and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, the proliferation of militia and civilian armed
groups, the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
cross-border crime and drug trafficking, and the
phenomena of mercenaries and child soldiers are all
interlinked; all of those plagues can trace their origins
to underdevelopment and even to non-development.
Those plagues are links in the chain of the
destructuring of our States and the tearing apart of the
social fabric of our societies. Their origins can also be
traced to the weakening of the capacities of our States
to manage their internal contradictions, which every
society must do. They reveal the relative loss,
according to each particular case, of initiative and of
the ownership of the State's own ability to make its
own laws and comply with them, and to provide basic
social services to their populations.

As a result, we see a weakening and sometimes a
loss of the sense of belonging on the part of those
impoverished and now marginalized communities in a
context where competition for control of scarce
resources and power is becoming more bitter.

Therefore, we must focus particular attention on
those aspects in upcoming reports in order to make a
better linkage between peace and development. The
dynamics needed to implement the report's
recommendations also imply the strengthening of
coordination and collaboration between the
representative of the Secretary-General in the
subregion and the Executive Secretary of ECOWAS.

It is necessary for the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa to work together with ECOWAS in order to
effectively implement the Moratorium on weapons and
build the institutional and legislative capacities of the
States in the region in order to implement the
provisions of the Moratorium nationally.

It is also necessary for us to strengthen the
logistical capacity of ECOWAS in re-establishing
peace, security and stability in the subregion so that the
States concerned will be enabled to return to their
initial raison d'etre - development and subregional
economic integration.

In addition to the observations just made, the
assessment presented to the Council in the report is
revealing of the greater awareness by the Secretary-
General of the urgency of the situation and the need to
act. The United Nations and many developmental
partners have deployed substantial efforts to bring
peace and stability to West Africa. We would like to
recognize those contributions and to call for
implementation of a multidimensional strategy so that
we can hope to succeed where ad hoc actions or
country-level actions have not given us the hoped for
results.

Along those lines, we share the vision whereby
three areas of responsibility must be clearly established
in order to create conditions conducive to the
emergence of a synergy. We would also like to insist on
the importance we need to attach to harmonizing the
policies of DDR at the subregional level, on the other
hand, and to assuring adequate financing of those
programmes on the other, integrating them more fully
with the element of children.

Given that this report will not be the last one, we
would recommend, finally, that subregional
organizations and the Governments of the subregion be
consulted more widely during the process of report-
writing in the future so that the content of these reports
may be enriched and their scope broadened. We also
hope that this will provide an opportunity to offer
recommendations for consolidating peace and for the
post-conflict phase in the subregion.

