Mr. Jallow: The past six months have been a
period of sustained and intense work at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in
furtherance of the completion of trial and other
activities. During this period, the Office of the
Prosecutor has been able to prepare and present the
trials of six new cases and to complete the prosecution
phase of the trials in all but one of these cases. A guilty
plea was also successfully concluded in the Michel
Bagaragaza case and received the endorsement of the
Trial Chamber.

Over the same period, the Office of the
Prosecutor has had to prepare and file two final appeals
and three interlocutory appeals. It has also had to
respond to four final appeals and eight interlocutory
appeals filed by the defence. This is in addition to the
preparation of two motions for additional evidence and
responses to nine such motions in the Appeals
Chamber. Three final appeals were also argued, with
judgement delivered in one of them and pending in the
other two.

As the President has indicated, two new arrests of
indictees were made. Gre'goire Ndahimana was arrested
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in a joint
operation of the ICTR, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) in
August. Idelphonse Nizeyimana, a leading fugitive
earmarked for trial at the ICTR, was arrested in
Uganda in October 2009. I would like to record our
appreciation to the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda, as well as to
MONUC, for their cooperation, which made these
arrests possible.

With such continued tripartite cooperation among
MONUC, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the ICTR, we are optimistic that several fugitives still
sheltering in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can be apprehended and brought to justice and that
their arrests will contribute significantly to the
restoration of peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region.

However, I regret to report that there has been no
progress in the matter of cooperation by Kenya in
relation to the case of Fe'licien Kabuga. Repeated
requests to the Government of Kenya for details of
Kabuga's reported departure from that country have
gone unanswered for the past 12 months. This situation
should not be allowed to continue. This Council has,
by its resolution 1503 (2003), called on Kenya to
cooperate with the ICTR to ensure the arrest and
transfer of Kabuga to the Tribunal for trial. Kenya
should be required to comply with its legal obligations
under the United Nations Charter, and international law
generally, to give full cooperation to the ICTR and to
comply with these requests. In the event that this
situation continues in the weeks ahead, my Office will
seriously consider the option of initiating the process
for the formal referral of Kenya to the Security Council
under article 28 of the statute of the Tribunal for
non-cooperation with the ICTR.

The fifth Colloquium of Prosecutors of
International Criminal Tribunals, which I referred to in
my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6134), was
successfully hosted by the Office of the Prosecutor of
the Tribunal in November in Kigali, Rwanda. It gave
the prosecutors of all the international tribunals who
participated in it an opportunity to share experiences as
well as lessons learned and to consult further on ways
in which the process of fighting impunity through the
enforcement of international criminal law can be
further enhanced. The Colloquium adopted the Kigali

Declaration on international criminal justice, which
will be circulated to all Member States. In the
declaration, inter alia, the Prosecutors called upon all
States to take the necessary measures to vest their
national and regional judicial systems with the capacity
and jurisdiction to prosecute or extradite those
suspected of international crimes and to provide full
cooperation to all international criminal tribunals, in
particular with regard to the enforcement of orders and
requests for assistance.

In the months that lie ahead, my Office will focus
its efforts on several fronts. Trial readiness
preparations are already in progress in respect of the
two recent arrestees, namely, Gregoire Ndahimana and
Idelphonse Nizeyimana, whose cases are set for trial in
2010. My Office will also be attending to the
conclusion of eight partly heard cases, some of which
commenced in the past six months. We anticipate that,
by the end of 2010, the trials of all current detainees,
save the two new arrestees, will have been concluded.

We are also optimistic that the intensification of
tracking efforts and greater State cooperation may
yield positive results with regard to the apprehension
and transfer to the ICTR of the remaining 11 fugitives.
Three of those fugitives have been earmarked for trial
at the ICTR or by the residual mechanism, and the
remaining eight for referral to national jurisdictions.
The prospects for referral to a national jurisdiction
following any further arrests will largely determine the
conclusion of the Tribunal's trial phase under the
completion strategy. At this stage, it would be helpful,
and indeed necessary, for the Security Council to
continue to remind Member States of their legal
obligations of cooperation in respect of fugitives.

In the absence of other States willing to accept
cases from the ICTR for trial, our efforts with regard to
the referral of cases to national jurisdictions continue
to focus on Rwanda. As I reported the last time we met
with the Security Council, Rwanda has undertaken
considerable law reform in the justice sector that, if
combined with appropriate capacity building measures,
should be sufficient to enable my Office to renew its
requests for referral of cases to that country.

Since our last report to the Council, the Tribunal
has provided training to the staff of the new Rwanda
witness protection service. Some donors have agreed to
provide the necessary resources to make the service
and the video link system operational before the end of

2009. Those measures should take care of the concerns
related to witness protection and provide an alternative
for the taking of evidence from those witnesses who
are reluctant to travel to Rwanda to testify. Once those
capacity-building measures are implemented, I propose
to file new applications, early in 2010, for the referral
of the cases of eight of the 11 fugitives to Rwanda for
trial.

Cooperation between the ICTR and national
prosecuting and national judicial authorities has
intensified significantly since the holding of a joint
forum with such authorities in November 2008 at the
ICTR. The authorities of several such States are now
actively engaged in the investigation and prosecution
of international crimes, in particular those connected
with the Rwandan genocide of 1994. Those authorities
require, and have benefited from, significant
assistance, in particular evidence from the ICTR, in
that process. In the past 12 months, my Office has
received requests for assistance from 13 countries with
regard to 44 targets under investigation by national
authorities. We have serviced those requests by, among
other things, providing information from, and access
to, our evidentiary database and the records of other
organs of the Tribunal.

The sharing of information and evidence with
national authorities will continue to be a major element
of our work, not only now but beyond completion and
even under a residual mechanism. Combating
international crimes requires an effective partnership
between the Tribunals and national authorities. Access
by such authorities to the vast databases of the
Tribunals is indispensable for such a partnership. We
shall continue to attend to requests for cooperation
from States with all due diligence. In that respect, we
welcome and commend Canadian authorities for the
recently concluded successful prosecution in Canada of
the first case of genocide in relation to the events in
Rwanda. We also continue to support authorities in
Belgium and other countries in respect of ongoing
prosecutions.
In our last report to the Council, I indicated that
serious concerns for potential loss of evidence over
time, in particular in the cases of top-level fugitives,
had prompted my Office to propose amendments of the
ICTR Rules of Procedure and Evidence to provide for a
procedure for the preservation of evidence in cases
where fugitives continue to be at large. As the
President has indicated, the Judges of the ICTR,

meeting in plenary session on 1 October 2009, adopted
the necessary amendment to the Rules. Accordingly,
my Office proposes to request such proceedings, by the
second quarter of 2010, in the cases of the three top-
level fugitives, namely, Felicien Kabuga, Augustin
Bizimana, former Minister of Defence, and Protais
Mpiranya, former Commander of the Presidential
Guard of Rwanda. The objective of the proceedings
will be to enable the statements of prosecution
witnesses, and even of defence witnesses, to be
recorded before a judge, with a view to their use in a
subsequent trial in the event that the witnesses are no
longer available for good cause. In that way, we hope
that the interests of justice will not be defeated by the
loss of evidence in the wake of prolonged evasion of
justice by fugitives.

While we focus on servicing pending trials, the
preparation of new cases for trial, filing new requests
for referral to Rwanda and instituting proceedings for
the preservation of evidence in respect of the three top-
level fugitives, we are also attending to, and will
intensify preparations for, the closure of the Tribunal,
with particular attention to archival and residual issues.
Within my Office, the archiving of the records of the
Investigations Division and of the trials that have been
concluded is already proceeding in earnest.

All those activities will continue to require
significant resources, as well as the cooperation of
Member States, if the ICTR is to meet the goals of the
completion strategy. In that respect, we look forward to
the sympathetic consideration by Member States of the
ICTR budget proposals for the 2010-2011 biennium.
The cooperation of Member States and the support of
the Security Council, the other organs of the United
Nations and the Organization's Secretariat have been
indispensable in the Tribunal's achievements. I would
like to convey our appreciation for all such support. We
look forward to that same cooperation at this crucial
stage in the implementation of our completion strategy.

