Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Belgium has proposed a debate on a very important topic, and we are grateful to it. We welcome the presence of Ministers here, and we also welcome Ms. Bachelet and other keynote speakers and thank them for their contribution to this discussion on the role of transitional justice in efforts towards peacebuilding and sustaining peace in conflict and post-conflict situations.We believe that the approach formulated regarding the topic of our discussion is the right one. It is important to determine the role and the most useful forms of transitional justice in the achievement of its main goal, the establishment of a lasting peace and the prevention of the resumption of conflict. Internal armed conflicts are the main instance of the use of military force in today's world, and there is a dangerous tendency towards their proliferation against the backdrop or as the result of the overthrow or destabilization of legitimate Governments through external interference. Conflicts do not arise by themselves, therefore in resolving each one of them we must take an approach that bears their causes in mind. Transitional justice is not always the key to establishing peace. What is important is not to get carried away and prescribe the same medicine to all patients, independently of the diagnosis or the symptoms of the disease. However, that does not mean that the extensive instruments of transitional justice available should not be used where they are necessary. That is a multidimensional phenomenon that includes not only legal but political mechanisms, and national and international efforts are essential to establish peace in specific States. We are not convinced that the 2010 guidance note of the Secretary-General on the United Nations approach to transitional justice, which was drawn up without the participation of Member States, is right in all its aspects concerning this framework. The United Nations has been through various phases in the use of transitional justice instruments. In the early 1990s, great hopes were pinned on the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, created by the Council. However, by the early 2000s, it had already become clear that this mechanism was not effective. In spite of various political statements by and positions of States, the true assessment by all parties of the work of those bodies was almost identical. The Council, first, agreed to their costly reform, known as the completion strategy, and then opted not to replicate such mechanisms. The attention of the international community then shifted to the International Criminal Court, a body that seemed very attractive to many because, unlike the Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, it was based on the principle of complementarity. It was supposed not to replace but rather complement national justice. However, the further activities of the Court showed that the idea of complementarity remained a dead letter, while the general trend towards the politicization of the work of international judicial bodies manifested itself in its ugliest forms. To date, the most important international achievement in combating crimes against peace and humanity is the Nuremberg tribunal. It was created on the basis of the unity of all allies in the anti-Hitler coalition based on the principle of fair judicial procedure. That tribunal did not need any kind of completion strategy or any special and costly measures to preserve its legacy. The authority of the decisions of the Nuremberg Tribunal are indisputable, in spite of all the time that has elapsed. Let us come back to today's world. By the mid- 2000s, it had become clear that the most effective forms of transitional justice were those based on national dialogue in conflict-affected countries, complemented by United Nations efforts. Establishing a post-conflict reality is impossible without focusing on local traditions and specific features. In some places, for purposes of reconciliation truth and reconciliation commissions are needed, but in others traditional mechanisms are required, such as the Gacaca trials in Rwanda. Since sound national reconciliation is the determining factor in the successful resolution of a conflict and preventing its resumption, we believe the United Nations must focus its efforts on providing the most appropriate forms of technical assistance to restore a national justice system and law-enforcement bodies destroyed by conflict. In this process, the United Nations must be an actor that provides examples of good practices and proposes solutions rather than creating problems. In this connection, it is not always acceptable for unconditional demands to be made by the United Nations, such as the unacceptability of amnesty or the primary role of an international component in mixed judiciary and investigative bodies. It is important to openly discuss cases of the abuse of transitional justice. In United Nations documents, it is common for such mechanisms to be written about only in the most superlative terms. The only criticism we hear relates to the lack of political support, the lack of financing or the fact that the victims of crime do not have an appropriately active role. At the same time, mechanisms of transitional justice should not be used to consolidate the victory ofone party to aconflict over the other or to settle political accounts, neither should they be used to elicit foreign interference in the internal affairs of a State weakened by conflict. In addition, transitional justice must be distinguished from direct political manipulation in the guise of fighting impunity, a practice that, unfortunately, is taking root in our Organization. A sad example is the illegitimate International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. The way to genuinely contribute to ensuring the accountability of foreign terrorist fighters, including those active in Syria, would be to repatriate them and try them in courts of national jurisdiction, in accordance with counter-terrorism conventions, in keeping with the obligation, under those conventions, to extradite or prosecute them. Of course, that would be based on the principle of the inevitability of punishment and its proportionality to the crime committed. We are convinced that the issues of transitional justice in the work of the Security Council should not be reduced to the search for a universal formula, but rather should reflect country-specific realities and the mandates of peacekeeping and political missions. The United Nations should not dictate but should encourage and complement national initiatives.
