Mr. Simpson (New Zealand): I thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for acknowledging the
singular importance of this issue by calling this timely
debate. Allow me first to comment on some of the
disagreements aired in the lead-up to today's debate.

New Zealand understands the concerns expressed
regarding this Council taking up issues beyond the role
and mandate accorded to it by the Charter. However,
for those low-lying small island States, including
several in my own region, the Pacific, for which
climate change poses the ultimate security risk - that
of ceasing to exist as States and as communities -
debates about whether this constitutes a legitimate
topic for discussion cannot but seem rather abstract and
deeply divorced from the severity and urgency of the
challenges they face.
The potential security implications of climate
change have been well documented. They centre on the
significant challenges faced by many communities in
managing and maintaining access to basic resources -
land, food, shelter, water - in the face of sustained

 

climatic change. The Asia-Pacific region has also faced
a devastating series of natural disasters in the past few
years - events that are predicted to become even more
frequent and severe in the decades ahead. Such
forecasts are worrying for small island developing
States, which tend to be particularly vulnerable to such
events due to their size, geographic isolation and
relatively weak economic base. If not addressed, these
challenges could well contribute to increased
instability and conflict.

For some low-lying island States, climate change
poses a more fundamental threat, potentially
undermining their very viability and continued
existence, and raising the very real prospect that we
will witness forced migrations of an unprecedented
nature and scale. Put simply, whole populations could
be on the move, and by any measure that is a security
threat.

Several steps must be taken to prevent and
address the security impacts of climate change. First,
we must build the adaptive capacities of developing
countries so that they can better cope with future
climate-related events before they become security
challenges. Resilience to climate change requires more
than building capacity to cope with physical impacts. It
must also address existing and future resource use to
reduce pressures on resources and build in necessary
buffers for when things go wrong.

Secondly, and of equal importance, we must
manage the scale of these security impacts through
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. Addressing the
symptoms alone will be insufficient unless we also
address the cause. New Zealand is committed, through
negotiations in the context of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to
achieving comprehensive and effective global
mitigation action and implementing effective
adaptation measures. To make meaningful progress
towards those goals, this year's Durban meeting must
take the important step of implementing the Cancun
agreements.

It is also important that adaptation and mitigation
measures be effectively integrated into development
activities, including peacekeeping and peacebuilding
initiatives. New Zealand is currently working on
adaptation and development projects through a number
of bilateral, regional and multilateral initiatives. Our
climate change adaptation assistance in the Pacific

 

places a strong emphasis on climate-proofing new
infrastructure, for example in the context of post-
cyclone reconstruction.

Sharing best practices and research can also make
a significant contribution towards effective, practical
measures to address the security impacts of climate
change. New Zealand's initiative, supported by many
other countries, to establish the Global Research
Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases aims to
ensure that efforts to reduce agricultural emissions do
not compromise the food security of a growing global
population. No country will put its population at risk
by reducing its agricultural production, so we need to
find other ways of reducing associated emissions.

Issues of climate change and security must also
be dealt with in an integrated manner across the
breadth of United Nations agencies. We therefore
support the call by Pacific small island developing
States for consideration of mechanisms to support early
identification of climate change-related security
challenges and to promote comprehensive and cohesive
research, analysis and action to address their causes.

Many countries hold serious concerns about the
security implications of climate change for them and
for their neighbours. But we know from past
experience that such challenges can be addressed
before they reach crisis point, and that conflict need
not be inevitable. Many of the actions required for
achieving this lie outside the competence and mandate
of this Council, but understanding climate change as a
driver of instability and potentially of conflict is
nevertheless important to achieving a more secure
future.

I hope that today's discussions have taken us a
step closer towards achieving that shared
understanding, and I hope that today the Council will
send a clear and unequivocal message that it, too, is
willing to play its part in meeting this challenge.
Anything less will be a deep disappointment to the
people of small, low-lying island States such as our
friends and neighbours in the Pacific.

