Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): It is my honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania and
Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

Although we note positive developments, the
situation in West Africa remains fragile. For the
Council to focus on the region is therefore appropriate
at this moment when we ask ourselves how positive
developments can be strengthened and relapses
avoided.

The goals of the Security Council mission to West
Africa were twofold. First, the mission set out to
address particular situations in a number of countries in
the region. Most pressing were the talks in Cote
d'Ivoire, where the mission tried to rekindle
negotiations between parties. The European Union
shares the Security Council's concern at the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire and reaffirms the individual
responsibility of the political leaders to avoid
confrontation and engage in dialogue and negotiations
on the basis of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. The
European Union fully appreciates the strong message
that was delivered by the mission to all political leaders
in Cote d'Ivoire. In that regard, we also welcome the
West African mini-summit organized by the Secretary-
General on 6 July in Addis Ababa, which is to be
followed up later this month in Accra.

Secondly, the mission addressed a wide number
of thematic, region-wide issues. In that regard, the
mission followed up on the 12 March 2004 report of
the Secretary-General on cross-border problems
(S/2004/200). I would also refer to the comprehensive
strategy for cooperation with West Africa adopted by
the European Union in May 2004. A central tenet of
that strategy is tackling the overarching challenge of
integrating short-term crisis management with longer-
term preventive measures.

I would like to focus my intervention on three
thematic issues that are related to long-term
developments: the United Nations post-conflict
strategy for the region, the value of regional integration
and synergies of peacekeeping operations.

First, with respect to post-conflict situations, the
current situation in West Africa offers, in the words of
the report, a real chance to break out of the cycle of
conflict and poverty. Throughout its mission, the
Security Council stressed the relationship between
security and development. The European Union fully
agrees that, in making the transition to peace and
economic development in West Africa, that link is of
the utmost importance.

As the United Nations lacks one single
operational peace-building body, United Nations
organs have to cooperate actively to bring together
security and development concerns. We certainly hope
that the Security Council will further pursue the
comprehensive approach it adopted in the mission
report (S/2004/525). One way might be to explore
further ad hoc composite committees of the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and/or the
General Assembly that deal specifically with post-
conflict situations. A positive example in the West
African region is the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau.

Yesterday, the Economic and Social Council
discussed the assessment of the ad hoc advisory
groups. The European Union reiterated the valuable
contributions those groups make in pursuing a
comprehensive United Nations approach to
peace-building. It was also stated that collaboration
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council could be intensified. We would like to
take this opportunity to make the very same point.

Areas of potential cooperation are disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
security sector reform. The Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council could also rally together
to seek donor assistance. Post-conflict situations too
easily disappear from the front pages and consequently
from the radar screen of donors.

My second set of remarks regards regional
integration. Of course, the primary responsibility for
bringing about change and sustaining peace efforts lies
with the States in the region. In our view, regional
integration in West Africa can play a vital role in
preventing future conflicts. For years, cross-border
problems such as child soldiers, mercenaries, small
arms and the illegal exploitation of natural resources
have been fuelling conflicts. Solutions too must
therefore also be found at the regional level.

In West Africa, we recognize the positive role of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Like many other countries and
organizations, the European Union supports the
strengthening of that organization and of its
institutional capacity. In our view, now is the time to
work out a systemic donor coordination mechanism
under the leadership of ECOWAS. The European
Union strategy of May 2004 also calls for the
development of a conceptual framework for conflict
prevention and peace-building in West Africa. We hope
the leaders in the region will enable ECOWAS to
undertake that task.

Finally, the international community can also
contribute by intensifying its partnership both with
individual countries and with relevant organizations in
the region. The European Union tries to structure its
political dialogue with ECOWAS for that purpose. As
the European Union President, the Netherlands has
invited all Foreign Ministers of ECOWAS to an
informal meeting with their European Union
counterparts in Maastricht on 4 September. I can also
report that this week the European Union extended the
mandate of Mr. Hans Dahlgren as representative of the
presidency of the European Union to the countries of
the Mano River Union.

My last set of remarks regards synergy and
peacekeeping. The report of the mission deals with
collaboration and coordination within and between
United Nations missions in West Africa. Currently,
three large United Nations peacekeeping operations are
active in the region, amounting to almost 30,000 troops
and nearly half the peacekeeping budget of the United
Nations.

True, the situations in the countries differ. At the
same time, many problems and challenges with which
the United Nations has to deal are closely related. It
seems worthwhile to make a thorough analysis of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) and look for attainable synergies. Common
border patrols and the exchange of information are
things that immediately come to mind. We might also
look at more fundamental questions such as the
possible scope of a pooling of logistical needs.

The European Union looks forward to the report
that is currently being prepared by the Secretariat on
this issue. West Africa stands to benefit greatly from
ideas that would make the United Nations missions in
the region more effective. Subsequent efficiency gains
could possibly enable a more sustained United Nations
presence throughout the region. They would also
benefit the wider United Nations and provide us all
with important lessons to be learned for regional
peacekeeping.

Let me conclude by thanking you again, Mr.
President, for the opportunity to discuss with the
Council and with the countries of the region the report
of the Council's mission to West Africa. Whether it is
for short-term crisis management or long-term strategy,
the European Union stands ready to be a partner to
contribute our shared goal of peace and stability for the
peoples of the region.

