Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, let me thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for requesting this meeting and the
delegation of the United States for convening it. We are
also grateful to Mr. Martin Griffiths for his excellent
and enlightening briefing and his tireless work to
achieve peace in Yemen.

In August, the delegation of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea expressed its support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in holding
consultations with the warring parties, on 6 September
in Geneva, in order to initiate confidence-building
measures for the peace process. In that regard, we support
Mr. Griffiths efforts to oversee the consultations and
for all that he has been able to achieve in his meetings
with the Yemeni Government delegation, headed by the
Yemeni Minister for Foreign Affairs. At the same time,
we express our concern about the absence of the Houthi
delegation at that very important meeting. For us, the
Geneva conference represented an opportunity for the
belligerent parties to initiate and support a new process
that would not only help stop hostilities, but also pave
the road towards facilitating negotiations leading to
the parties' reconciliation and achieving lasting and
sustainable peace in Yemen.

Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned about the
vulnerable situation of civilians in the nearly three-year
conflict, with no immediate solution in sight,
which clearly will prolong the suffering of the most
vulnerable - the defenceless civilian population. My
delegation therefore calls on all parties involved in the
conflict - in keeping with the outcome of the meeting
held in Geneva - to understand that a political process
characterized by frank and inclusive dialogue, while
respecting human rights, international humanitarian
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, is the
only way to find a lasting solution to the crisis.

As the facts on the ground have repeatedly
demonstrated, there is no military solution to the
conflict, My delegation categorically condemns any
form of violence that targets civilian populations.
Conversely, we believe that civilians in need must be
provided with access to humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, we commend and are grateful for
the work of the Security Council, which, despite the
difficulties that it faces, ceaselessly continues to devise
solutions to restore peace and stability in Yemen.

