Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking Sweden
for convening this important briefing on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, including the African Union
(AU). I also wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, Ms. Sable-Work Zewde,
for her informative briefing. As this is the first time that
she has briefed the Council in her new role, on behalf
of the three African members of the Council I take
this opportunity to offer our sincere congratulations to
Ms. Zewde, wishing her resounding success in her new
functions, to which we offer our full support. We would
also like to express our sincere thanks and gratitude to
Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security.

I deliver this statement on behalf of the three
non-permanent African members of the Security
Council: C6te d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea and Ethiopia.

It is encouraging to note that the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is advancing. In particular, efforts are
being made to improve collaboration between both the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council and between the United
Nations Secretary-General and the African Union
Commission. That collaboration has become even
more steadfast since the eleventh consultative meeting.
We believe that the twelfth annual joint consultative
meeting between the members of the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which is scheduled for tomorrow, Thursday, 19 July,
will be a good opportunity for both bodies to step
up their efforts to address the most urgent security
obstacles and challenges in Africa, in particular the
problems related to South Sudan and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, further steps could
be taken to take this cooperation to the next level,
including through joint field visits, the development of
methods of understanding and shared analysis, regular
information exchange and joint planning, evaluation
and information systems.

We also welcome the continued strengthening
of cooperation between the secretariats of the two
organizations within the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, which was signed last year. In that regard,
we welcome the recent visit of the Secretary-General to
Addis Ababa for the second high-level meeting with the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, which
is testimony to the determination of the top leadership
of both organizations to forge solid ties between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace
and security on the continent. The shared commitment
of the United Nations and the African Union in the
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security, as well as in
the high level of representation on the bureau, is also
encouraging. In that regard, we commend the joint visit
of Under-Secretary-General Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Commissioner Chergui to the Central African
Republic and the Sudan.

We are pleased that the Secretary-General has given
the highest priority to partnership and cooperation with
the African Union in his proposal for reform of the
peace and security pillar, and his recent endorsement,
through the Fifth Committee, shows that Member States
strongly support this noble objective. The three African
members of the Council remain committed to assisting

the Secretary-General in his effort to implement the
United Nations reform process.

It is very important that we improve operational
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the areas of conflict prevention
and mediation, maintenance and peacebuilding. Of
particular relevance is the support to peace support
operations of the African Union. We must remember
that in resolution 2378 (2017), the Security Council
expressed its intention to continue considering the
adoption of practical measures and the conditions
necessary to establish a mechanism through which the
African Union could direct peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council. Those could be
financed in part through the contribution of the United
Nations, on a case-by-case basis.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/678), the African Union has made definitive
progress towards putting the Peace Fund into operation,
and the three African members of the Council wish to
salute the important achievements made during the
past year in that regard. In particular, we applaud the
endorsement by the Assembly of the African Union of
an instrument relating to the enhanced governance and
management structure of the Peace Fund, which created
the necessary legal framework for the establishment
of a board of trustees, an executive management
committee, an independent evaluation panel and the
creation of the Peace Fund secretariat. It is important
that the instrument of governance and management be
put into operation as soon as possible. We praise the
efforts that the African Union is currently deploying in
that regard.

With regard to the contents of the report, it also
indicates that there are promising advances being
undertaken by the African Union, of course with United
Nations support, to establish the necessary framework
for international humanitarian law and human rights,
as well as the conduct and discipline required for the
support operations of the African Union. We applaud
the completion of the conduct and discipline policies, as
well as the prevention of and response to exploitation and
sexual abuse. Other frameworks related to progress in
guaranteeing respect for human rights in the deployment
of troops from troop-contributing countries, as well as
compliance with training standards for African Union
peace support operations, are also encouraging.

The three African members of the Security Council
are proud of the level of commitment shown by African
Union member States in their quest for self-reliance
in order to reach their goal of funding 25 per cent of
peacekeeping and security costs. In that regard, the
$47 million raised by African Union member States this
year accounts for the highest-ever contribution to the
African Peace Fund since its establishment in 1993 and
proves that African Union member States are seriously
committed to achieving the goal of 25 per cent self-
funding. The three African members of the Security
Council expect a similar commitment from the United
Nations, in particular from the members of the Security
Council, in line with resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017).

I reiterate that United Nations-African Union
cooperation is a valuable tool in preventing and resolving
conflicts on the continent. It is vital that the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council support
both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union Agenda 2063. We believe
that supporting social and economic development
in Africa can help resolve several conflicts on the
continent. Therefore, greater cooperation in the area of
development is also needed, notjust in the area ofpeace
and security, because one without the other will lead us
nowhere. We are pleased that several initiatives have
been undertaken to ensure that women are involved in
processes to promote peace and security in Africa. The
three African members of the Security Council support
the participation and inclusion of women and young
people in the relevant processes and strategies because
they are key to achieving lasting peace on the continent.

The African Union is an indispensable partner of
the United Nations in the area of promoting peace and
security in Africa. We encourage the African Union
to continue its leadership and commitment to finding
African solutions to African problems. We recommend
that the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council continue to strengthen
their strategic partnership and align their visions with
a View to providing a speedier and more effective
response to conflicts. The three African members of
the Security Council will continue to firmly support
those key processes.

I would like to conclude by underscoring the
initiative by Ethiopia and Eritrea to achieve peace,
security and stability, not just for the two countries or
the Horn of Africa, but for the entire continent. The
African Union's promise to silence weapons by 2020 is
notjust a pipedream; it is possible. But we need support.
We must ensure that that noble goal is achieved.

