Mr. Szijjarto (Hungary) (spoke in Russian): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate of the Security Council in order to
discuss this very important topic. Countering terrorism
in the Middle East can be successful only if we pool
our global efforts. Unifying our global efforts requires
global cooperation.

(spoke in English)

A decade ago, when we had a chance to watch
reports from the Middle East on television, we were
shocked at the scenes we saw. But at that time we were
fairly sure that these kinds of developments would
never happen in Europe, on our continent. What we are
experiencing today shows how wrong we were. Now
the growing threat of terrorism has become part of
everyday life in Europe.

The Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) has built
a global network, including in Europe, and has around
30,000 foreign fighters, who pose a significant threat
to us. ISIS has caused more damage to our common
cultural heritage than any armed conflict or natural
disaster since the conclusion of the Second World War.
ISIS destabilizes the region around Europe and is one
of the factors that has led to an unstable situation in our
neighbourhood.

The other factor is the series of bad international
political decisions that resulted in the creation of long-
term war-torn zones in North Africa and the Middle
East region.

Because of ISIS gaining additional territory and
because of the aforementioned bad international
political decisions, the European neighbourhood is more
unstable than it has been in years. These developments
have led to a situation in which we must say that the
European Union is facing the greatest challenge since
its creation. Currently, the European Union is facing
the challenge of mass migration, a mass migration with
an unlimited source of supply of people. Let us just take
into consideration the fact that there are 8 million people
living on humanitarian aid in Iraq. There are 12 million
people living on humanitarian aid in Syria, of whom
almost 7 million are already internally displaced. In
addition, the sub-Saharan region, according to some
reports, is home to more than 12.5 million internally
displaced persons. That is not even to mention Yemen,
Libya or the situation in Pakistan or even in Afghanistan.

So ifwe take all ofthese elements into consideration,
then maybe we can agree that it is absolutely not an
exaggeration to say that there are around 30 million
to 35 million people around Europe who might make
a quick decision to leave their homes and hit the road,
heading towards Europe. That is why I think that it is
in our common interest to avoid this challenge, because
if there are 30 million to 35 million people heading
towards Europe, that can destabilize our continent: first
the periphery, and then the central part.

In order to prevent that, we have to stabilize the
situation in North Africa and the Middle East region
very quickly, as soon as possible. If we agree on that,
then it gives us two tasks.

The first task is to increase our efforts to combat
ISIS. Although we have formed the broadest coalition
ever, we have achieved only limited success. That is
why we have to make sure that ISIS does not gain more
territory, and we have to take back te territory that ISIS
has occupied. We have to make sure that the International
Criminal Court investigates crimes committed by ISIS,
because we must not leave such crimes without serious
consequences for the perpetrators. We Hungarians
recently took a decision to deploy 112 troops in Erbil,
in the Kurdish region, in order to carry out force-
protection duties. Those troops will soon take part in
training Peshmerga troops as well.

The second task would be to stop the war and make
peace in Syria. It appears that there is broad agreement
that the only way to achieve peace in Syria is through
negotiations. In order for negotiations to be successful,
we need maximal political inclusiveness.

We have to be aware that we will not be able
to overcome these difficulties without pragmatic
cooperation between Russia and the trans-Atlantic
community. Recent developments in multilateral
diplomacy, as Council members will recall, have
proved that even the most serious and complicated
challenges can be overcome if there is global will and
global cooperation. In our view, global will and global
cooperation cannot leave out Russia. Without a quick
reconsideration of the relationship between Russia and
the trans-Atlantic community, we are not going to be
able to stabilize the situation in North Africa and in
the Middle East region. Furthermore, if we are not
able to stabilize the situation in North Africa and the
Middle East, then we will not effect a the decrease in
the migratory pressure on Europe. It should be stated
that Europe is not going to be able to bear the heavy
burden of a mass migration on its own.

In conclusion, we should not commit such mistakes
in the future because doing so could destabilize our
continent, Europe, because our neighbourhood - our
surroundings * have already been destabilized.

