Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I am grateful
for this opportunity to present the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2016/ 1137)
to the members of the Security Council, and to review
with them the most recent developments in the country.

I welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, and thank
him for the Government of Mali's ongoing support
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I also
welcome the representative of Algeria, a leader in
international mediation, for his tireless commitment to
the promotion of the peace process in Mali.

Before beginning my briefing, I would like to pay
tribute to the victims of the dreadful suicide attack on
the Operational Coordination Mechanism camp in Gao.
We offer our condolences to the families of the victims,
to the Government of Mali and to the parties to the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, the perpetrators
of the heinous attack must be identified and brought to
justice as soon as possible.

We are trying to better understand the situation.
What we do know is that a car bomb exploded at around
9 am. inside the Operational Coordination Mechanism
camp, where close to 600 troops ofthe Platform coalition
of armed groups, the Mechanism and the Malian armed
forces had been stationed for the past three weeks in
preparation for joint patrols. The explosion caused
heavy casualties. An initial assessment puts the death
toll at over 60, with several dozen wounded - some
critically so. MINUSMA, Operation Barkhane and the
Malian armed forces are currently working as hard
as possible to assist the victims and secure the town
of Gao.

We condemn with the utmost firmness this
cowardly and ignoble attack, which constitutes a direct
attack on the peace process. It was clearly aimed at
derailing the peace process by undermining trust
between the signatory parties and the people, as well as
at countering the recent progress in the implementation
of the security arrangements of the peace Agreement.
This incident highlights once again the fact that an
acceleration in the implementation of the Agreement is
the only possible way to stabilize Mali and to bring the
peace process to fruition. I reiterate that time is against
us, and the United Nations remains more than ever
deeply committed to supporting the Government of
Mali and the signatory parties in the speediest possible
implementation of the Agreement.
We have reached a pivotal moment. I recall that the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was
signed more than 18 months ago, while the interim
period was intended to last 24 months. In other words,
more than 18 months have passed yet, despite some
advances, too little progress has been recorded. It must
be said that since the last Council meeting on Mali (see S/PV.7801), the implementation of interim institutional
and security arrangements has basically stagnated and
remains undermined by persistent disagreements and
a lack of trust among the signatory parties. We note
the recent heightened fragmentation of armed groups,
particularly within the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad, and the repeated attempts of dissident
groups to disrupt the peace process, all of hampers the
implementation of the Agreement. I must stress that only
five months remain until the end of the interim period.
The absence of tangible results is of major concern and
leads me to question the real will and commitment of
the signatories of the peace process.

As I have said, there has been some progress.
For instance, following the ministerial meeting on
the peace Agreement held in the margins of the
General Assembly in New York in September, armed
groups finally submitted, after a year's delay, the
lists containing their candidates for the Operational
Coordination Mechanism, the interim authorities, the
Commission on Integration and the Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission. Since
then, however, every attempt to implement joint
patrols has failed, mainly because of disputes among
the signatory parties on logistical and financial issues.
As a result, we have made insufficient progress. It was
only after intense negotiations and thanks to the good
offices of MINUSMA, international mediation and the
High Representative of the President of the Republic of
Mali for the implementation of the peace Agreement
that the armed forces of Mali and the armed groups
are now regrouped at Gao for the launch of the long-
awaited mixed patrols. Clearly, we must wait and see
what consequences this morning's tragedy may have.

Similarly, the rivalry among armed groups over the
presidency of the interim authorities in Kidal has so far
prevented their establishment. I was in Kidal in May
last year, where I met with the Governor-designate,
who told me that he would assume his functions within
a week. That was in May, while it is now January of
the following year. All this endless delay is deeply
regrettable and hinders the cantonment, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. All eight
cantonment sites that have been built and equipped with
the support of MINUSMA have been fully operational
but remained essential empty since October. Some
institutional and political reforms are required but have
yet to be transformed into action. The definition of
criteria for the integration of ex-combatants, security
sector reform and the redeployment strategy of the
Malian defence and security forces has yet to be
finalized by the Government. Similarly, an inclusive
and long-term dialogue on the restoration of State
authority and institutional reforms is necessary if these
reforms are to bring real change.

One of the pillars of the MINUSMA mandate, a
cornerstone of resolution 2295 (2016), is the restoration
and extension of State authority across all Mali. In
this regard, the Mission supported the Government in
the preparation of the local elections of 20 November.
These were the first elections held since 2009, and
unfolded in 92 per cent of the municipalities of Mali.
Unfortunately, they did not take place in the Kidal,
Menaka and Taoudenni regions, or in certain localities
of Gao, Mopti and Timbuktu, due to security incidents
and impediments to voting. On the eve of the elections,
armed groups and opposition parties repeatedly
expressed their objections to the organization of
elections, which they believed should take place only
after the establishment of the interim authorities.

Let us not forget, however, that 2017 is to be an
important year for regional elections and a constitutional
referendum in Mali. All stakeholders must therefore
strive to find common ground, and we count on the
Government to ensure that these elections are held in
an open and inclusive environment that will contribute
to reconciliation. One key point that must be stressed
is the election of many women, who now represent
nearly 30 per cent of elected municipal councilors in
Timbuktu, Gao and Bamako.

The announcement by President Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita in September 2016 of the convening of a national
reconciliation conference - now scheduled for
March under the auspices of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs - could offer a genuinely inclusive forum to
address all the root causes of the crisis and involve
all components of Malian society in order to map a
path towards national reconciliation. I welcome the
appointment of the Ombudsman of Mali, Mr. Baba
Hakim Haidara, to lead the preparatory committee, and
hope that this important conference can be held by the
deadline that has been set.

However, this morning's tragedy demonstrates the
extent to which the terrorist phenomenon is becoming
more and more disturbing in northern and central
Mali, as well as in the subregion. While the number of
attacks on the Malian armed forces, MINUSMA and
international forces has declined over the past three
months, their level of sophistication remains a cause for
growing concern. Complex attacks on our air capacities
have grounded some of our helicopters and impeded
their operational capability. We need to consider this
situation in depth, because if the security situation
continues to deteriorate at the current pace there
will soon be no peace to maintain in Mali. We must
condemn such attacks and be aware of their regional
dimensions, including recent lethal attacks on security
forces in the Niger and Burkina Faso close to the
Malian border. All ofthis highlights the imperative role
of the regional partners in the peace process and in the
work of MINUSMA. As called for in the resolution, we
continue to work to strengthen links with the member
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel.

The Council also called on us to adopt a more robust
and proactive stance to protect civilians suffering from
the deteriorating security situation. However, the only
viable solution to that problem is the redeployment of
the Malian defence and security forces to the north
and the centre of the country. A frank and constructive
dialogue must then begin on the impact of drug
trafficking and other transnational crimes on security
and the peace process.

In spite of the sustained efforts, we still face
significant capacity gaps - including helicopters and
other aircraft, armoured vehicles, logistical support and
protective gear - that hinder our ability to implement
our mandate. We are in constant contact with troop-
and police-contributing countries, which we thank
for the capacities they provide. I think that, more than
evert, a determined, additional effort is needed to close
the gaps.

It is of paramount importance to restore the
confidence of the Malian population. The window of
opportunity to generate tangible peace dividends on
the ground is closing. We continue to receive reports
of serious violations of human rights by armed groups,
and sometimes by State actors. The Government has in
the past done little to combat impunity. Above all for
people in the north ofMali, things are slow to change. A
lack of basic social services along with food insecurity
and chronic poverty all contribute to hindering trust
from taking hold and becoming entrenched. The
implementation of the development strategy for the
north has not yet begun, more than a year after the
international conference for the economic recovery and
development of Mali. It is imperative that armed groups
put an end to their obstruction of humanitarian access,
while the Government and its partners must work more
closely together to create the conditions for sustainable
prosperity and growth in order remedy a situation in
which millions of young Malians are still living under
very precarious conditions.

The Government of Mali, with the support of
MINUSMA, has developed indicators of progress that
have been annexed to the Secretary-General's report.
They will serve as a working and dialogue tool for a
more systematic assessment of the progress made by
the parties in Mali in the implementation of the peace
Agreement. However, the indicators must be met, that
is, they must help to address all the shortcomings
I mentioned. I would call on the members of the
international mediation to redouble their efforts to
re-energize the Agreement's follow-up mechanisms.

On the margins of the fourth high-level seminar on
peace and security, held in Oran in December with the
African Union and Algerian Foreign Minister Ramtane
Lamamra, we discussed the need for a high-level
meeting of the international mediation, which I think
should be held as soon as possible. We must also continue
to focus on establishing a common vision ofhow to deal
with dissident groups. I believe that the members of the
Security Council must not forget that they have the
option of imposing targeted measures against all those
who violate the ceasefire and deliberately hamper the
peace process.

Please forgive me for going on at such length.
I regret that, unfortunately, the circumstances have
impacted the tone and tenor of my briefing. I really
wanted to convey to the Council a sense of urgency
about the worrying state of the peace process in Mali.
But it nevertheless remains the only possible avenue
for achieving peace and reconciliation. Everyone must
be fully committed to the implementation of the peace
Agreement. There is not much time left.

