Mr. Duale (Somalia): I am very happy that the
resolution that the Security Council has just adopted
is the result of all the efforts that the Council has made
in the past in trying to forge the way for Somalia to
achieve a more permanent type of Government. It has
been 21 years since we lost most of our sovereignty and
our share in the international community's endeavour
for peace and security.

Today's resolution is a landmark and augurs well
for our Government and the future of Somalia and for
the new President to forge ahead towards peace and
security.

The new Government's achievement of this
stage not only augurs well for the security of the
region but will also help the fight against piracy off
the coast of Somalia. We are therefore very grateful
to the international community, the United Nations
and especially our neighbours and the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which have helped our transitional
Government fight against Al-Shabaab, who are allied
with Al-Qaida.

However, the Council will recognize that the real
fight is just starting - the fight for a real nation to
emerge from the ruins of destruction to a nationhood
that will allow every Somali to be proud of being from
that country. I hope that the Security Council, the
international community and the United Nations will
continue with their efforts to sustain the progress and
independence of Somalia so as to truly reach the goals
that we all hope will be achieved in the near future.

This Government now has four years, and we hope
that in those four years at least the structures that have
been destroyed and the Government machinery that is
not functioning can be put in place as soon as possible.
From there on, we hope there will be independent
elections in which every person will vote personally,
not through selection or through criminal influences.

I feel very emotional. I am so excited that I cannot
find the appropriate words to express our happiness and
that ofall Somalis, be they in Somalia or in the diaspora.
I hope that that happiness is also shared by the members
of the Security Council, who have endeavoured, for the
past 21 years, to reach at least this stage of possibility
of looking forward.

