We welcome participation of the Prime Minister of Somalia, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Hussein Roble, in this video-teleconference. We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. James Swan; the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira; and the representative of the Somali non-governmental organization, Ms. Zainab Hassan, for their valuable briefings. We have carefully studied the most recent quarterly report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/1113). The most important task for Somalia in the short term is the holding of national elections, scheduled to begin on 1 December. We welcome the broad consensus reached in Somalia with regard to the model for the upcoming elections. We hope that, in the coming days, Mogadishu will be able to resolve all outstanding issues with the federal member states, including those concerning the formation of electoral committees in the federal member states and, most important, guaranteeing people's safety at polling stations. We call on African peacekeepers and United Nations personnel to make every possible contribution in that regard, and we call on regional stakeholders to uphold their commitments to their obligations. We commend the progress made in the political dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states against the backdrop of the preparations for the elections. We hope that the Government will soon be able to resume negotiations with Somaliland and continue to normalize relations with Jubbaland. We also look forward to seeing further progress on the revision of the Federal Constitution. We agree that the institutionalization of that dialogue would facilitate further progress. We call on Special Representative Swan to continue his efforts to that end. We note that the Secretary-General's report includes an assessment of two draft laws on the issue of sexual violence, which are under consideration in the Federal Parliament and the parliament of Somaliland. We believe that all concerns related to those draft laws should be resolved in full respect for the sovereignty and political independence of Somalia. We cannot ignore that the security situation in Somalia remains tense. Al-Shabaab continues to perpetrate terrorist attacks, opting for a tactic of political assassinations through the use of increasingly sophisticated improvised explosive devices. We note that the group is capable of adapting to any pressure exerted upon it. Al-Shabaab recently intensified its activities in Mogadishu and in the federal member states of Hirshabelle and Galmudug, which is a cause for grave concern. Against that backdrop, AMISOM remains key to counter-terrorism efforts. The role of peacekeepers is increasingly significant in the light of the upcoming electoral process. We look forward to the finalization of the updated plan to transfer the responsibility for security in Somalia from AMISOM to the Somali National Army. At the same time, we oppose any attempts to force the Mission's drawdown. We continue to believe that any decision regarding the withdrawal of African peacekeepers from Somalia should take into account the progress made in training the Somali National Army and the establishment of a unified national security architecture. We hope that the independent assessment of international assistance aimed at promoting security in Somalia, as provided for in resolution 2520 (2020), will bolster efforts in the areas I mentioned. We call on the independent group of experts to cooperate more closely with regional stakeholders, in particular with the African Union.
