Ms. Murnaghan (Ireland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries members of the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Norway, align themselves with this
statement.

On behalf of the European Union, Mr. President, I
would like to thank you and the Security Council for
scheduling this meeting today, which is an opportunity
for the international community to demonstrate our
commitment to the Central African region. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his progress
report on the recommendations of the Security Council
mission to Central Africa last year (S/2004/52). I also
thank Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for his
briefing this morning.

Although Central Africa has the potential to be
one of the richest subregions in Africa, its potential has
not been realized. Many of the subregion's countries
are either in conflict or in post-conflict situations, and
the subregion as a whole continues to suffer from the
proliferation of small arms and armed groups, high
unemployment among young people, an
underdeveloped infrastructure, great numbers of
displaced persons and refugees, poor human rights
records and the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Those are
significant challenges that demand our attention. The
European Union is convinced that tackling those shared
problems also demands that we develop a regional
approach which is in concert with our efforts in each of
the individual countries concerned.

In considering a regional approach - and in
particular the convening ofthe international conference
for the Great Lakes region - it is encouraging to note
that the Secretary-General has said that the prospects
for success in the region have improved significantly,
most notably in Burundi and the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo.

The European Union believes that the success of
the Great Lakes conference will depend primarily on
the common political will of the countries involved in
achieving shared objectives. In that regard, we
welcome the important progress made in the
preparatory process to date, including the outcomes of
the most recent meeting in Addis Ababa.

The European Union suggests that the conference
will be all the more successful if an agreed time frame
for clear and realistic goals based on concrete
operational agreements or projects can be defined early
on. In that regard, it is now important that all the
national preparatory committees take immediate steps
to enable the agreed timetable for the holding of the
conference to proceed on schedule.

The EU welcomes the Secretary-General's call
for the first regional meeting of national preparatory
committees to be convened as soon as possible. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, it is during that
first regional preparatory meeting that detailed
discussions on substance and priority programmes
expected from the international conference will be
initiated at the regional level. In addition, coordination
and consistency with other existing processes such as
the New Partnership for Africa's Development are also
important.

As preparations continue throughout the year
towards the first summit of the conference, the
European Union stands ready to engage as a committed
and supportive partner to the countries of the region, as
a member of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes
region, through the good offices of the EU Special
Representative for the Great Lakes, Mr. Aldo Ajello,
and by our efforts to strengthen more effective
subregional cooperation and integration through
mechanisms such as those set up by the Economic
Community of Central African States.

As I mentioned previously, the prospects for the
international conference on the Great Lakes region are
much improved due to the progress made in the peace
processes in the region.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
European Union is encouraged by the significant
improvements achieved. Those include, inter alia, the
improved security situation, signs of national
reunification such as increased transport links and
improving commerce, better relations between that
country and its neighbours, and progress in security
sector reform. The EU commends the transitional
Government in its implementation of the Sun City and
Pretoria agreements. Difficult decisions have been
taken, and the commitment of the parties is
encouraging. Nevertheless, the situation remains
fragile, and the European Union urges President Kabila
and his Government to continue their work and put in
place the legislative framework and establish the
national institutions required for the holding of free
and transparent elections at all levels, the formation of
restructured and integrated military and police forces
and the implementation of a national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.

The European Union is committed to
underpinning peace, security and democracy in
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Operation Artemis
and the EU's support for the Integrated Police Unit are
clear demonstrations of that commitment. The EU
stands ready to support concrete initiatives for the
rebuilding ofa stable Congolese State able to guarantee
the safety of the Congolese people, national
reconciliation and stability in the region. In that regard,
the European Union commends the Secretary-General
for his initiative last week in calling a high-level
meeting to consider a strategy for the international
community's support of the security sector reform
effort.

The European Union is greatly encouraged by
recent progress in Burundi. Since we last had the
opportunity in the Council Chamber to discuss the state
of the peace process there, a significant milestone has
been reached with the convening of talks between
President Ndayizeye and a delegation from the Forces
nationales de liberation (FNL). The European Union is
pleased that those talks took place in a constructive and
cordial atmosphere. We also welcome the parties'
recognition of the need to end violence in Burundi and
their willingness to continue the dialogue.

The European Union hopes the proposed follow-
up meeting between President Ndayizeye and the FNL
takes place at the earliest opportunity. The EU calls for
the cessation of all hostilities in Burundi and for the
conclusion of an agreement for the inclusion of the
FNL in Burundian State institutions. The EU remains
willing to assist the parties in their quest for a peaceful
solution, and we reconfirm our readiness to support
Burundi in its reconstruction efforts, which remain
severely hampered by the ongoing violence in the
absence of an all-inclusive peace agreement.

The European Union is committed to working
closely with our African partners to strengthen African
capacities in the area of conflict resolution and
peacekeeping. In this regard, the European Union
commends the African Union for establishing the
African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) - the first force
of its kind in the history of the African Union. The
European Union fully supports this initiative and is
contributing €25 million to AMIB. In addition, a
number of EU member States have also made
significant national contributions, both in advance of
and in response to the Secretary-General's recent
appeal for support.

Notwithstanding the success and importance of
AMIB, the European Union believes, as stated last
November in this Chamber, that the option of a United
Nations operation in Burundi, authorized by the
Council, will have to be considered in due course. In
this regard, the EU welcomes the fact that the
Secretary-General is sending an assessment mission to
Burundi later this month, and we look forward to its
reporting in due course.

The wind of peace is blowing across the African
continent. Africa and its people deserve our full
support in their quest for peace, democracy and
sustainable development. Nowhere is this more true
than in Central Africa. The European Union recognizes
this obligation, and Africa, the United Nations and the
whole international community will find the EU to be a
willing and eager partner for peace and development
for all the African peoples.

