Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union,
as well as those to be made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf the Group of Friends
on the Responsibility to Protect.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
debate. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
excellent presentations, which underscored the gravity
of the situation.

A year ago, the Secretary-General had already
highlighted the need to strengthen respect for
international humanitarian law, the rules of which
are increasingly being flouted. In his latest report
(S/2018/462), he again rightly insists on that point and
provides new recommendations. It is in that spirit that
today Belgium would like to present some concrete
measures and suggestions that contribute to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

First of all, it must be remembered that the
primary responsibility lies with States. In Belgium, an
interministerial commission for humanitarian law was
established in 1987 to monitor the implementation of
international humanitarian law. We also have the means
to ensure perpetrators are held accountable, including
by establishing universal jurisdiction where permitted
by a sufficient connecting factor.

In addition to States, non-State armed groups must
also be made aware of the need to respect international
humanitarian law. Belgium commends the outstanding
work of Geneva Call in that regard, the results of which
are encouraging, as emphasized by the Secretary-
General in his report. However, our efforts would not
be complete if they did not were simultaneously applied
at the international level.

Belgium actively supports and participates in the
intergovernmental process of strengthening respect
for international humanitarian law, facilitated by
Switzerland and the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC). The work of promoting and protecting
international humanitarian law carried out by the ICRC
is more indispensable now than ever before against a
backdrop of flagrant erosion of these rules. It is for that
reason that my country has, for several years, provided
more than €20 million of financial support a year.

When States are unable to cope or are clearly lacking
in their obligation to protect their civilians, action
undertaken by the international community becomes
paramount. The protection of civilians is therefore at
the heart of the mandates of the vast majority of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In the majority of
cases, that mandate is implemented; however, under
some circumstances the protection of civilians has not
been ensured, with devastating human consequences. It
is on those cases that we must concentrate in order to
prevent their reoccurring.

Belgium believes that training is a cornerstone of
the prevention of such atrocities. We therefore decided
to invest in the training of contingents by supporting
the first French-language training in the protection of
civilians, to take place in a few weeks' time in Entebbe.
We are providing a specialized trainer and have
translated the course materials into French so that they
are accessible to more troop-contributing countries.

Like others, Belgium has made a commitment to
protect civilians through the Kigali Principles. We
welcome the broad adherence to the Principles by troop-
contributing countries. That is a positive development.
We encourage more countries to join the movement,
as well as to commit to concretely implementing the
Principles on the ground.

The protection of civilians is also an element that
must be taken into account in mediation efforts to
resolve conflicts. At a seminar at the United Nations
in February, chaired by Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister ofForeign Affairs Didier Reynders, it emerged
that there were sometimes difficulties in converging
the respective objectives of political mediation and
humanitarian negotiation. All too often, the actors
involved in each of those processes operate as though
in a vacuum. Strategic thinking is therefore necessary
in order to make the best choices while taking those
two dimensions into account.

In the face of increasing violations of international
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity - a
source of new conflicts in itself- we also call on the
Security Council to strengthen its support for national
judicial proceedings and hybrid mechanisms. States
that have not yet done so should also ratify the most
recent version of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court in order to ensure that the perpetrators
of atrocity crimes can no longer find refuge and thereby
escape accountability.

Finally, I would like to conclude by recalling the
obligations incumbent on all of us pursuant to resolution
2286 (2016), adopted two years ago by the Council, the
principles of which remain more pertinent than ever.
In that regard, Belgium is pleased to announce that
it is adhering to the principles set out in the political
declaration proposed by France on 31 October to take
concrete measures to strengthen the protection of
medical personnel in conflict zones.

