Mr. Niyonzima (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting to adopt the resolution on
Burundi. I would in particular like to thank the
delegation of France for its efforts to organize informal
2
consultations on the text of the resolution. I also thank
all delegations for the spirit of understanding and
flexibility they demonstrated during the negotiations in
order to arrive at a more or less balanced text.

Burundi is country emerging from an armed
conflict that ravaged it for 10 years. Its aftermath has
manifested itself in extreme poverty, youth
unemployment, the proliferation of weapons, crimes
involving weapons, the repatriation of refugees from
land disputes and the absence of moral and political
ethics, which has led certain opposition politicians to
attempt to plunge the country back into crisis, with a
view to reaping the dividends produced by the chaos.
Those are among the many challenges that the
Government of the Republic of Burundi, under the
leadership of His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
must overcome.

In the face of those enormous challenges, the
Government of Burundi has rolled up its sleeves. We
have considered security as the cornerstone of the
Government's efforts. The Government therefore first
embarked upon reforming the army and the national
police, as well as on the disarmament and
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
into normal civilian life in their villages and
communities of origin. As Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Karin Landgren clearly indicated
in her report dated 7 December, peace and security
prevail throughout the country.

Having put in place institutions to ensure the
country's functioning, the Government adopted a
national anti-corruption and good governance strategy,
established a national commission to address land and
other asset disputes and pursued the reform of the
country's security sector. Recognizing that good
governance requires an independent voice in order to
avoid complacency, the Government has set up solid
political safeguards through establishment of the
National Independent Human Rights Commission, the
Office of the Ombudsman and transitional justice
mechanisms.

Freedom of expression and association are part of
the reality of my country, which has surprised
representatives of the international community in
Bujumbura, notwithstanding the concerns raised in the
eleventh preambular paragraph of the resolution
regarding the Government, which must, from time to
time, reprimand certain journalists or representatives of
11-64530
the private media who have acted unprofessionally in
allowing themselves to justify hatred, civil
disobedience and even disinformation, either directly
or by providing a microphone to the opposition, who
often hide, unfortunately, in political organizations
disguised as civil society organizations.

The eleventh preambular paragraph of the
resolution also refers to an absence of political
dialogue with the extra-parliamentary opposition,
pointing a finger at the Government as if it were the
Government that opposed such dialogue. Yet, without
even waiting for the Security Council to request such
action, the President of the Republic has made several
appeals to the extra-parliamentary opposition for a
frank, direct dialogue. However, there has been no
response to any of those appeals.

The Government of the Republic of Burundi
thanks the Security Council for having indicated in the
twelfth preambular paragraph of the resolution, the
existence of unidentified armed elements that have
attacked security and defence forces and civilians. The
Government adds that, even among the ranks of the
National Police, there are elements that have at times
been found guilty of criminal acts and have been
severely punished.

By way of illustration, as was indicated in the
statement of the Government of Burundi on
7 December (S/PV.6677), when the annual report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Burundi (S/2011/751) was presented to the Council,
223 police officers have been punished. Some have
received prison sentences, while others were expelled
from the police ranks. Here, the Government of the
Republic of Burundi has been surprised by, and indeed
regrets, the fact that the Security Council has not
shown its appreciation of the measures that the
Government has taken.
11-64530
Paragraph 10 of the resolution referring to
extrajudicial killings allegedly orchestrated by the
authorities is in contrast with the draconian measures
taken against the security forces, which had earlier
been encouraged by military dictators to commit such
crimes against innocent civilian populations.

The Government of Burundi is not discouraged.
On the contrary, it has committed itself to continuing to
combat that culture of impunity until peace and
security, for all Burundians and all foreigners in the
country, prevails. The Government welcomes the fact
that the Council has noted significant progress in
several sectors of national life, the encouragement the
Council has provided and its willingness to continue to
provide support, in particular the appeal to the
international community to maintain its support to
Burundi towards peacebuilding and long-term
development. Those accomplishments, particularly in
the area of peace and security, would not have been
possible without the extremely welcome support of the
Security Council and the international community in
general.

The Government of the Republic of Burundi
wishes, with great sincerity, to thank the Security
Council for its wise advice and recommendations set
out in the resolution and commits itself to include them
promptly in the road map that is guiding its efforts, in
order to respond to the needs of its population and the
concerns of the international community.

