Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): The Nigerian
delegation would like to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate and for the concept note
provided to guide our discussion (S/2017/972, annex).
We also thank the Secretary- General, the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons for sharing their perspectives on
this important subject.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Conflict situations expose civilians, especially
women and girls, to grave dangers such as human
trafficking, sexual violence and slavery. Terrorist
groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Boko Haram have introduced a new dimension
into the issues of trafficking in persons and the sexual
exploitation of women and girls. Their outrageous
acts of depravity have shocked the world and drawn
unprecedented attention to the plight of women and
girls in conflict situations.

The war crimes and crimes against humanity that
they commit must not go unpunished. We are pleased
to be able to say that Boko Haram has been militarily
defeated. However, while we have had some success in
liberating a good number of the women and girls they
have held hostage, we will not relent until all of their
hostages are freed and reunited with their loved ones.
We would like to acknowledge the important role that
our neighbours Cameroon, Chad and the Niger are
playing in the fight against Boko Haram.
My delegation recognizes the importance of
ensuring that persons who have been trafficked are
shown empathy, treated as victims of crime and, in
line with domestic legislation, are not penalized or
stigmatized for their involvement in any unlawful
activities that they have been compelled to engage in.
Similarly, it is imperative to break the cycle of impunity
that may exist and to hold accountable those responsible
for committing such crimes. Nigeria is outraged by
the operation of slave markets in Libya where people
are sold like merchandise, a despicable act that must
be condemned. We take note of the assurances of the
Libyan Government that these cases will be investigated.
The Libyan situation demonstrates the complexity of
trafficking networks and the dehumanizing treatment
that they subject their victims to. We would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate that at no point in migrants'
movements - whether in countries of origin, transit or
destination - should they be enslaved or dehumanized.

The entities of the United Nations system must
work in concert to fight human trafficking in conflict
situations and in the context of terrorism, while
delivering their respective mandates. We believe that
this could be facilitated by improving the coordination
between and among the relevant agencies. As different
agencies have different capacities in terms of expertise,
a coordinated approach would enhance the overall
effectiveness of the United Nations in the fight against
human trafficking and terrorism.

With regard to how Member States can improve
their implementation of legal obligations to combat
human trafficking, we see a need for greater
commitment to implementing the relevant international
instruments. The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children is a case in point. It not only provides the first
internationally agreed-on definition of trafficking in
persons but also establishes a framework of obligations
and standards for Member States to formulate national
responses to fight human trafficking. Applying such
international instruments and the relevant domestic laws
is crucial to ensuring that those who engage in human
trafficking in conflict situations are held accountable.

In terms of national contributions to the global
efforts against the scourge of trafficking in general,
Nigeria strengthened the effectiveness of its domestic
laws under its 2015 trafficking in persons act by
expanding the scope of crimes that fall under human
trafficking. In that regard, crimes such as exporting
people for prostitution, procuring people for sexual
exploitation, recruiting people under 18 years of age
for prostitution, sexual exploitation or pornography,
and operating brothels or foreign travel that promote
prostitution and sexual exploitation are treated as
heinous crimes punishable under our laws.

Nigeria's establishment in 2003 ofa national agency
for the prohibition of trafficking in persons - creating
a permanent mechanism for rescuing, assisting,
supporting and catering to victims of human
trafficking, as well as for arresting, prosecuting and
jailing perpetrators of such trafficking - has helped
to refocus our fight against trafficking. Thanks to the
agency's establishment, the issue of human trafficking
has been effectively mainstreamed into broader
Government policies and programmes on economic and
social development, human rights, the rule of law, good
governance, education, natural-disaster management
and post-conflict reconstruction. The agency has also
strengthened partnerships among the Government, civil
society, faith-based organizations and religious bodies
and the media, as well as various rights groups. The
essence of those partnerships is to facilitate synergy
among the various stakeholders with a view to coming
up with policies and measures that can permanently
eradicate this menace.

With regard to the issue of mitigating victims'
suffering, the establishment of the United Nations
voluntary trust fund for victims of trafficking in
persons, especially women and children, is a welcome
development, since it should help to provide a reliable
way of restoring livelihoods and ensuring victims'
reintegration and rehabilitation into society. We urge for
more funding and donations in order to ensure that the
objectives behind the creation of the voluntary trust fund
are fully realized and of genuine benefit to victims. We
would also like to underscore our appreciation for the
efforts of UNODC and the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons in their sustained
operations to end trafficking in persons.

In the final analysis, we must aim to enhance
coherence and build alliances to confront these issues
head-on. Legal pathways to migration are an essential
component in dealing with this problem. Equally critical
is the need for greater responsibility-sharing to provide
protection to those in need. To achieve that objective,
we must implement the strategy laid out in the Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. With
solid partnerships and a clear approach, we can ensure
that criminals are brought to justice.

