Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting to consider the Secretary-
General's sixth progress report on developments in
C6te d'Ivoire and on the United Nations Operations
there, pursuant to Council resolution 1603 (2005) of
3June 2005 (S/2005/604). I would like to thank
members of the Council for their constant interest in
Cote d'Ivoire, which is evident from the public
meetings devoted to the situation in my country.

I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Oluyemi Adenidji, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Nigeria, and Mr. Said Djinnit,
Commissioner of the African Union Commission, for
having travelled here specially to brief the Security
Council on developments in the African Union
Mediation and, in particular, to report on the 40th
meeting of the Peace and Security Council, held at
Addis Ababa on 6 October.

I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, President of Nigeria, for his
personal involvement, and to the Mediator of the
African Union, Mr. Mbeki, for his tireless efforts as
they help us to look for a peaceful solution to the crisis
that has lasted too long.

I would like to welcome here Mr. Pierre Schori,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Antonio Monteiro, High Representative for the
elections in cote d'Ivoire, for their invaluable
contribution to bringing peace and stability back to
Cote d'Ivoire.

While we welcome the excellent sixth progress
report, which covers all of the conditions that must be
met if peace and stability are to return to my country, I
would, nevertheless, like to offer a few comments,
which in no way call into question the substance of that
report.

The general tone of the report would suggest that
it does not take sufficiently into account the fact that
Cote d'Ivoire has been at war for three years with
consequences that we all know. The northern and
western half of the country is occupied. There are more
small arms and light weapons in circulation and there
is a virtual absence of the State in the occupied area.
People are simply frustrated because the crisis has
bogged down and because they are suffering on
account of this. The rebels keep delaying laying down
their arms and this, despite all the sacrifices made by
the President in the name of the people of cote
d'Ivoire.

My delegation would reserve the right to convey
to the Secretary-General in due course the observations
of the Government of cote d'Ivoire on his sixth report.
Here, I would simply like to reiterate my Government's
commitment to ensure safety for goods and persons
and freedom of movement for the impartial forces. As
members know, major security measures were taken
inter alia after the deadly attacks in Guitrozon and Petit
Duekoue, in the western part of the country, and in
Anyama and Agoville, north of Abijan.

Turning to the decisions taken by the 40th
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, those decisions support the Government's
constant position reflected in the Ivorian constitution.
As the presidential election could not be held,
primarily because the rebels are still in arms and the
country is still divided, the President of the Republic
will remain in office until the new president is sworn
in.

The arrangements for government proposed by
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
will, we are sure, make it possible for the peace
process to continue. Today, it is blocked primarily with

respect to the process of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration (DDR).

My delegation strongly hopes that the decisions
of the African Union will be endorsed by the Security
Council. Discussions on what some call a
"constitutional vacuum" must be ended so that all the
parties can get down to work to prepare for free and
transparent elections - the only way out of this
crisis - on the basis of the various agreements,
particularly the road map in the 6 April 2005 Pretoria
Agreement and the 29 June 2005 Pretoria Declaration.

