Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We are grateful to Mr. Farid
Zarif for his briefing. We welcome to the Security
Council His Excellency the Prime Minister of Serbia.
And we thank Mr. Thaci for his statement.

The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo plays a vital role in ensuring stability in
Kosovo. We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team for their contribution
to the security and stability of Kosovo.

All constituents of the international presence in
Kosovo must maintain neutrality while executing their
respective mandates. Although the overall situation in
Kosovo remained stable during the past three months,
the situation in the northern area continues to be fragile.
We are particularly concerned over the recurrence
of violence in northern Kosovo. Such incidents can
undermine the security and stability of the territory,
as well as have a regressive effect on the political
process. The incidents also point to the need to address
deficiencies in the training and discipline of Kosovo's
police.

We look forward to the resumption of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue without any preconditions,
following the formation of a new Government in Serbia.
In order for the process to be productive, it is important
to implement the agreements that were reached earlier.

We take note of the progress made for the
certification of university diplomas. We would urge both
sides to resolve the issues pertaining to the agreements
on regional cooperation and freedom of movement, as
well as the agreement on the integrated management of
crossing points. The authorities in Kosovo need to move
towards enacting the necessary legislation on cadastre
records.

The implementation of agreements, however, will
need the demonstration of political will and flexibility
on the part of both sides.

The decline in the number of voluntary returnees
during the reporting period covered by the Secretary-
General's report (S/2012/603) is a matter of concern.

The report highlights some incidents of minorities
being targeted. Such incidents exacerbate the perception
of insecurity and deter voluntary returns; they should
be investigated properly and the perpetrators should be
brought to justice.

Acts of vandalism against sites of culture and
religious heritage are unacceptable and need to be
addressed effectively.

Finally, we call upon all parties to pursue the path
of dialogue, engagement and mutual accommodation
for the sake of lasting peace in Kosovo and the region.

