Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
express our gratitude to you, Sir, for your able
stewardship of the Council this month and to commend
you for convening this debate. I would also like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for her report
and her important efforts, and the Executive Director
of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman, for her work.

As Israel assigns high priority to the protection of
children, we read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/826), and are encouraged
by the efforts of the Security Council, its Working
Group, the Secretary-General and his staff. Israel
supports international initiatives in this arena,
including the adoption of the landmark Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Protocol. To this end, we
also invited Ms. Coomaraswamy to visit our country,
and we look forward to that visit soon.

Across the globe, children are being recruited to
join roving militias, armed gangs and terrorist groups.
In our region, we have seen the recruitment of children
for terror attacks and violence, including but not
limited to suicide bombings. We have seen the cruel
exploitation of children as human shields. And we have
seen the transformation of children's bedrooms into
bomb-making factories, schools into weapons
storehouses and kindergartens into terrorist safe
houses. To combat that disturbing phenomenon, more
attention must be paid to the incitement and
provocation by communal and political leaders in our
region as a whole, including in the Palestinian
Authority.
Youth are extremely impressionable. They are
susceptible to brainwashing by individuals of
popularity, and indoctrination by the hateful materials
found in the textbooks used in our region. Those forms
of incitement are the most harmful, as they pervert the
value and worth of education. In order to truly protect

children, we must understand the educational
consequences of incitement. Hence, it is with regret
that we note that the severity of that issue was not
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General. The
incitement of children is no less dangerous than
terrorism. It nurtures an infrastructure of hate and
poisons the life stream of society. We hope more
attention will be given to that pressing issue in the
future.

Similarly, we regret that the report omits
reference to the fact that children have actually been
recruited by Palestinian terrorists to carry out attacks.
This is a reality we face and it has been documented
both by Israel and by human rights groups. We hope
this reality is given attention by the Council and in
future reports.

This year has been an especially difficult one for
the children in our region, caught in the crossfire of
vicious armed conflict and between currents of
extremism and hate. Terrorist attacks in the north by
Hizbullah and in the south by Palestinian terrorists
have blanketed civilian life in Israel since early this
summer.

While children in Israel's north have gone on to
rebuild their lives, children in Israel's south continue to
suffer from Palestinian terror. The situation became so
grave that recently thousands of children were
evacuated from their homes in Sderot. The
psychological toll that terrorism has levied on children
is only beginning to be understood. Just this morning,
we learned that record numbers of teenaged students in
the north of Israel have dropped out of school owing to
post-traumatic stress. In the south, parents and medical
health professionals are seeing exceptionally high
levels of anxiety and fear among children, many of
them showing signs of trauma and regression such as
bed-wetting and nightmares. Some children cannot
even remember what life was like before the Qassam
rockets.

It is important to recall that no one has a
monopoly on victim status. The suffering of all
children - and I emphasize, all children: Lebanese,
Israeli and Palestinian children - must be
acknowledged. Denying the suffering of one side
undermines the prospects for mutual understanding and
tolerance.

Unfortunately, in this world body over the past
month, we have seen exactly that: a willingness to
ignore one side of suffering and to adopt one-sided
resolutions. The resolutions adopted by the Human
Rights Council and the General Assembly politicized
tragic human suffering, projected a one-sided version
of history and distorted reality. Those resolutions
turned suffering children into political pawns to
increase criticism of Israel, while ignoring reality on
the ground and the source of terror.

I would like to take just a moment to note that
Israel finds the statement, made during today's
deliberations, that more children than combatants were
killed during this summer's conflict in Lebanon - and
I suppose that those statements meant terrorists - to
be highly troubling and questionable. I am unaware of
the source of the data cited, but what I do know is that
Hizbollah, by firing weapons from civilian areas and
using civilians as human shields, deliberately distorted
the distinction between civilian and terrorist. They
attempted to escape retaliation and avoid responsibility
for their terror. The obscurity surrounding the number
of civilians and terrorists killed merely confirms that
tactic. While the death of every innocent civilian -
adult and child alike - in time of war is a real tragedy,
the specific statement that we heard today could lead to
conclusions that are clearly problematic.

The ceasefire agreed upon two days ago in our
region is a sign of promise, a promise of peace and
hope for us and for our children - all children. But
more must be done. We must see to it that the tensions
underlying this conflict, the hatred and incitement, and
Hamas's disregard for its internationally accepted
obligations - to recognize Israel, to renounce violence
and terror and to abide by previous agreements - are
addressed.

Israel awaits a genuine Palestinian partner that
desires peace. Indeed, our region has had a difficult
few months. But the past cannot be changed, and the
victims on all sides of the conflict cannot be returned.
What remains is the course that we chart together to
prevent further tragedies and to bestow a legacy on the
next generation. If we do so, we can transform
animosity into amity and embark together - not in the
distant future, but in our day - on the path of mutual
recognition, respect and direct dialogue.

