Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Let me join
others in welcoming President Tadic' back to the
Security Council today. The presence of the Secretary-
General is also very welcome.

The Security Council meets today in unusual
circumstances. A new State has been established in
Europe against the wishes of its former parent State
and against the wishes of a permanent member of the
Council. That new State has been recognized today by
many Governments in Europe and beyond, including
my own. Formal letters of recognition have today been
delivered to the President of Kosovo by British
Government representatives.

It is important to understand how this came about
and to understand why the events of recent months, of
yesterday and today, and of the weeks and months to
come are inevitable as well as exceptional. At the heart
of today's controversy is a resolution adopted at this
table in June 1999. In that resolution, the Council took
an unprecedented step: it effectively deprived Belgrade
of the exercise of authority in Kosovo. It did so
because the then regime in Belgrade had not just
unilaterally deprived Kosovo of its powers of self-
government, thereby triggering a rebellion; it had tried
in 1999 to expel the majority population from the
territory of Kosovo. Hundreds of thousands of men,
women and children were driven from Kosovo by the
State security forces of Slobodan Milosevic. People
being herded onto trains provoked images from the
1940s. The events of 1999 shape the events we see
now.
In resolution 1244 (1999) the Security Council
recognized that the human rights of the people of
Kosovo and the stability of the region could be secured
only if Serbia did not govern Kosovo. It established a
United Nations mission to serve as Kosovo's interim
government. That mission had two crucial tasks: first,
to help Kosovo establish its own institutions of self-
government and to pass authority progressively to
those institutions; and secondly, to facilitate a process
to determine Kosovo's future status, taking into
account the Rambouillet accords, which had specified
that such a settlement had to be based on the will of the
people of Kosovo. Resolution 1244 (1999) placed no
limits on the scope of that status outcome, and
paragraph 11 (a) of the resolution is clear that the
substantial autonomy which Kosovo was to enjoy
within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was an
interim outcome pending a final settlement.

Within two years of the resolution's adoption, a
new, democratic, Government came to power in
Belgrade. That Government and its successors have
wrestled with the legacy of Milosevic's war crimes.
They are right to argue that they should not be
punished for those crimes. But equally, they have a
duty to help resolve the problems caused by Milosevic,
and they must accept that the legacy of Milosevic's
oppression and violence has made it impossible for
Kosovo to return to control by Belgrade. When, in the
middle of the final status process, the Government of
Serbia changed its constitution to exclude any future
for Kosovo outside Serbia, it effectively ended any
chance of a negotiated settlement. The international
community cannot be party to a settlement that is
opposed by more than 90 per cent of the territory's
population. Apart from anything else, that would be
contrary to our overriding priority of upholding peace
and security.

My Government is convinced that the proposal of
the United Nations Special Envoy for supervised
independence, which the Kosovo Assembly has
embraced and committed itself to implement, is the
only Viable way forward. It commits Kosovo to protect
its minority populations. Other than the Kosovo Serbs,
all of them - the Roma, Jews, Turks and others -
have endorsed the Ahtisaari plan. That speaks for itself.

The United Kingdom urges Kosovo's Serb
population to play a full part in the political, economic
and social life of Kosovo. The United Nations Mission,
the European Union (EU) and NATO will work to
ensure that the commitments made by Prime Minister
Thaci on 17 February and the far-reaching provisions
to protect minorities in the Ahtisaari plan are
implemented in full. Kosovo's progress towards the
European Union will depend on, inter alia, how well it
treats its minorities.

We also expect the Serbian authorities and
Kosovo Serb leaders to take no action to promote the
separation of the north of Kosovo from the rest of the
country. Excluding Kosovo's Government from
majority-Serb areas of Kosovo will not be accepted.
Kosovo Serb leaders should work with the Government
in Pristina and with the international presences.

The Ahtisaari plan also commits Kosovo to
accept extensive and continuing international
supervision. NATO has agreed to continue to provide
security in Kosovo, and the European Union has agreed
to deploy a rule-of-law mission to oversee the buildup
of Kosovo's capacity in this crucial area.

One delegation has sought to argue that the
European Union mission can deploy only with the
express agreement of the Security Council. The United
Kingdom disagrees. The EU has been part of the
international civilian presence in Kosovo from the
outset. The United Nations Mission has evolved and
developed over the past nine years, adapting to
changing circumstances within its original broad
mandate without requiring any new decisions from the
Council. I do not want to repeat once again our views
on the legal position but for the sake of clarity they are
attached to the circulated copy of my statement.

The European Union is committed to a better
future for the region as a whole. My Government
applauds the European vision for Serbia that President
Tadic has consistently displayed. As the European
Council said in December 2007, a stable and
prosperous Serbia, integrated into the family of
European nations, is important for the stability of the
region. That is the future open to Serbia, and my
Government calls on its leaders to look ahead and to
focus on that prize.

More immediately, we call on Serbia's leadership -
religious as well as political - to encourage restraint, to
refrain from provocative words or actions and to desist
from punitive measures or threats against Kosovo. We are
concerned about the violent demonstrations against some
embassies in Belgrade and about the attacks on
international offices in North Mitrovica.
I began by saying that the Security Council was
facing an extraordinary set of circumstances. It is not
ideal for Kosovo to become independent without the
consent of Serbia and without consensus in the
Council. My Government believes that the unique
circumstances of the violent break-up of the former
Yugoslavia and the unprecedented United Nations
administration of Kosovo make this a sui generis case
that creates no wider precedent - a point that all EU
member States agreed upon today.

My delegation hopes that the Security Council, in
the weeks and months to come, can recover its unity of
purpose on this issue and that the United Nations on
the ground will continue to make its contribution to
stability, security and prosperity in the Balkans
alongside the European Union, NATO and others, with
the active backing of the Security Council.

