Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We have
listened most attentively to approximately 80
delegations, which have expressed their views on the
situation in Iraq at this open meeting of the Security
Council, convened thanks to the League of Arab States
and the Non-Aligned Movement. Chile can only
understand the somber and depressed atmosphere that
has been so clearly expressed in so many of the
statements made yesterday and today. Our position as a
member of the Security Council, is known by all
Members of the Organization. Up to the very last
minute, together with other members of the Council,
we promoted a peaceful solution, convinced that it was
possible and that it was the best approach, both for the
international community and for the countries directly
involved in the conflict.

For a week now, we have been meeting in the
Council Chamber, and have then walked through the
corridors and rooms of the United Nations, surrounded
by television screens that display the horrible images
of war, like accusatory eyes reminding us that we could
have and should have done more. Today, however, it
seems urgent that we devote ourselves to looking to the
future, especially the future of the United Nations.

I would like to start with a general observation.
My country values multilateralism, not just as a
convenient, available option but as a necessary and
indispensable requisite that is part of our identity as a
sovereign nation, our democratic ideals and our
geographical dimension and location.

That is why we accord a vital role to the United
Nations. We admire how, over the past 50 years, the
United Nations has contributed to regulating relations
among States and to a very broad range of
humanitarian activities. Though imperfect, defective
and frequently bureaucratic, no one can deny the
irreplaceable role it has played in protecting the
security of persons and in promoting peace and
sustainable development. Over the last 50 years, it has
dealt with many crises and challenges to its authority
and relevance. After each crisis, as soon as the dust has
settled, the principle actors have returned to the United
Nations. All have recognized in the end that in it lies
our sole source of international legitimacy and legality.

Yet, we should not think that these resources are
inexhaustible. Immersed as we all are in a globalized
world, faced with a situation that will define the shape
of our international system for many decades, we
believe that the risks the United Nations is now facing
are great. That is why we fully agree with the
Secretary-General: this is the time for the members of
the Council to make a special effort to bring their
positions closer together and to resume a dialogue that
restores the Organization's capacity to act.

Our effort should be patiently aimed at finding
those principles that unite us, in a deliberate attempt to
find the common ground that made it possible two
years ago for the Council and the United Nations as a
whole to adopt a unanimous position in the fight
against terrorism.

We could start with the proposals made yesterday
in the Council by the Secretary-General when he
signalled the two principles that should guide our
decisions on the future of Iraq.

"The first principle is respect for Iraq's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence. The second is respect for the
right of the Iraqi people to determine their own
political future and control their own natural
resources."

We hope that those principles can contribute to
uniting the members of the Council and to orienting us
in taking the very difficult decisions awaiting us in the
very near future.

Today, we should devote ourselves to resolving
the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Chile supports a
pragmatic, flexible and urgent approach to the
proposals of the Secretary-General on this issue. The
information that the Council has in its possession leads
one to think that if the Council does not adopt a
resolution on this issue in the next two or three days,
we will have to grieve over the greatest humanitarian
catastrophe that the United Nations has ever faced. We
have hope that work to produce a draft resolution
acceptable to all will be successful in a very short time.
But the Council must give its support to all initiatives
to stabilize and to assist a region so greatly afflicted by
the disasters of war.

Chile maintains its hope that the proposals for a
road map which, it was announced by President Bush,
was recently submitted to the Palestinian and Israeli
parties, will make it possible to achieve headway on an
issue that is so central and crucial to international
peace and security. The creation of a Palestinian State
coexisting in peace with the State of Israel is an issue
to which Chile attaches the greatest priority, and to
which the Council must devote all its energy.

As do all in the Chamber, my country desires a
cessation of hostilities in Iraq. We call for the full
implementation of the Geneva Conventions and respect
for international humanitarian law on the part of both
parties. We express our regret at the death of civilians
and soldiers. Both bring mourning to families both here
and elsewhere. We express our condolences at the
violence that continues to morally mutilate the lives of
so many thousands of children because it leaves them
forever incapable of harbouring the hope that civilized
life is possible.

