Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): Mr. President, I wish you and your team every success as you assume the monthly rotating presidency of the Security Council. I thank Belgium for its presidency last month. I also very much thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for being here, for her informative briefing and for her leadership. We also extend our thanks to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the entire United Nations country team for the indispensable work they carry out in support of Iraq's security, stability and prosperity. Iraq still stands at a crossroads - as it did when we were briefed last December (see S/PV.8676) - and, as the Special Representative said, it is in fact still in the headlines. Iraqis are choosing their new political leaders as a result of their legitimate demands regarding economic opportunity, good governance, electoral reforms and responsiveness to all Iraqis. We call on Iraq's next leaders to urgently deliver those reforms, which will combat corruption and promote fair and free elections. We also call on them to protect demonstrators and hold their killers to account, transparently and in accordance with the rule of law and Iraq's Constitution. Such reforms should be embraced because they are in Iraq's national interest. Doing so will limit the influence of destabilizing armed groups outside State control, attract foreign investment and ultimately help convert Iraq's rich natural resources into a higher quality of life for all Iraqis. Iraqis continue to demand a sovereign State that affords them dignity and to resist Iranian coercion, and, in the face of outrageous killings, beatings, kidnappings and torture, the reformist movement endures. That violent assault on the freedom of peaceful expression and assembly has no place in a democracy. The United States will continue to use all available national tools to promote accountability for corruption and serious human rights abuses. That includes our recent national designation of four Iraqis implicated in serious human rights abuses and corruption. I should note that we still face threats by Iran- backed militias, even following the attacks against United States and coalition forces hosted on Iraqi bases, which killed an American earlier in the year. Iran- backed militias besieged the United States Embassy in Baghdad for nearly 26 hours in recent days, and there continues to be rocket attacks on it, as recently as the last 48 hours. We underscore the Government of Iraq's special duty under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations to take all appropriate steps to protect the premises of diplomatic facilities. Together, Iraqi and coalition forces continue to jointly pursue the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS) on the battlefield. We should be mindful that ISIS remains a threat and we call on the international community to assist Iraq in its critical counter- terrorism efforts. Looking ahead, if Iraq's new leaders do not address the people's legitimate economic and governance grievances, the country could reverse years of progress towards stability and prosperity for a new generation of Iraqis. It is because of those high stakes that the work of UNAMTIand Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert is so crucial. We call on Iraq's new leaders to fully embrace UNAMI's mandate in promoting inclusive political dialogue and _ reconciliation, advancing structural reforms, facilitating regional engagement and addressing long-standing issues between Baghdad and the Kurdistan Regional Government. In a country as full of potential as Iraq, it is hard to isolate a single priority today, but I wish to draw the Council's attention to the topic of credible early elections, as several Iraqi leaders have called for. As part of its mandate, UNAMI's technical electoral assistance, in coordination with the Government of Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission, will be critical in the months ahead. We encourage UNAMI, alongside locally based non-governmental organizations (NGOs), to assist Iraq towards an inclusive electoral process. I would also like to stress the value of UNAMI's work, as directed by its mandate, in the monitoring and documenting of human rights abuses and violations. That paper trail is essential to promoting accountability for those responsible for violence against peaceful protesters. We are increasingly concerned about the lack of progress and humanitarian access for NGOs. Humanitarian NGOs, including many United States partners, have been unable to carry out life-saving activities for all Iraqis of all faiths and ethnicities over the past three months owing to a backlog of access requests. We commend UNAMI's engagement on that issue and call on the Iraqi authorities to urgently find a solution. On the unresolved issue of Kuwaiti and third- country missing persons, property and archives from the first Gulf War, the United States is strongly committed to the efforts of UNAMI, the Tripartite Commission and the International Committee of the Red Cross to make further progress. The recent discovery of remains in Samawah, as was mentioned this morning, is one step towards healing and reconciliation between Iraq and Kuwait. Iraq's political landscape may seem challenging in the immediate term, yet we remain optimistic that Iraq's new leaders will put the interests of all Iraqis first and believe that they can deliver structural reforms to chart a new prosperous course for Iraq, with UNAMI and the international community standing by its side.
