Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, as well as the
statement by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group ofFriends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

We thank the Lithuanian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today's debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his very forward-looking
tenth report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2013/689).

The protection of civilians in times of
war - a concept at the heart of international
humanitarian law - imposes on parties to an armed
conflict the obligation to protect civilians by respecting
fundamental principles, such as the distinction
between civilians and combatants, proportionality and
prudence in attacks and, naturally, the prohibition of
indiscriminate attacks. Similarly, parties to a conflict
have the obligation to give special protection to medical
staff and equipment and humanitarian assistance. They
must guarantee access to medical care and humanitarian
assistance. Unfortunately, those principles are violated
on a daily basis, particularly in Syria and South Sudan.

The Syrian Government is bombing certain
locations with barrels containing explosives, thus
killing many civilians, including children. However, the
use of indiscriminate explosive weapons in populated
areas violates the rules and principles of international
humanitarian law, as the Secretary-General noted in his
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Moreover, besides the agreement concluded for
the evacuation of women and children from the city
of Homs, the parties must allow humanitarian relief
to reach the entire civilian population, guarantee
the security of humanitarian convoys and remove
administrative obstacles. The parties must guarantee
humanitarian access to the civilian population.

In September 2013, at the initiative of the Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs, 27 States from several
continents and the European Commission signed a
petition calling on all the parties to the Syrian conflict
to immediately respect their obligations with regard
to protecting civilians as well as medical personnel,
infrastructure and transport vehicles, to authorize
and facilitate immediate and unhindered access to
humanitarian relief throughout the country and to
guarantee without delay the security and safety of
humanitarian personnel in carrying out their functions.

Belgium today wishes to reiterate that appeal,
which the presidential statement of 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/15) partially integrated and which the
statement made by the observer of the European Union
earlier today also addressed. Belgium also wishes
to recall that 11 actions that could be implemented
immediately were developed in Rome on 3 February
by the high-level working group on the humanitarian
challenges in Syria.

Belgium would also like to reiterate that there can
be no lasting peace unless justice is done - unless
the perpetrators of atrocious crimes are punished by a
criminaljurisdiction. Granted, as the Secretary-General
states in his report, some progress is being made in that
regard in a number of countries. But further efforts are
always required from States, which bear the primary
responsibility for combating impunity. Belgium calls
on all States that have still to do so to adopt national
legislation providing for the prosecution of persons
suspected of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
crimes of genocide, to ratify the Rome Statute and to
fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court.

Belgium encourages Member States to establish
witness protection programmes, for which it is ready to
share its own technical expertise. Finally, we stress the
need to bolster inter-State judicial cooperation in order
to facilitate the prosecution of those crimes before
national jurisdictions, in accordance with the principle
of complementarity.

I also want to recall - as the Head of the European
Union delegation just did - the letter that was
addressed to the Security Council over a year ago by
57 countries, including Belgium, expressing their wish
to see the situation in Syria referred to the International
Criminal Court Prosecutor.

Allow me to emphasize that it is always preferable
to prevent conflicts before getting to a point where
peace missions are necessary. That is why we support
the Secretary-General's "Rights up front" initiative,
which stresses the promotion of early warning and
timely action.

I would like to reiterate the initiative of France
on voluntarily restricting the right of the veto when a
situation of a mass crime is recorded - a voluntary
approach that does not involve a revision of the Charter
of the United Nations. Belgium encourages the other
permanent members the Security Council to be open
to this.

The primary responsibility for the protection
of civilian populations lies with the parties to the
conflicts. The Security Council nevertheless has a role
to play in ensuring that peacekeeping operations have
a clear mandate, enjoining them not only to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid but also to protect
civilians, particularly those under imminent threat of
physical violence, as provided for in sub-paragraph 8
(h) of resolution 2086 (2013). Everything must be done,
both by the United Nations and the Member States,
so that all persons engaged in those operations are
aware of the obligation to protect civilians. Similarly,
we must ensure that the meticulous preparation of
peacekeeping operations, their organization and the
requisite coordination with the local authorities and
all international stakeholders guarantee the success of
the protection-of-civilians aspect of the United Nations
mandate.

In his report the Secretary-General refers to the
challenges that new weapons technologies pose to the
protection of civilians in times of war. First, concerning
armed drones, their use must be in accordance with
the rules of international law, including humanitarian
law and the laws governing armed conflicts. Secondly,
regarding autonomous weapons systems, or killer
robots, before their use becomes widespread, it is
essential to begin thinking and discussion, including
in the United Nations, on the ethical questions and
criminal responsibility arising from the use of such
weapons.

