Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by expressing our appreciation
to Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Great Lakes Region, for his valuable
and last briefing. I wish to thank him for his tireless
efforts since his tenure began to engage in dialogue and
cooperation with the Governments of the Great Lakes
region in order to respond to the challenges it is facing.
I also wish to congratulate Mr. Huang Xia on his
appointment as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region. I hope that he will be able
to build upon the achievements of the previous period.

I wish to address three points today: first, the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region;
secondly, the security situation in the Great Lakes
region; and thirdly, the humanitarian situation.

First, with regard to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, we welcome the progress
made since the framework agreement was signed six
years ago. It summarizes the challenges facing the region
and provides solutions, The framework agreement is
considered the major factor guaranteeing stability in
the Great Lakes region. In that regard, we call on all its
signatories to fully honour the commitments contained
in the agreement and to implement its provisions in
order to address various challenges faced by the region.

Furthermore, we appreciate the role of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, which held its ninth meeting
in Kampala in October 2018. We hail the outcome of
that meeting, particularly concerning cooperation
among the States of the region to neutralize destructive
forces and strengthen relevant mechanisms, in concert
with the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), in particular the Joint Follow-up
Mechanism on the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF).
We call on those States to strengthen cooperation in
order to make even further progress, notwithstanding
the challenges faced by them in the areas of security
and illegal trafficking in natural resources.

The State of Kuwait supports the vital and
important role that the Special Envoy and his Office
play in enhancing the mechanisms that contribute to
the implementation of the framework agreement. We
also support his basic role in the promotion of capacity-
building, as well as his good offices in convening
consultations among the States of the region, his
preventive diplomacy and his role in strengthening
cooperation among the States of the region and
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, ICGLR and the Southern African
Development Community.

Regarding the political situation, we welcome the
recent positive political progress in the region, such
as the first peaceful transfer of power in the history
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We look
forward to the formation of the new Government as
soon as possible in order to build upon those recent
positive achievements. There is no doubt that security
and political stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are important catalysts for the economic
development of the country and of the Great Lakes
region and, as indicated in the Framework agreement,
could result in further support from the Security
Council and the international community.

Secondly, the security situation remains a concern
for the international community because of the continued
deterioration of the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Armed groups are more active in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The number of
attacks by the ADF has increased in Beni, claiming the
lives of 245 civilians in 2018, including many women
and children. We condemn those attacks and urge the
national forces to confront them and to develop plans to
put an end to such attacks in future.

We commend the cooperation among the States
of the region, as noted by Mr. Djinnit in his briefing,
particularly among the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, for the repatriation
and reintegration of former Forces De'mocratiques
de Liberation du Rwanda combatants. We also
commend the support provided as part of the follow-up
mechanism, which represents a positive contribution to
strengthening regional stability.

We agree on the importance of repatriating former
Mouvement du 23 mars combatants, as indicated by
the Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2019/229)
and in accordance with international law. Regarding
other positive developments in the region, I welcome
the agreement signed between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups in
Bangui on 6 February. We hope that that agreement
will make it possible to achieve stability in the country
and strengthen stability in the entire region. We also
welcome the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan.
Thirdly, we are concerned at the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation as well as at the lack of
security and stability in the Great Lakes region, which
has resulted in 7 million displaced people and more
than 4 million refugees. The burden is growing for the
countries of the region, and it is becoming difficult to
find solutions to the situation. We call upon the States
in the region to make greater efforts to address the
humanitarian situation. We also commend the role of
the United Nations, through the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
responding to the humanitarian crisis.

We must recall the difficulties that the region has
been experiencing as a result of the spread of Ebola,
particularly in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially since the epidemic
could spread to neighbouring countries despite its
tireless efforts.

To conclude, it is important to address the
challenges that the region faces in a comprehensive
manner. Such an approach should confront security,
political, humanitarian and development challenges,
and the United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework would also help the Great Lakes region
in this respect. The Office of the Special Envoy deals
with all these areas, with the aim of harmonizing
development efforts with the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework signed by the countries of
the region.

