Mr. Ryan (Ireland): My delegation fully
associates itself with the statement to be made shortly
by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union.

The ever-deepening cycle of repression and
violence in the Middle East makes it more than ever
necessary to make rapid progress in the renewed efforts
to reach a just, peaceful and comprehensive settlement.
The situation in the Middle East is, as the Secretary-
General has often said, one of the world's truly
dangerous fault lines. Manifest injustice, instability,
insecurity, a frozen political landscape: these pose an
unacceptable and continuous threat to the region and to
international peace and security. The international
community has a clear responsibility and duty to move
beyond rhetoric and language. Not to act now would be
a dereliction of duty to the people of the region and to
the cause of international peace and security.

We and others have said many times in this
Chamber that no solution will be found through
terrorism or any other form of violence or through
military action. Ireland, for this reason, calls once
again for an immediate end to Israeli military
occupation; for the full implementation of resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002); for an end to all forms of
terrorism; for full support for efforts by the Palestinian
Authority to institute reforms; for an end to the
harassment of the presidential compound in Ramallah;
for the early convening of an international conference;
and for support for the ongoing efforts of the "quartet"
and regional actors towards a peaceful solution.

Acts of terrorism are not only deeply wrong in
themselves; they bring great suffering on the
Palestinian people, and do not bring forward by one
day the achievement of their legitimate aspirations.
Ireland condemns all such acts.

The Government of Israel has every right to
defend its citizens against terrorism. It must do so,
however, through measures that are in accord with
international humanitarian law. Repression and the
ongoing occupation of Palestinian territories will
inevitably breed more of the hatred and resentment
upon which terrorism feeds.

The violence and destruction carried out by the
Israeli Defence Force at the Palestinian presidential
compound in Ramallah are deeply reprehensible and,
furthermore, are counterproductive. These attacks place
in grave danger the physical security of Chairman
Arafat, who is the elected leader of the Palestinian
people, and therefore an essential partner in the peace
process. They also militate against the efforts currently
under way to achieve reform in the Palestinian
Authority.

It makes no sense to call on the Palestinian
Authority to take measures to combat terrorism, while
at the same time destroying the means necessary to
implement such measures and refusing the political
perspective necessary to support them.

The present Government of Israel must be
brought by its friends to a realization that its present
reliance on close security control of the entire
Palestinian people will not bring the Israeli people the
security that they deserve. It failed in the past and it
will fail again. The only way to peace is through an
agreement that meets the legitimate national aspirations
on all sides.

It is vitally important to put in place a framework
for the long-delayed achievement by the Palestinian
people of their legitimate rights and for the conclusion
of a just and peaceful settlement between the Israeli
and Palestinian peoples, who are fated to live side by
side, and between Israel and all its neighbours.

It is absolutely clear that the parties cannot now
reach a settlement on their own. Current efforts on the
part of the international community to help them find a
way forward must be vigorously and urgently pursued.
This is profoundly in the interest of both the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples.

This is not just a local issue, but one with major
regional and indeed global implications. It is also,
therefore, profoundly in the interest of the entire
international community that a lasting and just
settlement is reached. The time has come to convene an
international conference. The aimlessness and drift that
have taken hold must be shaken loose. Every day that
passes without constructive action magnifies the risk
that further and perhaps far greater violence will be
unleashed.

There is no room for delay or preconditions. The
three problems identified by the Secretary-General -
occupation, violence and economic misery - have to
be addressed, and addressed urgently, in parallel.

The blueprints are there, in abundance. In
addition to resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), we
have the Saudi initiative, endorsed at the Arab League
Summit in Beirut, we have our own resolution 1397
(2002), we have the proposals made recently by the
President of Egypt and we have statements of vision by
regional and international leaders. In effect, a virtual
consensus has emerged in the international community.

We need now to see the leadership and the
statesmanship that would take advantage of this
unprecedented moment in the history of the Middle
East conflict and push it vigorously towards a just and
lasting solution.

