Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Regrettably, we have concluded that the
quality of the reports of the High Representative for
the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina gets worse every time. It is clear that
Mr. Inzko is trying to tailor his assessments of what is
going on in the country according to his notion - which
suits him and the other supporters of the never-ending
preservation of an outside protectorate for Bosnia

and Herzegovina - of the incapacity of the country's
governing bodies and entire political class generally.
We believe that approach is fundamentally mistaken,
disrespectful to Bosnians and untethered to reality.

Despite the painful legacy ofthe 1992-1995 conflict,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is gradually developing on
both the social and economic fronts. Its gross domestic
product, exports and people's incomes are increasing and
unemployment is falling. On 7 October general elections
were once again held in accordance with democratic
standards, as was confirmed by international observers
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe. A foreign policy based on a balance of the
interests of the Bosnian parties is being implemented.
In 2010 and 2011, Sarajevo successfully carried out the
functions of a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, and in 2015 it presided over the Council of
Ministers of the Council of Europe. Problems arise, as
with any State, but they are far from insurmountable
for Bosnians.

The successful experience of the Brcko District,
where the foreign Supervisor's activities had been
frozen since 2012, clearly shows that the Office of the
High Representative is a relic of the past for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Worse than that, its very presence hampers
the internal Bosnian dialogue and fuels attitudes of
dependency among a certain part of the establishment.
For the entire period of almost 10 years that the High
Representative has been in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
he has exploited the resources of his Office to advance
the NATO and European Union agendas and settle
accounts with Bosnian leaders who acknowledge the
protectorate's irrelevance, instead of carrying out the
tasks assigned to him with regard to implementing the
civilian aspects of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace.

In future, we urge the High Representative to
avoid tendentious comments about one or other of the
country's political parties on the eve of elections, as
occurred during Mr. Inzko's interview with the Austrian
newspaper Wiener Zeitung on 2 October, widely
reproduced in the Bosnian media. In the interview, the
High Representative directed one-sided criticism at the
major Bosnian Serb party, the Alliance of Independent
Social Democrats, breaching every democratic norm
and his own mandate by essentiallyjoining the election
campaign on the side of the opposition.
The smearing of Bosnian Serbs and Croats who are
against the erosion of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
attempts to centralize the country long ago morphed
into an end in themselves for the High Representative,
who in his most recent report (S/2018/974, annex) has
no qualms about referring to unverified media accounts
or simply plucking overreaching conclusions out of the
air. For example, he expounds on the alleged rampant
corruption and the Bosnian authorities' inability
to combat it based on the overtly politicized and
completely unsubstantiated decision - which means
there should be no place for it in a report - ofthe United
States Department of State to include a Bosnian-Serb
parliamentarian, Nikola Spirie, on its restricted list on
the eve of the elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The High Representative also speculates about the
tragic death of a student, David Dragicevic', in a way
that portrays what occurred as some sort of systemic
flaw in the Republika Srpska judiciary. In our View
such assessments are cynical and irresponsible. For
those of our colleagues who would like to have a more
balanced and factual picture of what is happening in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we once again recommend
that they read the report of the Government of Republika
Srpska, which according to tradition is drafted in Banja
Luka to coincide with today's meeting. We urge the
High Representative to abandon his one-sided self-
involvement in Bosnia's internal political wrangling
and do his proper job, the implementation of the 5-1-2
plan, which the Office has so far abandoned that this
key task is barely mentioned in passing, like some
minor side issue.

A clear inadequacy in the High Representative's
report, in our view, is the absence, for all practical
purposes, of any serious analysis of possible ways to
emerge from the crisis situation in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina related to the exclusion of the
procedure for filling the upper house of the Parliament
from the current version of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
election law. The situation is fraught with issues
regarding the composition of the House of Peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's Parliamentary Assembly and
the installation of the President and members of the
Government of the Federation. We hope that the Office
of the High Representative will prepare the relevant
completed plans at least by early December, when the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board meets.

As for Russia's approach to a Bosnian settlement,
we continue to focus on doing everything possible to
facilitate compliance with the Dayton Agreement and
to develop a mutually beneficial dialogue with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Our message about the importance
of respect for Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as the broad powers
of the two entities and the equality of the country's
three constituent peoples, as provided for in the
Peace Agreement, were received in a constructive
spirit by all the Bosnian parties during the working
visit on 21 September by Sergey Lavrov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. We believe
that the time for an outside protectorate has passed.
The international community's role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina should be based on helping Bosnians
broaden the scope of their common interests and
find their own recipes for compromise solutions to
problem issues, including reforming the judicial system
and removing the foreign experts from the country's
Constitutional Court.

The Bosnian Croats' idea for fine-tuning Bosnia
and Herzegovina's electoral system deserves attention.
It would provide sufficient guarantees for filling
senior leadership positions exclusively with legitimate
representatives of each of the country's constituent
peoples. Unfortunately, during the recent elections a
member of the Presidium of Bosnia and Herzegovina
from the Croats was once again elected by votes from
the Bosniak majority. It would be desirable for the
Bosnians to reach an agreement on how to prevent this
practice in the future. It is not acceptable to artificially
crank up the pressure on the Republika Srspka in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its legitimately elected leaders.
We have a principled objection to unilateral sanctions
on Bosnian Serb leaders.

In response to my British colleague, I want to
confirm that as a member of the Contact Group of the
Steering Board, Russia is committed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's stability and development. But we have
not signed on to any obligations to drag the country into
Euro-Atlantic structures. That is not our business and
it is not the United Kingdom's, either. It is the business
of the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina. However,
we definitely do not agree with the policy of dragging
Bosnia and Herzegovina into NATO. Such actions only
worsen the tensions in the country and distract the
Bosnian parties from working for reform. In this case,
the consensus on domestic political issues provided
for in the 1995 Peace Agreement cannot be achieved,
owing to the principled position of the Bosnian Serbs,
who are not prepared to see alliance-based dividing
lines drawn between the Republika Srpska and Serbia.

We stand in solidarity with the Views of many
European States on the gravity of the threat of the
proliferationofradicalextremistideologiesinBosniaand
Herzegovina. The activities of the Islamic underground
must be eliminated by the country's relevant bodies,
including in the context of regional cooperation.

