Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I first join
colleagues in expressing horror and disgust at the
attack on the United Nations in Abuja today. I convey
the British Government's condolences to the Secretary-
General and to the Nigerian delegation and through
them to all of the victims and to the whole United
Nations family and the Nigerian Government and
people. My Foreign Secretary, William Hague, has
issued a statement expressing his utter condemnation
of this brutal act. As he said in that statement, around
the world the United Nations works for peace, security
and international cooperation, and an attack on the
United Nations is an attack on these principles. The
United Kingdom stands ready to provide any assistance
we can to the United Nations and to the Nigerian
authorities to bring those responsible to justice.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to take stock of recent progress in United
Nations peacekeeping and to review the variety of
challenges we currently face. The United Kingdom
believes that the presidential statement to be adopted
today will add important new ways to strengthen the
relationship between troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Security Council in
our consideration of peacekeeping mandates.

United Nations peacekeeping is a complex and
unique global partnership. United Nations
peacekeepers help fragile nations emerge from conflict
to find new stability. They are a scarce asset, and we
have a responsibility to ensure that they are deployed
to maximum effect in the places where they are needed
most.

I welcome the opportunity today to hear views
from across the partnership about how we may
strengthen our collective effort. I will restrict my own
statement to three short comments about how the
Security Council may improve its role supporting
peacekeeping. I feel that they may not be new, but that
they are worth reiterating.

First of all, the Council must understand the
operational challenges standing in the way of success
for our peacekeeping operations. That means greater
participation from those on the ground- from troop-
and police-contributing countries - when we examine
peacekeeping missions and their mandates. And it
means that we must understand not only where gaps in
resourcing lie, but how these specific gaps affect the
ability of a peacekeeping operation to fulfil its
mandate.

Secondly, we must be fully aware of progress on
the ground from across the peacebuilding community
in order to mandate a complementary role for
peacekeepers. We know that today's conflicts require a
complex range of responses from peacekeepers. They
are often called upon to help protect civilian
populations, monitor and protect human rights, work to
build fledgling police forces and judiciaries in support
of national authorities, and support electoral processes.
The Council must understand how to mandate
peacekeepers to play an appropriate role as part of a
longer-term effort to build sustainable peace. That
requires coordination with a wide range of partners
with specialist skills from within the United Nations
funds and programmes, international financial

11-4815]
institutions and regional and subregional organizations.
In such a complex environment, in order to write clear,
achievable and realistic mandates - a well-worn
refrain - this Council must be apprised of progress on
the ground by all of these actors.

My third point is that we must ensure this
Council has access to appropriate military expertise.
The United Kingdom supports the emerging tradition
to invite heads of military components to address the
Council. And as the presidential statement suggests, we
look forward to a similar consultation with the heads of
police components in the future.

The Military Staff Committee has demonstrated,
through its discussion in November last year of the
draft concept of operations of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, and of other issues since, that it
has an important role to play. But we must not get
caught up in process. All Council members can
contribute military advice to the Military Staff
Committee Without recourse to Charter redrafting by
making the most of the informal mechanism. We do not
need further discussion about process; we should just
do it.

In addition to today's debate, a number of other
initiatives are already in place to take this work
forward. We welcome the ongoing efforts of the
Security Council's Working Group of the Whole on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by
Nigeria, and underline the need for this Group and
other key actors - including the Fifth Committee and
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations -
to complement one other's work on that shared agenda.

In the past eight months we have seen once again
the critical role that United Nations peacekeeping
operations play in the maintenance of international
peace and security. United Nations peacekeepers serve
with dedication and courage to create a safer and more
stable environment in conflict and post-conflict zones
around the world. We owe them our gratitude.

