Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): As this is
the first statement we are making under your leadership,
Mr. President, the delegation of Senegal would like to
warmly congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency and wish you every possible success in the
coming month. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the delegation of Angola for the way in which it
conducted the business of the Security Council during
the month of March.

Today's vote follows a series of initiatives
undertaken within the framework of the United Nations
since the beginning of the year and clearly demonstrates
the interest that we have taken in the situation in
Burundi. The delegation of Senegal, in taking part in
the negotiations on the text of the resolution we have just
adopted (resolution 2279 (2016)), has striven to forge,
alongside other members of the Council, the consensus
that was so evident here today, because in our eyes it is
of primary importance that we show a united cohesive
front in tackling the situation in Burundi.

It therefore behoves me to pay tribute to the spirit
of cooperation and mutual understanding that prevailed
and enabled us to achieve this conclusion to a process
that was launched a few weeks ago, following the visit
of the Council to Burundi. The Secretary-General, as
well as a high-level delegation of the African Union
composed of five Heads of State and Government,
then also visited Bujumbura. With respect to those
initiatives, my delegation would especially like to
underscore that the current resolution is intended to
serve as a formal framework for bringing into harmony
all of the international community's efforts.

It is therefore important to take note of the
resolution's mention of the main results achieved by the
high-level delegation of the African Union and the new
momentum generated by the strengthening of regional
mediation undertaken by Ugandan President assisted in
this since the most recent summit of the East African
Community by the former President of Tanzania,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa. In our eyes, the current resolution
could also serve as a tool to enable the Secretariat's
team led by Mr. Jamal Benomar to maintain and
strengthen its interaction with the regional mediation
and the African Union to create conditions conducive
to a cessation of violence, the protection of civilians
and the effective launch of an inclusive dialogue.
Finally, it seems to us to be of primary importance
to recall the necessity to configure the United Nations
presence in Burundi in a way to meet all the challenges
of the situation, including a gradual approach mindful
of the momentum behind the action of regional and
continental actors.

