The President (spoke in French): On behalf of the
members of the Security Council, I reiterate our firmest
condemnation of the heinous terrorist attack perpetrated
in Mogadishu. The members of the Security Council
offer their most sincere condolences to the families of
the deceased and their solidarity with the people and
the Government of Somalia.

I request members of the Security Council to
stand and observe a minute of silence in memory of
the victims.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2017/840)

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/840, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

After consultations among Council members, I

have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"As the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) completes its mandate on
15 October 2017, the Security Council recognizes
the achievements made by Haiti since 2004.

"The Security Council takes note of the report

of the Secretary-General of 5 October (S/20l7/840)

and the assessments, recommendations and

lessons learned contained therein. The Security

Council expresses its intention to take them into

account in the framework of its ongoing work to
enhance the overall effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping and transitions.

"Recalling resolutions 2350 (2017) and
2313 (2016), the Security Council welcomes the
notable progress made by Haiti towards stability
and democracy. It underlines the improvements
in strengthening the security and humanitarian
situation. The Security Council also welcomes
the presidential elections held in 2016 and 2017,
which have paved the way to consolidating Haiti's
democratic institutions through a peaceful transfer
of power.

"The Security Council recognizes the
contribution of MINUSTAH in restoring security
and stability in Haiti throughout its 13 years. The
Security Council expresses its appreciation for the
efforts of the United Nations country team, under
the leadership of the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, and MINUSTAH personnel
for their dedication. The Security Council
also expresses its gratitude to the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their support over
the years.

"The Security Council recalls the primary
responsibility of the Government of Haiti for
ensuring stability in Haiti and reaffirms in
particular the need for political dialogue as
a peaceful resolution to help defuse tensions
between competing groups and to address ongoing
socioeconomic grievances. It emphasizes the
importance of prioritizing strengthening the rule
of law, judicial reform, respect for human rights,
including the empowerment of women and their
full participation in decision-making, and further
developing the capacity of the Haitian National
Police to enable it to improve Haiti's security
environment, all of which are critical to achieving
long-term stability. Further, the Security Council
expresses confidence that the new Mission will
work closely with the Government of Haiti and calls
upon the Government to facilitate the Mission's
mandate and functioning.

"The Security Council recognizes the United
Nations New Approach to Cholera in Haiti and
continued progress in reductions of suspected
cases of cholera.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on all
forms of sexual exploitation and abuse and affirms
the importance of supporting victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

"The Security Council stresses that there is
important work ahead to further advance Haiti's
long-term security, democratic consolidation and
sustainable development. The Security Council
underscores the importance of continued support to
Haiti as it embarks on the next stage of the United
Nations engagement, and welcomes the work of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to consolidate progress made
as Haiti transitions to a non-peacekeeping United
Nations presence.

"The Security Council welcomes the use
of a range of different tools to support Haiti
as it seeks to address its political, economic,
social and security challenges. It emphasizes the
importance of MINUJUSTH developing a clearly
benchmarked projected two-year exit strategy to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti
to continue supporting the efforts of the Government
of Haitian in sustaining peace and peacebuilding."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/20.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.

