Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would
also like to express my delegation's appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his valuable
and comprehensive briefing.

What has been distinctive about post-cold-war
conflicts of all types is the number and scope of
humanitarian disasters that they have produced:
displacements, starvation, the deliberate targeting of
civilians, ethnic cleansing and genocide. Civilians have
been the main victims of violence in situations of civil
war or occupation. Attacks directed against civilians
are serious violations of international humanitarian
law.

The Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, addressed
the problem quite bluntly in a statement to the Security
Council in 1999, when he said: "We are at the end of a
century that has seen the creation and refinement of
much of the corpus of international law. Yet civilians
have rarely been so vulnerable." (S/PV.4046, p. 3)

Since then, the Security Council has given careful
attention to that very significant problem. By
discussing this thematic item on many occasions in the
past six years, the Council has recognized the appalling
reality to which I briefly referred. Our enormous
challenge is to bridge the existing gaps between the
policies to protect civilians and the operational
modalities on the ground.

The United Nations as a whole, and the Council
in particular, must continue to be fully engaged in
pushing forward that agenda. In December 2003,
Mr. Egeland, to his credit, presented a very valuable
10-point platform on the protection of civilians, which
continues to provide a basis for our discussions and
deliberations. Given the time constraints, I shall limit
my statement to only some of its main points, bearing
in mind the statement made by Under-Secretary-
General Egeland at the beginning of this meeting.

In a number of cases, humanitarian access
continues to be either denied or obstructed. Brazil bas
repeatedly expressed its concern over that situation. If
States are unable to deliver assistance to their
population, they must ensure safe and unhindered
access by humanitarian international personnel to those
in need. It is highly deplorable that humanitarian
workers have become victims of deliberate violence. In
resolution 1502 (2003), the Council expressed its
determination to take appropriate steps in order to
ensure the safety and security of United Nations
humanitarian and associated personnel.

Vulnerable groups, such as women and
children- especially among refugees and internally
displaced persons - should be better protected from
all threats and acts of violence. All efforts should be
made to stop the deplorable and indiscriminate use of
rape and sexual violence as the equivalent of a weapon
of war wherever it occurs. The perpetrators of such
crimes must be brought to justice and prosecuted.
Furthermore, HIV/AIDS brings an additional
dimension to situations of mass displacement and
human rights abuse. As efforts to safeguard the rights
and well-being of refugees and internally displaced
persons are increased, Brazil welcomes the fact that an
increasing number of countries are making use of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.

Parties to armed conflict have a duty to protect
civilians from the devastation of war. Violations of
international humanitarian law must not go
unpunished. I should add that progress has been made
in the fight against impunity with the establishment of
international tribunals, particularly the International
Criminal Court, bearing in mind that States have the
main responsibility to exercise their criminal
jurisdiction and bring perpetrators to justice.

The Rome Statute provides for the Council to
refer to the International Criminal Court cases of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. As
stated by the delegation of Brazil when the Council last
considered the Darfur case, while we support the
referral of the case to the International Criminal Court,
Brazil, as one of the founding members of the Court,
cannot support provisions that impose limits on the
Court's universal jurisdiction. The integrity of the
Court must not be compromised. We renew our call to
all States, without exception, that have not done so, to
accede to or ratify the Rome Statute at the earliest
opportunity.

Brazil agrees that there is a need for more reliable
and predictable resources to provide assistance to
people in need, including civilians caught in the
crossfire. The lack of support for "forgotten
emergencies" is an issue that needs to be properly
addressed. We need to ensure that humanitarian
assistance is provided in a non-discriminatory,
balanced and more proportionate manner.
Peacekeeping operations must be given adequate
resources for the protection of civilians. Specifically
programmes such as those of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration remain continuously
underfinanced. Funding is also needed to support the
strengthening of institutions of the rule of law, national
reconciliation processes and similar efforts to reduce
the risk of relapse into conflict and to save civilian
lives in war-torn countries.

It is a fact that in the post-cold-war era the
suffering inflicted upon civilians by the new patters of
conflict has become a matter of deep concern. We need
now to focus on concrete measures to alleviate the
situation of civilians, by identifying, adopting and
improving the means utilized to protect them.

