The President: The Security Council will now

resume its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the

Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on assistance by the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) to
the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS)
of 3 May 2005 (S/2005/285) and the proposals
therein on support the United Nations could make
available to AMIS.

"The Security Council applauds the Vital
leadership role the African Union is playing in
Darfur and the work of AMIS on the ground. The
Council supports the findings of the joint
assessment mission, led by the African Union
from 10 to 22 March 2005, which included the
United Nations and other partners. The Council
also supports the subsequent decision taken by
the African Union's Peace and Security Council
on 28 April 2005 to expand its mission in Darfur
to 7,731 personnel by the end of September 2005.

"The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing deployment of UNMIS and looks
forward to close coordination and cooperation
between UNMIS and AMIS. In this context, the
Council recalls its request in resolution 1590
(2005) for UNMIS to closely and continuously
liaise and coordinate, at all levels, with the
African Union Mission in the Sudan with a View
towards expeditiously reinforcing the effort to
foster peace in Darfur, especially with regard to
the Abuja peace process and the African Union
the

Mission in the Sudan.

"The Security Council welcomes the role
played by the African Union's partners in support
of AMIS and underlines the active role played by
the European Union and by other, bilateral,
donors.

"The Council emphasizes the importance of
increased coordinated international assistance for
the African Union effort in Darfur and
emphasizes the readiness of the United Nations to
continue playing a key role. In this context, the
Council welcomes the second joint assessment
mission from 1 to 4 May, which included
representatives from the AU, the United Nations
and other partners. The Council looks forward to
continuing contacts in order to facilitate provision
of assistance as requested by the African Union.
The Council welcomes, in this regard, the effort
and intention of the Secretary-General to consult
closely with the African Union on the scope and
nature of possible United Nations support to
AMIS."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/18.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
