The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Canada, the Czech Republic, India, Jordan,
Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan and Uruguay to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council and in accordance with the
provisions of article 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, to extend an invitation to Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-
General for Field Support; Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti; and
Ms. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like, first of all, to thank my colleagues
and the invitees for their participation in the debate that
we have organized today under the French presidency
of the Council. Collectively, participants represent the
key branches of the Secretariat responsible for carrying
out peacekeeping operations, several of the main troop
contributors from every geographical group, the two
regional organizations with the most extensive
cooperation on the ground with the United Nations and
countries responsible for a very large portion of the
financing for peacekeeping operations.
It seems to us that it is high time that the Council
hold a debate on peacekeeping, which has and
continues to make it possible to achieve great things, in
particular thanks to the skill and dedication of the staff
of the United Nations. However, peacekeeping also has
its shortcomings and problems. In that connection, the
analyses contained in the Brahimi report (S/2000/809)
and the conclusions reached by the Council itself
almost 15 years ago, as reflected in its presidential
statement (S/PRST/ 1994/62) of 1994, are as relevant as
ever.

However, we are at a critical juncture as a result
of the scale of our engagement, deteriorating
conditions, the increasing complexity of mandates and
the growing constraints on our resources. All of us
acknowledge that the situation calls for a response.
Numerous initiatives have been launched, beginning
with the Secretariat's own efforts but including also
those of others, including our Canadian friends. I am
sure that they will tell us about them in due course.
Nevertheless, the Security Council has a special
responsibility, both because the Charter confers upon it
the responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and because it is the Council that
defines peacekeeping operations. In that connection,
there has been significant improvement in the way that
the Council carries out its own work, including in its
daily activities and in its relations with the main
protagonists in the area of peacekeeping.

It is for those reasons that France and the United
Kingdom have sought to initiate a debate in the
Council on how we can make the improvements that
are so necessary. In that regard, we circulated a
background document to serve as the focus of the first
informal exchange among the members of the Council
during the informal seminar we hosted yesterday at the
French Mission in cooperation with the British
Mission. The Ambassador of the United Kingdom and I
could provide participants with more information about
that. However, we feel that the very first stage of that
undertaking should be to listen to the planners and
organizers of peacekeeping operations and those
responsible for their day-to-day functioning, including
special representatives, troop and financing
contributors and others providing support for this
crucial activity. Success would not be possible without
them.

The Council must of course be responsible for its
own duties, but it must also be in a better position to
09-21747
discharge its peacekeeping responsibilities. That is a
collective function in which everyone must play their
part. In turn, every voice must be listened to carefully.
It is therefore my pleasure now to give the floor to
participants.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Ms. Susana Malcorra,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support; and
Mr. He'di Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. I now give the floor to
Mr. Le Roy.


