Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership of the
Council during the month of February and for
convening this very important meeting. I wish also to
thank the Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee and the 1540 Committee for their hard
work, concise reports and invaluable contributions.

As we are convened here today, the world is
witnessing the formation of a dangerous new
alliance - indeed, an axis of terror - comprised of
Iran, Syria and Hamas. As many here are quite aware,
the Iranian leadership is hosting Hamas in Tehran at
this very moment and has committed itself to a more
active role in the Palestinian Authority. As Khaled
Mashal, head of the Hamas delegation, stated during
the visit, Iran "will play a major role in the shaping of
the Palestinian Authority and Palestinian nation in light
of the many challenges facing us". The President of
Iran and the Ayatollah Ali Khamenei subsequently
called for a continuation of acts of terrorism against
Israeli citizens. This meeting follows a recent visit by
the Iranian President to Damascus, the capital of terror,
which is home to the headquarters of over 10 different
terror organizations. During that visit, the Iranian
President used the Syrian presidential palace, which
has been put at his disposal, to meet with terror
organizations and plan and direct orders for specific
acts of terrorism. One can only wonder what will be
the real nature of this deeper Iranian involvement in
the Palestinian Authority.

This new axis of terror poses a major threat to
regional and world stability and is a recipe for the
world's worst pandemic. Should we neglect this
imminent threat, the axis of terror may be the seed of
the first world war of the twenty-first century. We call
on the international community, through its relevant
organs and, especially, this Council, to take seriously
these joint efforts by Iran, Syria and Hamas, and act
decisively and swiftly to prevent Iran, an extremist and
dangerous terror-supporting regime, from acquiring the
capability and know-how to develop nuclear weapons.
Time is of the essence.

The provisions Hamas seeks from Iran and Syria
are all the more dangerous, considering its recent
political empowerment and its goal to eliminate Israel.
The recent elections in the Palestinian Authority cannot
whitewash the radical nature of this new ruling party.
Hamas is a terror organization. It is responsible for
more suicide bombings, terrorist attacks and more
deaths during the current period than any other terrorist
organization, murdering 482 Israelis in total, some 44
per cent of the total killed. Hamas's goal is to strike
deeply and in a deadly way, leaving its victims
motherless, childless and limbless. I invite each
Council member to read Hamas's charter, which calls
for killing Jews and eliminating Israel. Only last week,
Hamas, whose headquarters are in Damascus, released
a video where one terrorist states,

"We will hunt you everywhere, when you wake
and when you sleep there is no better blood
than Jewish blood [We will] quench ourselves
with your blood and we will quench the thirst of
our children with your blood."

This statement was made, by the way, after Hamas's
election as the governing party of the Palestinian
Authority.

The democracy of despots is a dangerous facade.
To imagine Al-Qaida at the ballot box, Om Shinrikyo
in the primaries, ETA celebrating an election victory
and the PKK with a democratic majority are a
frightening nightmare, where evil tries to pass itself off
as something it is not.

The Hamas majority is not democracy; it is
fanaticism propagated under the veil of democracy.
Indeed, Hamas denies the very international
agreements that instituted the recent elections. Israel
cannot and will not recognize a terrorist regime. We
will not provide legitimacy to its practices, and we call
on the international community to recognize that
terrorism and democracy can never coexist. As
Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated on behalf of the
Quartet last September, there is "a fundamental
contradiction between such activities and the building
of a democratic State" (Press release SG/SM/JOIIS).
He further emphasized last month,

"It is the view of the Quartet that all members of
a future Palestinian Government must be
committed to non-violence, recognition of Israel,
and acceptance of previous agreements and
obligations, including the road map."

The international community, which recognizes
the new enemy called international terrorism, should
upgrade its joint efforts against the threat of terrorist
organizations disguising themselves as democratic
bodies. Moreover, the fight against terrorism cannot be
combated by a handful of States, no matter how strong
their resources may be. This dangerous phenomenon is
a global crisis, and it is our moral duty to work
together to combat this pandemic.

We additionally call on the international
community to hold accountable States that provide safe
harbour to terrorists, host its infrastructure and
promote a culture of hatred and incitement. We are
particularly troubled by the connection between
terrorism and money-laundering, and we must work
together to block the steady flow of finances that
enables terrorist cells to operate. In this regard, we
urge all States to join and implement the 1999
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.

Israel believes that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the Al-Qaida Committee and the
1540 Committee provide valuable assistance to the
international community in enhancing its capabilities
to fight terrorism. We believe it is vital to coordinate
the activities of those committees in order to avoid
duplication and maximize efforts.

Israel believes that the CTC should lead the way
in setting the norms, priorities and primary objectives
in the international fight against terrorism. We believe
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which was declared operational last
December, is already enhancing the fight against
terrorism, in the spirit of resolution 1373 (2001). We
view technical assistance and capacity-building as key
tactics in enabling countries to improve their counter-
terrorism efforts. Yet we call on the CTC to ensure that
its efforts are action-oriented, and we encourage it to
utilize the expertise of States with direct experience in
counter-terrorism.

We commend the Al-Qaida Committee for its
emphasis on State accountability. We also attach great
value to the 1540 Committee. The proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, their
delivery systems and related materials continues to
constitute a major threat to international peace and
security. We believe that resolution 1540 (2004) is an
effective tool against nuclear and unconventional
terrorism, and we call on the international community
to implement it fully.

Israel is pleased to witness the growing - almost
universal - recognition, as stated in resolution 1624
(2005), that all acts of terrorism are condemned
irrespective of their motivation. The fight against
terrorism cannot be held hostage to any so-called root
causes. There can be no attempt to justify or excuse the
use of terrorism as a weapon. There is no such thing as
bad terror and good terror. Terror is terror is terror.

We hope that that sentiment will be extended
during our forthcoming deliberations on the
comprehensive convention on terrorism. Israel supports
the goal of finalizing that convention during the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly. However, it
would be unfortunate should the convention be
achieved only at the cost of including amendments that
allow terrorist organizations and State sponsors of
terrorism to argue that situations exist in which
terrorism is justified. As the Secretary-General has
stated, "terrorism committed by whomever, wherever
and for whatever purposes' can never be accepted or
justified" (S/PV.526], p. 3).

Somewhere, at this very moment, a terrorist's
mind is being poisoned, a terrorist's pocket is being
filled, an explosive device is being donned.
Somewhere, right now, a country is polluting its youth
with incitement, propaganda and an infrastructure that
enables terrorism. This tragic phenomenon will only be
uprooted through a concerted international effort.

We look forward to the progress of the CTC and
the Executive Directorate, the Al-Qaida Committee and
the 1540 Committee in leading efforts to stop this
dangerous global phenomenon before more innocent
lives are lost.

