Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome the Prime
Minister of Romania, who is presiding over the
Security Council. His presence in this Chamber, as well
as the participation in today's meeting of the Secretary-
General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico
and the high-level representatives of a number of
leading regional organizations, provide compelling
evidence of the importance of the issue under
discussion.

Against the backdrop of ominous challenges
facing the international community, particularly in the
security sphere, the goal of consistently improving
cooperation of the United Nations and the Security
Council with regional and subregional organizations is
becoming increasingly valuable. Such cooperation
must continue to be based on the firm foundation of the
United Nations Charter, in particular Chapter VIII.

Of no less importance is the growing awareness
among Member States of the need for strict compliance
with the fundamental principles and standards of
international peacekeeping activities at all stages of the
process of conflict prevention and settlement and post-
conflict peace-building. Here, we are referring, above
all, to the immutable nature of the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
optimal solution would be for all regional and coalition
peacekeeping operations to be authorized by the
Security Council and to be accountable to it. Those
conditions are necessary in the case of operations
whose mandates include elements of peace
enforcement.

Successful experiences in carrying out operations
authorized by the Security Council - such as the
NATO operation in Afghanistan, the European Union
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
those of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia and the
regional coalition in Timor Leste - constitute a partial
list of positive examples of compliance with those
fundamental principles.

Considerable experience has been acquired in
positive cooperation between the Security Council and
regional partners such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the African Union,
the Organization of American States and subregional
organizations such as the Southern African
Development Community and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. The League of Arab States
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference must
play an important role in finding peaceful solutions to
the numerous problems of the Middle East.

Russia continues to vigorously promote the
intensification of cooperation, above all, in the
peacekeeping field, between the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). CIS
peacekeepers continue to assist in the effective
settlement of the crisis in Tajikistan. Now, together
with the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia,
they are maintaining security and stability in the zone
of the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict.

The cooperation now being established between
the United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization has great potential. In that framework,
intensive work is being conducted to develop that
organization's peacekeeping potential, inter alia, for
use in United Nations peacekeeping operations.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization plays an
important role in ensuring stability and security in the
Eurasian region. Its members have indicated their
readiness to develop interaction with the United
Nations in a great number of relevant areas such as the
combat against international terrorism, the illegal
trafficking of drugs and assistance for post-conflict
rehabilitation in Afghanistan. Regional and subregional
organizations must come forward more actively in
making use of their resources and comparative
advantages.

Meanwhile, the United Nations must pay
unflagging attention to enhancing coordination of its
efforts with those organizations, rationalizing the
division of labour and preserving the prerogatives of
the Organization and the Security Council.

We welcome the important contribution towards
achieving these goals made through the Secretary-
General's regular high-level meetings with the
leadership of regional organizations. That practice
should be continued, all the more so as the agenda of
United Nations cooperation with regional partners is
becoming increasingly broad and diverse. In addition
to peacekeeping and peace-building objectives are the
issues of countering the spread of weapons of mass
destruction and the illegal circulation of small arms and
light weapons, solving other destabilizing cross-border
problems and combating the drug trade and organized
crime.

In that context, it seems useful to reflect on the
possibility of establishing in the United Nations an
updatable data bank on the forms and practical
parameters of the Organization's cooperation with
regional organizations, on available resources and on
proposals for cooperation with the United Nations. Of
course, we are not thinking of any kind of attempt to
formalize such cooperation or to make it fit onto a
Procrustean bed of computers. Quite the contrary, there
is a need to seek out opportunities for strengthening the
coordination of efforts and for more flexible
cooperation.

We hope that the outcome of today's debate will
enable us to take forward the process of improving
multidimensional cooperation with regional
organizations and, in doing so, more fully to realize the
potential of the system for worldwide collective
security enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
