The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Waslekar for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegal abroad.

At the outset, I would like to express how pleased

we are to have the Secretary-General participate in this
high-level Security Council debate on a topic that is of
particular interest to him. Allow me to also reiterate,
on behalf of Senegalese President Macky Sall, the
warm congratulations of Senegal for the excellent work
carried out during his two mandates at the helm of the
United Nations, and for his significant contributions
to building peace and security and promoting and
protecting the interests of the international community,
and particularly those of Africa, in the areas of
development and human rights.
I also thank and congratulate the briefers today
for their relevant and structured briefings. They have
presented a comprehensive overview of the stakes and
challenges linked to the issue of water. I am referring
to the Secretary-General; Mr. Danilo Turk, Chair
of the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace;
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President ofthe International
Committee of the Red Cross; and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar,
President of Strategic Foresight Group.

For the first time in its 71-year history, the Council,
in a formal meeting this morning, is broaching the
issue of water and its relationship to peace and security.
Certainly, the issue has featured in the background
of certain Council decisions, particularly presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/15, of 20 July 2011, and
presidential statement S/PRST/2013/15, of 2 October
2013. The former deals with the consequences of
climate change and, in the latter, the Council urges all
parties to conflicts to abstain from attacking civilian
installations, such as water supply stations, and to avoid
establishing military positions in inhabited areas.

We also can recall that seven months ago almost
to the day, President Sall presided over the very first
Council debate on water and peace and security, under
the Arria Formula. That commitment at the highest
level reflects the importance that Senegal attaches to
the problem. Indeed, it also explains why the Secretary-
General and the President of the World Bank appointed
the President of Senegal as a member of the High-level
Panel on Water on Water. It should be recalled that the
mandate of that Panel, which is made up of 12 Heads of
State and Government, seeks to spur global action with
a view to accelerating the effective implementation of
Goal 6 ofthe 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
That goal seeks to guarantee access to water and
sanitation for all and ensure the sustainable management
of water resources. It is that ongoing commitment to the
issue that enabled my country, through its Minister for
Water and Sanitation, to hold the co-chairmanship of
the Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace. Its
mission is to offer a global architecture to make water
an instrument of peace and cooperation, rather than a
source of conflict.

It is clear that water is essential to life, if not life
itself. It is a daily part of an individual's life at every
stage. As a fundamental element ofgeology, water is also
necessary in the areas of biology, the conomy, culture
and worship. It is for those reasons that the United
Nations has made it a human right and acknowledged
that access to water is essential for the enjoyment of all
other human rights. Regrettably, today climate change,
urbanization, demographic changes and unsustainable
economic practices, as well as the dizzying increase
in consumption, all contribute to a reduction in the
quantity and quality of water. Moreover, although
71 per cent of the Earth's surface is water, less than
3 per cent of it is freshwater, of which 2.2 per cent is in
glaciers and groundwater reserves. As a result, a mere
1 per cent of the Earth's water is left to meet the needs
of the 7.35 billion human beings and those of plants
and animals.

Above and beyond the scarcity of water, the
resource is unevenly distributed throughout the planet,
with nine countries sharing 60 per cent of the world's
water reserves while 28 countries experience regular
water shortages, and 80 occasional shortages. A
total of 1.5 billion people do not have access to safe
drinking water. Predictions are even more alarming.
They warn that, by 2050, at least one in four people
could live in a country affected by chronic or recurrent
freshwater shortages.

The competition for access to water might seem
inevitable because, in addition to being a natural
resource, water could take on a geostrategic dimension,
which would make it a domestic security challenge for
a number of States. Nevertheless, the legitimate efforts
of our countries and communities to guarantee access
to such a vital resource can and must be deployed in
a sound, organized way in order to guard against
misunderstandings and even tensions, especially in the
case of water resources being shared among several
States. Recent history teaches us that such a hypothesis
is not a fictitious one.

In that regard, it is true that commendable efforts
have been made over time towards the peaceful and
concerted management of water resources, with the
signing, since the end of the Second World War, of
more than 200 bilateral and multilateral cooperation
instruments covering some 60 international
watercourses. In the same vein, it should be recognized
that shared waters have historically and sometimes,
improbably, brought States closer together and formed
the basis for closer ties and confidence-building.

As far as it is concerned, Senegal, whose history,
geography and name bear the indelible imprint of
its eponymous watercourse, has always striven to
promote what we refer to today as water diplomacy.
As the Secretary-General recalled just now, it was
that constant faith that formed the basis for the
establishment with its neighbours, almost 45 years
ago, in 1972, of the Senegal River Basin Development
Organization (OMVS) - made up of Guinea, Mali,
Mauritania and Senegal - and, in 1978, the Gambia
River Basin Development Organization, whose
members are the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and
Senegal. The OMVS is now cited as a successful model
of cooperation in the area of collective water resources
management. Its originality lies in the fact that its
facilities and infrastructures belong to its four member
States, investments are made by all of them and the
benefits are mutually shared.

Cooperation is the path of salvation. But it must
be acknowledged that there remains much to be done
in that area. In the same vein, it is worrisome to note
that, to date, 158 of the 263 international watercourses
remain without a cooperation framework. Moreover,
according to many experts, unequal access to water
could be the main cause of future conflicts. By way of
illustration, the 2015 World Water Development Report
states that

"[i]nter-State and regional conflicts may
also emerge due to water scarcity and poor
management structures."

A decade earlier, former Secretary- General Kofi Annan
argued that

"fierce competition for fresh water could well
become a source of conflict and war in the future".

But he tempered that by stating,

"that same competition could be a catalyst
for cooperation".

In the same vein, the question of water is sometimes
linked, for political reasons, to territorial, social and
economic disputes. Even if water is not the stated
reason for a war, nonetheless, in many conflicts its
control is an important issue that could fuel conflict.
In other situations, water is used simply as a weapon of
warfare or to put pressure on vulnerable populations.
In a spirit of solidarity, the international community
must combat the phenomenon that highlights how the
issue of water pervades conflicts and its unfortunate
humanitarian consequences - just underscored so
eloquently by our briefers. It is also incumbent upon
us to step up our efforts to secure sources and supply
chains and to guarantee water quality, which, in the
context of global threats, must be kept out of the reach
of the many criminal gangs and terrorist groups.

The Security Council must choose between
potential future conflicts and a future of peace. In that
regard, one thing only deserves to guide our action. If
nothing is done, water could lead to future clashes in the
way that fossil fuels and land are at the origin of today's
conflicts. The notion of preventive diplomacy therefore
reflects all of the fullness and nobility of its meaning.
To sail in another direction would be to row against the
current, if not to swim in troubled waters, given the
various factors whose combined effects accentuate the
scarcity of the resource and the unbridled race for its
control. That means that the Council should pay more
attention to the issue in order to prevent the occurrence
or the exacerbation of tensions between States sharing
water resources, in particular, cross-border water
resources. In that regard, it is well established that
the risk of tensions has increased between countries
upstream and downstream of the same river basin, with
situations that, in some cases, could lead to regional
instability. That is the whole point of Senegal's proposal
to create a group of friends of the water-security
initiative here in New York, which I invite delegations
to join.

In conclusion, Senegal would like to thank the
Security Council and the many Member States for their
interest in its initiative on water, peace and security,
and hopes for a proactive stance on the issue, which
is the only attitude capable of negating the disturbing
predictions. More than 69 countries are participating in
today's open debate, which shows the importance that
the international community attaches to the problem. In
particular, my country dares to hope for a clear message
from the Security Council that it will contribute to
making water flow only in the direction of fostering
the development, peace and harmony of peoples. In
doing so, the most precious resource will ultimately
cease to be the object of misunderstandings, concerns
and bloodshed.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

