Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom warmly welcomes the renewal of the
mandate for the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus (UNFICYP) through resolution 2263 (2016),
unanimously adopted today. As the penholder on this
issue, and as one ofthe largest contributors to UNFICYP,
we are pleased that the mission has been extended for
another six months. We thank colleagues for their roles
in bringing our negotiations to a successful conclusion.

This adoption sends a positive message at a
hopeful time for Cyprus. Through resolution 2263
(2016), we have done three main things. First, we have
welcomed the progress and the positive momentum in
the leaders-led settlement negotiations. Secondly, we
have captured the positive developments since the last
mandate renewal, including on confidence-building
measures. And, thirdly, we have authorized a modest
uplift in UNFICYP's force levels to assist the mission
in its planning for the hopeful event of a settlement in
the near future.

As penholder, the United Kingdom recognizes that
there were sensitivities, as evidenced by my Russian
colleague's statement. Our efforts during the drafting
focused on striking a fine balance on emotive issues,
and we believe that the resolution, unanimously
adopted, achieved that balance - a balance that allows
everyone be sure that no party felt undermined. It draws
on language from the Secretary-General's UNFICYP
report (S/2016/ll). The resolution also has the support
of the parties themselves, and we are very glad to note
that a significant number of other Council members
co-sponsored it.

Finally, there is positive momentum ongoing in the
leaders-led settlement negotiations. The Council now
needs to assist those leaders to reach agreement. The
road ahead will be tough, and the leaders will need
to show continued courage to take difficult decisions.
In doing so, they will have the full support of the
United Kingdom, which is something British Foreign
Secretary Philip Hammond made clear during his visit
last November. But the support of the whole Council
will also be vital in making this prospect ofa settlement
a reality. We have a real opportunity ahead to bring this
long-running issue to an overdue conclusion. And let us
help the leaders to seize that opportunity.

