Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, thank
Mr. Ian Martin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Nepal and head of the United
Nations Mission in that country, for his comprehensive
briefing and for introducing the latest report
(S/2008/454) on the request of Nepal for United
Nations assistance in support of its peace process. We
also welcome the Ambassador of Nepal to the meeting
this morning.

Since the adoption of resolution 1740 (2007) and
the subsequent establishment of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), the Nepalese people have
made significant strides towards restoring peace and
democracy in their country. South Africa commends
those efforts. We welcome in particular the successful
holding and conclusion of the elections to the
Constituent Assembly on 10 April. The elections,
which saw a large number of women elected, reflected
the diversity of Nepal's population.

Now that the electoral process has been
successfully completed, the next step is the formation
of the Government and the relevant institutions of that
country. We have no doubt that the Nepalese people
will also be successful in that venture. We are
confident that the relevant parties in Nepal will, in due
course, complete that process. We hope that the
international community will support the new
Government of Nepal in its efforts to address the
challenges ahead.

My delegation is encouraged by the progress
made in the peace process in Nepal since the formation
of the Constituent Assembly. As noted in paragraph 4
of the report of the Secretary-General, the
establishment of a republic in Nepal took place in a
generally peaceful environment. Notwithstanding that
progress, the report of the Secretary-General
acknowledges that significant challenges remain in the
country, including reaching an agreement on the basis
for the formation of a new Government, the completion
of the peace process and the country's long-term
development. In that connection, we encourage all
parties in Nepal to continue to work together in a spirit
of cooperation and to pursue dialogue in order to
address those challenges.

My delegation underlines the importance of
national ownership and the responsibility of Nepalese
stakeholders in addressing the challenges facing their
country. In that regard, we call upon all parties in
Nepal to uphold previous agreements and ensure that
the country is restored to the path towards sustainable
peace, stability and prosperity.

With regard to the role of UNMIN, my delegation
applauds the entire staff of the Mission for their
dedication and invaluable role in support of the
Government and the people of Nepal. We commend in
particular UNMIN's work on arms monitoring, mine
action, electoral support, gender and social inclusion,
and child protection.

Finally, with respect to the request of the
Government of Nepal for the continuation of UNMIN,
on a smaller scale, to engage in the remainder of its
mandate tasks for a period of another six months,
South Africa stands ready to support that request. We
hope that this mandate extension will enable UNMIN
to complete the remaining activities, in particular the
ongoing work on monitoring the management of arms
and army personnel. We also encourage the new
Government of Nepal to utilize UNMIN's expertise as
it carries out its own priorities aimed at benefiting all
the Nepalese people.
