Mr. Vieira de Mello: Though it is only three
months since I last had the opportunity of briefing the
Council, I do so now against the backdrop of a
radically different situation in East Timor. These past
weeks have witnessed the most exciting qualitative
leap forward in the process that the Council tasked the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) - exactly two years ago - with
performing: devolving authority onto what will
ultimately be the fully independent State of East Timor.

My briefing today will not repeat the contents of
the Secretary-General's report but, rather, provide some
more intimate commentary to the recommendations
made therein. In particular, I intend to devote some
time to the outline of our plans for a successor mission
to UNTAET, which we consider necessary to ensure
that East Timor's full independence is more of a
political reality and not, in effect, a merely ceremonial
event.

Needless to say, it is our hope that the Council
will agree with us that what we put forward today and
what members have read in the Secretary-General's
report do indeed constitute the best possible approach:
modest, focused, practical and, above all, necessary.

Before I begin my briefing proper, allow me to
say how truly pleased we are that today's meeting is
being presided over by such a distinguished President,
Foreign Minister Cowen of the Republic of Ireland, a
nation whose people and Government have been
particularly stalwart friends of East Timor over the
years. Thank you, Minister, for honouring East Timor
and UNTAET through your presence here today.

Finally, I would like to introduce several of my
close partners who have been integral in bringing us to
where we are today. Sitting beside me is Mr. Mari
Alkatiri, who, as members know, is Chief Minister of
the Council of Ministers of the Second Transitional
Government of East Timor. He is also the Secretary-
General of FRETILIN, which won the largest number
of votes in the election of 30 August. Mr. Alkatiri is a
busy man; his other portfolios include Economy and
Development, as well as Timor Sea petroleum issues,
in addition to his responsibilities as a member of the
Constituent Assembly. Also with us is Ms. Fernanda
Borges, the new Minister for Finance and an
independent member of Government, as well as Mr.
Fernando de Araujo, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation and leader of the Partido
Democratico, which came in second in the ballot.

Contrary to the views of the many naysayers, the
election campaign and polling day, as well as the days
leading up to the announcement of the results,
proceeded as we knew they would: in a remarkably
peaceful and dignified fashion. It was a process widely
praised by outside observers, including by this Council.

As the Council knows, on 15 September the 88-
member Constituent Assembly was sworn in, while on
20 September the new all-East Timorese Cabinet, now

called the Council of Ministers, was formally
established.

The creation of a democratically elected
Constituent Assembly and the formation of an
executive branch that, by and large, reflects the vote is
an event of enormous significance for East Timor.
Never before has East Timor been afforded this most
basic of rights: the ability of its people to select for
themselves who should govern them. This marks the
most decisive move yet forward towards full
independence.

At this stage, UNTAET is, quite clearly, a mission
in support of the Government. Within the parameters
laid out in resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1338 (2001),
and the powers assigned therein to UNTAET, all
administrative decisions are now taken by the East
Timorese themselves. This is in line with our stated
goal of using the period from the election to
independence to have a trial run, so to speak, in which
effective responsibility lies with a national Government
that will hopefully maintain its composition after
independence, but with UNTAET continuing to provide
the closest possible support, guidance and partnership.

The Secretary-General, in the letter he addressed
to the President yesterday, informed the Council that,
on 19 October, the Constituent Assembly voted
overwhelmingly to recommend to the Secretary-
General 20 May 2002 as the date of independence for
East Timor. This date, if approved by the Council,
would see the end of the transitional administration and
the transfer of executive, legislative and judicial
authority to the constitutionally mandated institutions
of East Timor. In other words, should the Council agree
to this date, East Timor's long quest will be attained
exactly 200 days from now. How these 200 days are
used, both in preparing for that momentous occasion
and also in preparing for what takes place afterwards,
will have the most marked impact on how we
remember the previous 24 months since the Council
created UNTAET.
I mentioned a moment ago that with the
devolution of power onto East Timorese institutions
came the inevitable increase in responsibility as well.
One of the more onerous aspects of this will be fitting
the activities of the new Government within its limited
means. As the Council knows, this has been a
complicated and, yes, a frustrating and unpleasant task.
Crafting a budget of some $65 million in a country
with as many competing demands as East Timor has
forced on us the cruellest of decisions.

These will become ever more apparent as the
process of drawing down the number of international
personnel in the East Timor Public Administration - a
process that is already under way - begins to bite.
This should not be surprising when we face an
imminent situation in which the support provided by
the current mission, with its budget roughly 10 times
that of East Timor's national budget, will simply not be
sustained after independence. Adjustments will be
inevitable.

Our aim, in the time remaining before
independence, is to minimize this negative impact and
at the same time seek to ensure that those aspects of
administration that are critical to the viability of the
Government and stability of the new State are
sufficiently ensured after the UNTAET mandate comes
to an end, while also making certain that we are well
placed to continue the critical tasks of assisting the
East Timorese gradually to take over all line functions.
A key component of our work in the time remaining is
managing an organized, rational drawdown of
UNTAET personnel in positions of public
administration, in line with the figures presented in
July by the Secretary-General in his last report to the
Council. The 35 per cent target set for this October has
been achieved, and that of 75 per cent will be attained
by independence.

Three factors are critical in the management of
this process. First, we need to avoid an unduly
precipitous reduction in the calibre of delivery of
Government services. Secondly, a minimum degree of
continued support is required to ensure that the new
Government does not falter. I will come to this in more
detail later. Finally, we need a clear indication from the
Council as to its concurrence on the nature of the
successor mission that we are proposing.

Obtaining that will allow us to commence, in
good time, the selection of personnel to help perform
key functions. This will clearly be critical. I have noted
before that one of the primary lessons for the United
Nations to learn from a mission such as UNTAET is
that we need to be able to select and recruit, more
effectively and rapidly than is currently the case,
individuals not only with the requisite skills for the
jobs at hand, but also with the ability to transfer those
skills to local capacity.

As proposed, the successor mission to UNTAET
would focus on the security of the new nation. In the
most basic sense of the word, security continues to
provide little cause for concern. Border infiltrations
have not occurred during this year's dry season -
which, incidentally, is coming to an end - as a result of
our robust response to last year's significant and
murderous threat, while the Indonesian armed forces
now provide more resolute action against hardcore
militia in West Timor. As far as national crime rates are
concerned, they would, I suspect, be the envy of many
Governments.

On independence, maintaining internal security
will continue to be the primary responsibility of
international civilian police, though with the increasing
involvement of the national Police Service that we are
creating. More so than was the case with the Defence
Force, the East Timorese police were at the forefront of
ensuring security on polling day. They performed their
potentially difficult duties in an outstanding manner,
and their high visibility, good nature and
professionalism - qualities not always found in more
mature forces - lent lustre to an already brilliant day.

We are planning a reduction in the authorized
strength of the civilian police component of some 25
per cent - that is, 400 police officers - between now
and independence, for a total of 1,240 on that day.
These will then be reduced in a phased manner as the
East Timor Police Service acquires ever more
operational capacity.

I shall confine my comments on the policing of
independent East Timor to just two. First - and this is
another of my hobby horses - we need to get
absolutely right our approach to the deployment of
international police officers so as to ensure that this
most important of institutions is built on solid
foundations. It is vital to the success of this element of
the mission that we deploy only those officers who
have the most appropriate qualifications.

Secondly, as indicated in the report, it is possible
that the current target of a 3,000-strong East Timor
Police Service is overly generous. If this is the case,
and if it is decided through consultation with the
Council of Ministers to reduce the overall ultimate size
of the East Timor Police Service, it would obviously
have beneficial consequences in terms of cost and
speed of full deployment.

Until the East Timorese can assume full
responsibility for the maintenance of their internal
security through a non-corrupt and effective police
force, it will be very difficult for the international
community to abdicate its responsibilities in this area.
However time consuming and expensive our obligation
in this regard, it would be the most false of economies
to prematurely call the job done.

By independence we also propose that the United
Nations military component should number some 5,000
personnel, a reduction of roughly 44 per cent from the
current authorized strength. Their purpose will be to
continue to ensure effective border security pending the
full establishment and training of the East Timor
Defence Force and while there continues to be growing
illegal trading and other forms of criminality on the
border and grounds for believing that residue armed
militia in West Timor retain the determination to cross
into East Timor and inflict harm - despite, as I
mentioned earlier, a welcome increase in Indonesian
enforcement action.

The East Timor Defence Force has now been
moved to its new training centre, which has been fully
functional since last June. The first battalion has been
formally raised, following the completion of its basic
training, and is on its way to operational tasking. In a
significant, though little noted, development, I ordered
that a small contingent of East Timorese soldiers be on
active duty throughout the country through the final
weeks of election campaigning and for the day of the
elections. Though the men were small in number, the
impact of the sight of them provided a significant
reassurance to the people of East Timor. They were a
source of pride on that day, as well as of optimism that
East Timor would have at its disposal a small but
effective apolitical armed force.

The first East Timor Defence Force battalion will
be deployed to the eastern sector of East Timor early
next year once the area has been vacated by United
Nations peacekeepers, and will be ready for operational
tasking in June. Under the current schedule, the second
battalion will not be operational until late 2003, while
the whole force will not be free-standing until mid-
2004. Donors thus may wish to consider accelerating
their capital funding of this exercise to allow for a
quicker final withdrawal of international military
forces from East Timor. I am acutely aware that
military costs present the most sizeable portion of the
expenses of any United Nations mission.

While a competent military force is one means of
providing a degree of security, more effective still is
the realization of sensible bilateral relations based on
mutual respect and an identification of common
interests. This is what the East Timorese leadership,
with the assistance of UNTAET, has been seeking with
Indonesia. On 12 September Mari Alkatiri, Jose
Ramos-Horta, Xanana Gusmao and I met with the new
President of Indonesia, Ms. Megawati Soekarnoputri,
as well as with her Coordinating Minister for Political
and Security Affairs and her Foreign Minister. The
meeting set the tone for what I hope will be a
reinvigorated and increasingly harmonious period in
the development of relations between the two
neighbours. This should be cemented in the coming
weeks and months with a series of meetings on a broad
range of issues of mutual interest. We are also working
towards holding a further high-level discussion next
January, at which it is our hope to clear the books of a
number of these issues.

Nearly two weeks ago, in follow-up to the
meeting with the Indonesian President, my Deputy
visited Jakarta for discussions focusing exclusively on
justice issues. While the new Attorney-General has
responded favourably to our proposal for monthly
working-level meetings, with a view to moving
forward the many outstanding and complicated cases of
serious crimes involving both Indonesia and East
Timor - including by judicial cooperation and the
support we will continue to extend to the new ad hoc
human rights tribunal that President Megawati has
decided to establish, with a view to taking to court the
first group of suspects identified last year by the then
Attorney-General - much still needs to be achieved in
this area.

The events that I have described are positive
developments that I warmly welcome. However, if we
are to prove the cynics wrong, let us be clear that real
progress can only come with concrete action. There are
still far too many outstanding issues affecting both
sides of the border that require resolution. These
include, to name but a few, cooperation in the
investigation and bringing to justice perpetrators of
serious crimes in East Timor; cross-border issues,
including the formal demarcation of the border;
bringing closure to the question of pensions for former
Indonesian civil servants, on which significant progress
has been achieved; and ensuring adequate land access
between contiguous East Timor and the enclave of
Oecussi. We need to use the coming 200 days to push
for answers to as many of these as possible prior to
independence.

Progress has also been made in encouraging
refugee returns and working to isolate the unrepentant,
permanently embittered militia hardcore. October saw
the highest monthly return - 3,233 refugees - since
March 2000, bringing to 188,646 the total number of
returns since September 1999. A number of factors
perhaps contributed to this welcome development,
among them the peaceful holding of the elections,
greater cooperation with the Indonesian authorities and
the reconciliation process being driven by the East
Timor leadership, with our full support, in particular
through the sustained involvement of my own Chief of
Staff. We anticipate further returns before the full onset
of the rains and the Christmas period, and must
continue in our efforts to find a quick solution to the
far too prolonged misery of the many thousands of
refugees who continue to live in fear and poverty in
West Timor.

In order to reinforce current peace and stability, it
is essential that both the demands for justice and the
need for reconciliation are addressed in a mutually
supportive manner. Together with Timorese partners,
we continue to work on a variety of programmes
focused on reconciliation, and early interventions
designed to prevent past differences developing into
communal violence. To date, violence flowing from the
1999 abuses has been remarkably minimal, although
challenges may increase with the return of a more
difficult refugee caseload in the coming months.

After broad consultations, a regulation
establishing the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation was promulgated in July, and it is
expected that the selection of regional and national
Commissioners will be finalized by the first week in
December.

The Commission will facilitate healing by
allowing human rights victims, perpetrators and
witnesses to give their personal accounts, which will be
compiled into a report. The other main goal will be to
offer perpetrators of less serious crimes the opportunity
to enter into community-based plea-bargaining
mechanisms, rather than the formal justice system.

These procedures will not, obviously, apply to
murder, rape and other serious crimes, which will
remain within the exclusive jurisdiction of the court
system. The Commission will have a mandate of two
years. It will cover the whole period from 25 April
1974 to 25 October 1999, and will be totally funded
through voluntary contributions.

Finally, and most importantly, I wish to address
the matter of what we - the East Timorese and the
United Nations - hope will be the civilian elements of
the successor mission. It will include the standard
offices, such as political affairs and human rights that
support the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in traditional operations and mission
administration elements.

Let me, however, focus specifically on an area
that may require more explanation than other
components: our proposed structure for dealing with
serious crimes committed in the course of the violence
of 1999. The report of the Security Council Mission to
East Timor and Indonesia, of November 2000, rightly
pointed out the significant difficulties we were facing
in dealing with serious crimes. Likewise, these
concerns were reflected in the exhortation to deal
effectively with this matter contained in Security
Council resolution 1338 (2001).

We have taken these concerns seriously.
Consequently, we are seeking to restructure our
approach, bringing our handling of serious crimes more
directly within the purview of my office. We are doing
this not simply to ensure that this area is dealt with as
effectively and efficiently as possible, but also to
reflect the distinctive international nature of the
responsibility to deal with this matter.

To be sure, progress in this area has been made.
As the Secretary-General's report indicates, 32
indictments have been issued, charging 62 individuals
with crimes against humanity. New territory in
jurisprudence is being explored with the first ever
indictment for the crime of extermination being issued
for crimes committed in the enclave of Oecussi. In
other words, real progress can be made. The first
indictments were issued much faster and at
significantly less cost than was the case in either The
Hague or Arusha. We should ensure that the process
can be further cemented, and thus we have proposed
this restructuring for a continued, assured presence in
dealing with serious crimes, but at a reduced level and
for a time-limited period.

Let me now turn to the proposed civilian support
group. It does indeed bear repeating that UNTAET's
mandate to establish a national civil administration,
assist in the development of civil social services and
support capacity-building was both unprecedented in
scope and began following the near total destruction of
East Timor. The two years since have seen much
progress. However, the limited human resource base
available and the fact that provincial East Timor under
Indonesian rule lacked the institutions of a full-fledged
State meant that it was impossible to create self-
sufficient government structures in just two years.

In my last briefing to the Council, I mentioned
that we could not simply walk away from the nascent
government administration and put at risk the
investment that, the Member States have made so far.
We are currently working with the Second Transitional
Government to identify its human resource needs
across all ministries, with the assistance of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP). While the
comprehensive results are not yet available, it is clear
that up to 300 positions in total would be needed, with
the majority in areas related to human development and
poverty reduction, which will be funded through
voluntary - either multilateral or bilateral - sources.

However, some areas of the administration are
critical to the viability and political stability of the
Government as a whole, and we must ensure that they
are supported for a specific period of time through the
assessed budget. As the Council knows, we have been
studying this question since last March. A series of
studies - the latest being the UNDP human resources
assessment report just released - have made it clear
that government stability will depend upon
international expertise in the following areas: finance,
legal and justice systems, essential infrastructural
services and basic regulatory, administrative and
central logistical and procurement systems. They are
akin to the vital functions upon which the corpus of
government depends. Any resulting failure of the
public administration would, I believe, be the failure of
the United Nations. These may be strong words, but it
could not have been expected that a self-sustaining
government could be established from the ground up in
just two years.

Let us therefore finish the job. I can assure the
Council that the Timorese do not want a needlessly
protracted dependence on international support.
Equally, I can confidently say that UNTAET, the East
Timorese leadership, the civil service, United Nations
agencies, the World Bank and others are all
unanimously convinced of the serious risks
accompanying a precipitous withdrawal of critical
international support.

I therefore believe that it is a fair and - in
relative terms - modest proposal that is made by the
Secretary-General. A civilian support group of 100 or
so experts out of the up to 300 that I mentioned earlier
is all that has been requested to ensure a minimum
degree of expertise in the critical areas I have just
enumerated. The civilian support group would have
within its mission plan the task to also train and hand
over to Timorese staff as soon as possible.

I appreciate that elements of the successor
mission are unprecedented, but this is natural, given the
fact that so much of UNTAET's mandate was
unprecedented.

In conclusion, we are well advanced in the
planning for the successor mission. We will continue to
keep you closely informed of our progress in finalizing
and adding detail to these plans, a process that I am
confident will gather steam in the coming weeks as the
Second Transitional Government - which, you will
recall, is only just over one month old - fully
establishes itself.

It is said in some quarters that UNTAET stands
on the verge of being a United Nations success. While
it is flattering to hear this, Mr. President, Mr. Minister,
it is a premature verdict, and certainly not one for me
to make, save that we stand a much greater chance of
ensuring that this is the case if - paraphrasing a recent
Council debate - we allow UNTAET to exit with a
strategy. That strategy is, I would strongly suggest,
what has been presented to you by the Secretary-
General.

In other words, while the current phase on which
we are embarked may be nearing completion with the
approach of independence, the job we have all set out
to do is not yet done. We need to ensure that our
combined and truly inspiring investment in East Timor
to date is fully realized as a fitting and deserved reward
for both the East Timorese - for the courage and
determination they have shown over the years - and
for our Organization, the United Nations, for the
commitment it has shown to this most noble task.

