Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
thank Peru and Sweden for their initiative to advance
the youth, peace and security agenda by proposing a
draft resolution in follow-up to landmark resolution
2250 (2015). We commend both countries for the
careful way in which they organized the process and
also commend Jordan as the originator of resolution
2250 (2015).

I should like to make four points.

First, we co-sponsored the text of resolution 2419
(2018) because we welcome its substance and certainly
also its unanimous adoption by the Council. We hope
that the request contained therein for a follow-up report
will ensure that this issue receives the attention that
it deserves from the Council and the wider United
Nations system. We welcome the fact that so many
other member States also sponsored the text.

Secondly, on the need for a comprehensive
approach, we appreciate the fact that the resolution
recognizes the importance of a comprehensive approach
to conflict resolution, peacekeeping and sustaining
peace. We welcome the fact that the resolution
reaffirms the important role that young people can play
in these efforts. We welcome in particular the Council's
intention to invite civil society, including youth-led
organizations, as briefers here in the Council. We also
welcome the encouragement to the Secretary-General
to include in his reports the progress made towards the
participation of young people in peace processes.

Thirdly, the importance ofthe progress study is clear.
The study was exceptional; its methodology provided
access and a voice to more than 4,000 young men and
women who would not ordinarily have had the chance
to participate face to face in this sort of policy-shaping
process. It was this unique participatory approach that
led the study to convincingly demonstrate how young
people often feel unrepresented and excluded by the
very institutions that are supposed to serve them. We
recognize the positive reception of the progress study
by an overwhelming majority of the membership of the
United Nations, including most members of the Council,
in the open debate held on 23 April (see S/PV.8241).

My fourth point concerns the importance of
listening to today's youth. In negotiating this resolution,
we tried to do our utmost to have young voices heard,
including through active inputs from our own youth
delegates, whom we commend for their contribution
in this context. We express our hope that the Council
will continue to listen to their voices and increase
youth participation in issues of peace and security. The
young people of the world have a legitimate desire to
participate in the process of making decisions about
their own future.

