Mr. Mansour: On behalf of Palestine, I
congratulate you, Madam President, as well as your
country, the United States of America, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month. We are
fully confident in your leadership. I also express
appreciation to the United Kingdom for its skilled
12-30484
stewardship of the Council in the month of March. I
also express our appreciation for the important briefing
to the Council today given by Mr. Lynn Pascoe.

In spite of relentless Israeli assaults on the rights,
land and very existence of the Palestinian people, they
remain committed to peace and have not forsaken their
legitimate national aspirations, including for the
realization of their inalienable right to self-
determination in their homeland. That was reconfirmed
in the letter conveyed on 17 April by President
Mahmoud Abbas to Prime Minister Netanyahu. It is a
reaffirmation of our genuine commitment to the path of
peace and a direct call on Israel, the occupying Power,
to cease its illegal expansionism and oppression of the
Palestinian people, respect international law and not
miss this historic opportunity for peace.

In word and deed, the Palestinian leadership has
upheld its obligations and adhered to the historic
compromise consecrated in the 1988 Palestinian
declaration of independence and the Palestine
Liberation Organization's participation in the Middle
East peace process since its inception, more than two
decades ago, with the aim of achieving the two-State
solution based on the pre-l967 borders and on
comprehensive peace. Astoundingly, that commitment
has prevailed in spite of Israel's systematic aggression,
colonization and human rights violations, by which it
continues to cause immense suffering to the Palestinian
people and to obstruct the peace process, undermine
the Palestinian Authority and destroy the principles and
objectives of the two-State solution.

Moreover, despite the failure to hold Israel
accountable and to fulfil the legal and moral
obligations towards Palestine, it is clear that the
international community has also not forsaken the
noble goal of peace for Palestine and Israel and the
wider region. That is attested to, inter alia, by the
countless initiatives and consistent calls for ending the
Israeli occupation and for achieving Palestine's
independence by Governments and international and
regional organizations, including the United Nations,
the League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the European Union, the African Union, the India-
Brazil-South Africa trilateral mechanism, the Summit
of South American-Arab Countries and others. Of
course, this also includes the efforts of the Quartet and
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
the International Assistance to Palestinians, including
5
the recent Brussels meeting and the 11 April Quartet
statement (see SG/2182), despite that it falls short of
expectations given the responsibilities undertaken by
the Quartet.

It is also reflected in the provision of
humanitarian aid and financial assistance to Palestine.
And it is certainly reflected in the strong expressions of
solidarity by peace-loving people from all over the
globe who continue in ways large and small to support
our people. Here, we condemn again Israel's excessive
force and incitement against Palestinian civilians
protesting the occupation, as well as against
international activists peacefully supporting Palestine,
ranging from the killing of an American citizen, Rachel
Corrie, to the criminal attack on the Gaza humanitarian
flotilla, in which nine Turkish civilians were murdered,
to the latest incident of brutality by an Israeli
commander against a young Danish peace activist and
several other activists.

All such support reaffirms the international
commitment to our just cause and nourishes our
resilience. That is why, despite our intense despair and
frustration, we have not given up on the goal of the
independence of a sovereign, viable, contiguous,
democratic State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace and security
with Israel, based on the pre-1967 borders and a just,
agreed solution to the Palestine refugee problem. Yet,
we are all aware that hope cannot be sustained in a
vacuum. Without a credible political horizon, our
hopes and convictions are being eroded. The continuity
of this horizon is being obstructed by Israel's refusal to
respect the longstanding parameters of the peace
process, enshrined in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, and Israel's brazen
impunity, which makes peace seem impossible.

Belief in the two-State solution is diminishing,
particularly as Israel continues its illegal settlement
activities all over the occupied Palestinian territory,
including occupied East Jerusalem, leading us to a
point where many now openly question the
attainability of that solution and where the
consideration of alternative solutions is on the rise. The
failure to bring a halt to Israel's settlement campaign,
which would enable us to overcome the impasse and
resume direct negotiations, threatens to unravel all that
has been achieved to date and to usher in an era of
even greater instability and uncertainty.
In the period since our debate in January (see S/PV.6706), and even in just the few days since the
delivery of President Mahmoud Abbas's letter, Israel
has forged ahead non-stop with its illegal colonization
campaign, confiscating land, building settlements and
the wall, demolishing homes and infrastructure, and
evicting Palestinian families. Israeli officials continue
to make provocative declarations regarding settlement
expansion, apparently vying with each other for the
largest land grabs, along with flagrant attempts to
entrench illegal settlement outposts on Palestinian
land, including attempts by the Israeli Prime Minister
himself.

We have drawn the Security Council's attention
to such illegal actions in the recent period in and
around the cities of Bethlehem, East Jerusalem and
Al-Khalil, as well as to horrific acts committed against
Palestinians by Israeli settlers with the full support of
the Israeli Government. It is by now well-known that
the Palestinian presence in many of those areas,
especially in East Jerusalem, the Christian community
in the Bethlehem area and the Bedouin community in
the Jordan Valley, is being gravely threatened;
livelihoods, particularly in agriculture, are being
devastated; and entire communities, such as those in
Al-Khalil, are living under the constant terror of
extremist settlers. Regrettably, however, our appeals
have been to no avail, and the Council remains unable
to uphold its duties to stop Israel's aggression, which is
further destabilizing the situation and literally
destroying the two-State solution.

The international community cannot remain on
the sidelines. The Security Council's Charter duties are
clear, as are the responsibilities of United Nations
Member States and the obligations of the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Serious, practical measures must be undertaken to
compel Israel to halt its illegal settlement activities and
all other related unlawful policies in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
begin genuinely moving towards ending this
illegitimate, belligerent 45-year-old occupation.

Israel must stop expanding its massive network of
settlements and the wall, stop its deceitful attempts
regarding the establishment of illegal settlement
outposts, and stop its displacement of Palestinians,
notably in the areas of the West Bank commonly
referred to as Area C. It must be pointed out that, while
the designation of Area C under the Oslo Accords was,
12-30484
like the Accords themselves, intended as a temporary
measure, it has instead become frozen in time by the
occupying Power for its own obvious illegal gain.
There, Israel continues to gravely harm the Palestinian
presence and Palestinian development, rabidly
pursuing illegal measures to alter the demographic
composition, character and status of that vast area of
land in order to ease its de facto annexation, which
must be completely rejected.

Tensions have also risen in the recent period
owing to intensification of the Palestinian prisoner
crisis. Thousands of Palestinian civilians, including
children, are have been inhumanely imprisoned by the
occupying Power, which routinely violates their human
rights and subjects them to severe humiliation and
torture. Among the prisoners, hundreds have been held
under "administrative detention" for months and years
without charge or trial, with several Palestinians
undertaking hunger strikes in protest of that illegal
practice, with several of them on hunger strike for over
one month. Moreover, on 17 April, a day of solidarity
observed as Palestinian Prisoners Day, approximately
1,600 Palestinians in Israeli prisons joined the hunger
strike in a peaceful, non-violent protest against their
captivity and the deplorable conditions under which
they are being held.

We call on the international community to
immediately address that crisis. It must be demanded
that Israel respect its obligations under the Fourth
Geneva Convention and under human rights law. It
cannot be permitted to continue its daily arrests - with
at least 2,000 Palestinians arrested since the prisoner
exchange in October alone, including some released in
the exchange - and abusive treatment of Palestinian
prisoners, with no recourse for the victims of this
policy, which is destroying the hearts, minds and spirits
of so many of our citizens and destroying our society's
fabric. We call for an end to that illegal Israeli practice
and for the release of all Palestinian prisoners.

We have also, in the recent period, drawn the
Council's attention to Israel's escalation of attacks
against the Gaza Strip, wherein the occupying Power
has carried out a series of military strikes against
civilian areas, including extrajudicial killings, which in
the course of a few days in early March led to the
killing of at least 18 Palestinians, among them
children, and the wounding of dozens of other
civilians. Israeli military operations have also included
assaults against Palestinians commemorating Land Day
12-30484

on 30 March, in which the occupying forces fired tear
gas, stun grenades and live ammunition, killing a
young man and wounding more than 300. Such acts of
aggression continue to traumatize the Palestinian
people, particularly in Gaza, where the civilian
population continues to suffer vastly from the
devastating impact of the Israeli blockade and the
criminal Israeli military aggression of 2008-2009 -
for which, to date, there has been regrettably, no
accountability and no justice, which our people and
leadership continue to demand.

Israel's settlement campaign - the main obstacle
to the peace process - as well as the blockade of
Gaza, the imprisonment of Palestinians and all other
forms of collective punishment against our people must
be ceased, in order to avert the escalation of tensions
and a further deterioration of the situation. The
Security Council must find the political will to act. An
unequivocal demand must be made for Israel, as the
occupying Power and as a State Member of the United
Nations, to abide by its legal obligations under the
Charter, the Fourth Geneva Convention and United
Nations resolutions. It is time to end the selective
application of the law and the shameful pretexts, which
have only fed Israeli impunity. Should Israel choose to
ignore this appeal - instead entrenching the
occupation and continuing to oppress the Palestinian
people - the international community has a
responsibility to act to bring an end to this unlawful
situation.

In that context, we stress the importance of the
proposed Security Council Visit to the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Such a
visit, long-overdue, would reaffirm the Council's role
in securing peace and enhancing its engagement and
credibility. Moreover, it would allow Council members
to assess first-hand the reality on the ground under
Israel's occupation, thereby better informing their
understanding of the various dimensions of the conflict
and of the efforts needed to overcome the obstacles to
direct negotiations and to salvage the two-State
solution along pre-l967 borders. We urge Council
members to make a positive decision soon on the
matter.

Furthermore, we reiterate our call on the
depositary State, Switzerland, to take the necessary
measures to convene a conference of the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
determine means to ensure respect of the Convention in
7

the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. We stress the value of such a conference for
upholding the rule of law, compelling compliance by
Israel and reaffirming the primacy of international
humanitarian law for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, including under foreign occupation.

I conclude by reiterating that the Palestinian
leadership remains committed to its international
obligations and the pursuit of peace, justice and the
fulfilment of the rights and national aspirations of the
Palestinian people in accordance with international
legality.

It is time for Israel to respect the law and finally
respond to the historic, genuine compromise made by
the Palestinian people and the Arab States, as enshrined
in the Arab Peace Initiative, now in its tenth year, and
to respond to the hand that continues to be extended for
peace. In word and deed, Israel must prove that it is
serious about ending its military occupation of
Palestinian land since 1967 and reaching a
comprehensive peace that will allow the Palestinian
people to live in freedom in their State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, achieve justice,
including for the Palestine refugees, and allow Israel
and Palestine to peacefully coexist and thrive side by
side, as well as with all our neighbours in the region,
ensuring a future of freedom, dignity and security for
all of our children.

Should Israel once again respond with
intransigence and impunity, undermining all of our
efforts and deepening the impasse, the Palestinian
people and their leadership will not give up, but will
continue to pursue all peaceful, non-violent, legitimate
political, diplomatic and legal avenues in the
international arena to ensure the restoration of the
Palestinian people's inalienable rights and the ultimate
achievement of peace and justice. We will not cease
our appeals to the international community to uphold
its responsibilities in that regard.

