Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks South Africa for taking the initiative to convene
this open meeting. We listened attentively to the
briefings by the Secretary-General and representatives
of civil society.

Peace and security in Africa are not only relevant
to the well-being of the African people, but are also
closely related to peace and stability throughout the
world. Achieving stability, peace and security in
Africa is a common aspiration of the African people,
but is also the incontestable responsibility of the
international community, in particular the Security
Council. Preventive diplomacy is an important means
of maintaining international peace and security. I
would like to make the following points on how to put
preventive diplomacy to good use.

We must fully leverage the role of African countries
in solving African problems. All countries should
uphold the principles of mutual respect, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and non-interference in the
internal affairs of other countries. We must place our
full trust in the countries of Africa and have confidence
in them, instead of taking it upon ourselves to solve
their problems. Prevention should be carried out while
respecting the will of the countries concerned and
insisting on their ownership.

We should fully leverage the unique roles of
regional organizations, such as the African Union, while
remaining committed to addressing African issues
through political and diplomatic means. We must make
good use of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the good offices and mediation
capacity of our Organization. We must also avoid
taking action by invoking Chapter VII of the Charter
at every turn. Mediators and parties to conflicts and
disputes should form a sense of community and shared
destiny in tackling difficult problems through dialogue.
We must promote security through cooperation and
respect and accommodate each other's legitimate
concerns. It is essential to fully leverage the roles of
women and youth, shape a culture of peace and settle
differences by seeking common ground, while putting
our differences aside.

We must attach greater importance to addressing
the root causes of peace and security in Africa, putting
economic and social development at the forefront
and - by developing prevention and the mitigation
of social risks - laying a solid foundation for lasting
stability. The international community should help
Africa achieve development through pragmatic action.
China is willing to dovetail the joint building of the
Belt and Road Initiative with the African Union's
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the development strategies
of African countries, in order to help African
countries to strengthen connectivity, enhance their
development capabilities and promote peace through
inclusive development.

China has never been absent from efforts to help
Africa maintain peace and security. As we speak, more
than 2,000 Chinese peacekeepers are safeguarding
peace in five United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Africa. The Chinese Navy has been escorting vessels
in the Gulf of Aden and in waters off Somalia for more
than 10 years. It has completed more than 1,200 escort
assignments for more than 6,700 vessels.

During the Beijing Summit of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation last year, China decided
to implement a Chinese-African peace and security
cooperation framework and established a China-
Africa Peace and Security Forum to provide a platform
for exchanges in the field of peace and security. We
established the China-Africa Peace and Security Fund
to support cooperation between the two parties in peace
and security, peacekeeping and stabilization.

The first batch of military assistance materials,
worth ¥200 million, has arrived in Africa in order to
support the African Standby Force and bolster African
capacity to respond immediately to crises. We have also
provided ¥300 million in aid for the counter-terrorism
operation in the Sahel and to support the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel.

We have actively supported the good offices and
mediation of the United Nations by making donations
over many years to United Nations prevention efforts.
In addition, through the United Nations Peace and
Development Trust Fund, we have provided support
to United Nations mediation mechanisms, including
the Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Board
on Mediation and the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs crisis response system.

The Chinese people have always shared the same
vision and destiny with the people of Africa. We have
always shown respect, love and support to Africa on its
path towards achieving peace and development. China
will continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with Africa
and march together with it, hand in hand.

