Ms. Laj: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to provide this brief update to the Security
Council on the situation in South Sudan. As the next
regular report ofthe Secretary-General on South Sudan
will be available in the coming weeks and in light
of the statements of the other speakers today, I will
focus my comments on key operational developments,
including the support of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to the implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan.

Despite the signing ofthe peace agreement, violence
continues in many areas of the country. In Upper Nile,
tensions between the Dinka and Shilluk communities
remain high following the outbreak of violence that
occurred in the United Nations protection site in
Malakal in February. Since that incident, UNMISS has
been supporting humanitarian partners to re-establish
facilities and restore service delivery within the
site, while also providing force protection for food
distribution both within the site and to the internally
displaced persons who relocated to Malakal town.
We have also taken measures to increase perimeter
security at the site and we continue to engage closely
with community leaders and the local government to
prevent any resurgence of violence.

I welcome the United Nations Headquarters-led
Board of Inquiry that has been constituted to assess the
response of the Mission to the incident in Malakal, and
stand ready to provide any support the team may need to
conclude its investigation. Its findings, combined with
the recommendations of the Mission's own preliminary
investigation, will strengthen our ability to prevent
such conflict from occurring in the future.

Elsewhere in the country, clashes between
Government forces and armed groups continued in the
Equatorias and in the greater Bahr el-Ghazal region,
with reports of civilian deaths, as well as looting and
the harassment of communities by Government forces.
Jonglei continues to see a resurgence of intercommunal
clashes, both in the Greater Pibor Area, and more
recently, between communities in Pochalla. Warrap
and Unity have also seen civilians killed in a continued
cycle of violent retaliatory cattle raids. These conflicts
are not new; they erupt out of historic social divisions
and competition over limited resources and will likely
continue to threaten longer-term peace and stability.
Furthermore, the dramatic deterioration of the economic
situation is continuing to take a heavy toll on the people
of South Sudan and could have security implications.
As an additional consequence, humanitarian needs are
escalating and spreading rapidly across the country.

This overall context only underscores the urgent
need to sustain momentum towards implementing
the peace agreement. As Chairman Mogae has just
highlighted, some very important wheels have begun
to turn, in no small part because of the continued
commitment of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (JMEC) and partners. I wish to assure
the members of the Council that the Mission is fully
supporting this process under the coordination of
the JMEC. Allow me to provide some examples of
that support.

Over the past months, UNMISS has provided
logistical and technical assistance to the Joint Military
Ceasefire Commission in its efforts, including
the clearing of land at some designated sites and
the installation of sanitation facilities. The United
Nations Mine Action Service has also worked to
clear unexploded ordnance from the planned sites.
Meanwhile, the Mission is supporting the Commission
in the establishment of the joint Juba coordination
centre, formerly known as the Joint Operation Centre.

UNMISS continues to provide air transport to
move opposition forces to Juba, in line with the agreed
transitional security arrangements. On 24 March, the
Mission completed the first airlift of 22 high-ranking
opposition officers from Pagak to Juba, including
generals of the Sudan People's Liberation Army in
Opposition, who will constitute the leadership of
the joint integrated Police and Strategic Defence and
Security Review Board. Airlifts resumed on Monday,
28 March, with the transport of an additional 39
opposition forces from Malakal to Juba, including their
light weapons, followed by a third batch of 40 the next
day. We shall continue these operations throughout the
week, weather permitting, and today 130 additional
soldiers have arrived - 40 on a United Nations flight
and 90 on a Troika-chartered plane.

The Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism continues its
deployment across the country, with accommodation
and other logistical support, including force protection,
provided by UNMISS. The Mechanism has also taken
on the additional task of verifying the redeployment
sites for military forces outside Juba, in line with the
transitional security arrangements. These are critical
responsibilities, and we are providing the necessary
support to the monitoring and verification teams on
the ground to facilitate their investigations as much
as possible.

South Sudan is at a critical juncture. While I
am slightly optimistic that the developments that
Chairperson Mogae and I have just highlighted are
steps forward, we all know that enormous challenges
and hurdles remain. In tandem with this measured
progress, continued ceasefire violations and the rise of
previously dormant intercommunal conflicts, coupled
with difficulties in meeting the country's growing
humanitarian needs, deplorable human rights abuses
and the sharp economic downturn all threaten to derail
the peace process. Sustained progress will require
both parties to form the Transitional Government
without further delay and to demonstrate the courage
to compromise for the sake of peace. Most important,
it will require South Sudan's leaders to begin to put the
people first.

The formation of the Transitional Government is
indeed a necessary step towards setting the country on
a path to longer-term stability and improving the lives
of the people, who have suffered far too much for far too
long. But it isjust a first step. The work does not end when
Riek Machar returns to Juba to form the Transitional
Government with President Salva Kiir. In fact, that is
when the hard work of rebuilding the country has to
start and difficult decisions must be taken. That is why
we all need the continued support of the members of
the Council and the sustained effort and cooperation of
the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union, the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission and all partners. The road
ahead will be long and difficult, but we must move
ahead. The people of South Sudan deserve nothing less.

