Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the Security
Council's successful mission to Afghanistan. The
report before us contains many important ideas and
recommendations. We believe that it will be very
helpful to the Council in addressing the issue of
Afghanistan in its next phase.

I thank Ambassador Oshima and the Japanese
delegation for their initiative and active efforts to make
the mission possible and successful.

I should like to take this opportunity to stress
three points.

First, security and stability remain the top priority
for Afghanistan and should be addressed with enhanced
effort. China supports the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan to combat terrorist and extremist activities
and to maintain national security and stability. The
international community should provide more
resources to help Afghanistan to strengthen its military
and police forces so that it can, independently and as
soon as possible, assume the responsibility for
maintaining national security and social stability.
Secondly, it is necessary to accelerate economic
and social reconstruction in Afghanistan so that
development and dignity can be enjoyed by all

Afghans. The international community should make
further efforts to assist the Afghan Government
effectively to implement the Afghanistan Compact and
the interim Afghan National Development Strategy so
as to help it to achieve tangible progress on the
economy, infrastructure, education, human rights and
law and order.

The extensive growth in poppy cultivation and
illicit trafficking poses a life-and-death challenge to the
peacebuilding process in Afghanistan. We urge
Afghanistan to strive to counter the drug threat and
hope that it can cooperate closely with the United
Nations, regional organizations and its neighbours to
that end.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue to provide unwavering support to the people
and Government of Afghanistan in order to propel that
country towards success. That is the common
responsibility of the international community. We
support an enhanced and more extensive role for the
United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in the peacebuilding effort in
that country. We call on the international community to
continue to provide multifaceted support and assistance
to Afghanistan and to make every effort to implement
tangible and beneficial projects for the Afghan people.

As a friendly neighbouring country of
Afghanistan, China will, as always, make a
constructive contribution to help Afghanistan to
achieve peace, stability and economic and social
development and to maintain regional peace and
stability.

