Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for having
convened this debate on the issue of Afghanistan.
China has listened attentively to the briefing delivered
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and to the statements made
by Ms. Samar of the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission and Ambassador Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations.

At present, Afghanistan is in a crucial state
of transition. China commends the National Unity
Government for its unremitting efforts in maintaining
national stability, promoting national reconciliation and
facilitating economic development. At the same time,
the country is still facing grave challenges across the
political, economic and security fields. In order to help
Afghanistan respond to challenges, the international
community must continue to provide firm support in
the following areas.

First, it must vigorously improve the Afghan
security situation. The international community must
invest heavily in supporting the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces capacity-building, and
enhance its self-defence capacity to effectively deal
with the threats of terrorism, transnational crime
and drug smuggling. General Assembly resolutions
have confirmed the security cooperation between and
among regional countries, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and Afghanistan. We hope that all
parties concerned will continue to push it forward.

Secondly, it is important to steadfastly promote the
national reconciliation process. Advancing the national
reconciliation process is the only way to ensure long-
term peace in Afghanistan. All parties in Afghanistan
must focus on the national interest and the people's
interests and participate actively in the reconciliation
process. The international community must fully
support the inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
reconciliation process so that all parties can join the
peace talks with fruitful results without further delay.

Thirdly, it is imperative to substantively assist
Afghanistan in enhancing its governance capability.
On issues concerning Afghanistan, it is the people of
Afghanistan who have the final say. The international
community must truly respect the right of the Afghan
people independently to choose their political system
and development path, and at the same time, on the basis
of the national development strategy and specific needs,
assist the Government in enhancing its administrative
capability in a targeted way.

F ourthly, it must more effectively assist Afghanistan
in its integration into regional development. The
international community must make good on its
commitment of assistance and support Afghanistan in
its economic development. With resource endowments
and geographical strength, Afghanistan enjoys broad
prospects in regional economic cooperation.

General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
have confirmed the great significance of the One
Belt, One Road project to promote Afghan economic
development and regional cooperation. It is our hope
that all parties can jointly promote the One Belt, One
Road project to enhance regional economic cooperation
and connectivity, so as to assistancest Afghanistan in
its social and economic development.

China commends the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its work. We
laud UNAMA for its assistance to Afghanistan in
maintaining national stability, promoting economic
development and enhancing governance capability.
We will continue to support the work of UNAMA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto.

China and Afghanistan have been good friends
and close neighbours for generations. China looks
forward to the achievement of peace, security, stability
and development. China will continue to support
Afghanistan in enhancing its security capacity-
building and in combating terrorism and will support
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization as it plays an
active part in that regard. China will continue to support
the Afghan peace and reconciliation process and
participate actively in the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and
the United States of America, and other relevant
mechanisms and processes.

China supports Afghanistan in its integration
into regional cooperation. We will align our One
Belt, One Road initiative with Afghanistan's National
Development Strategy. Together with the international
community, we will make concerted efforts towards the
swift achievement of peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan.

