Mr. Guehenno: There have been several
developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
since the previous briefing to the Security Council on 7
July, especially the installation of the Transitional
Government of National Unity. I will focus on the
situation in Bunia, while Mr. Ngongi, who has just
completed an impressive two-year tour of duty as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, will brief the
Council on the developments relating to the
Transitional Government.

The security situation in Bunia remains calm but
tense, following a military operation undertaken by the
Interim Emergency Multinational Force against the
Union des patriotes congolais (UPC) on 11 July. The
Multinational Force Action was in response to the
UPC's continuing attempts to assert its authority and to
undermine the weapon-free-zone policy established by
the force. This resulted in some UPC casualties, in the
confiscation of a large number of apparently new
weapons and ammunition and in the destruction of
various pieces of equipment belonging to the UPC. In a
separate incident on 13 July, armed elements shot at the
internally displaced persons camp at the Uruguayan
base near the airport, and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) responded by returning fire.

The increased number of internally displaced
persons returning to Bunia has required reinforced
security measures, since many returnees, now
estimated to number some 20,000 to 25,000, prefer to
go to an internally displaced persons camp instead of
returning home. In the meantime, the humanitarian
situation, although much improved, remains a source of
concern. A joint, high-level humanitarian assessment
mission last week has found that, despite an
improvement in the security situation in Bunia, many
priorities, including camp conditions and the
availability of basic services in the town, require
immediate attention.

In the meantime, as indicated by the Secretary-
General yesterday, MONUC, together with its partners,
is stepping up efforts to implement the Ituri strategy,
which was circulated widely to members of the
Security Council and to other Member States. To that
end, several concrete measures have been taken to
operationalize the actions of the Ituri interim
administration. Such initiatives include human rights
training; preliminary recruitment of Iturian police that
have taken up tasks at the airport in Bunia; bringing
Radio Candip under the control of the Ituri Interim
Administration; relocating the two makeshift medical
clinics at the public hospital that is now guarded by
MONUC; preparing an interim operation plan for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers; and establishing a flexible trust fund through
which the financial and material needs of the Ituri
Interim Administration will be funded. The trust fund
currently contains contributions from the United States
of $250,000, and Germany is also expected to
contribute $100,000.

Despite these encouraging initial steps towards
normalizing life in Bunia, many challenges lie ahead.
Above all, the most difficult task will be to end the
pervasive culture of war and impunity. To this end, the
armed groups in Ituri in particular should be
encouraged to engage in a political process. Many
efforts are under way in this regard, including the third
meeting of the Comite de concertation des groupes
armes, which will be held next week in Bunia.
However, the continuing ambitions of Mr. Thomas
Lubanga in expanding his authority and that of the
UPC outside the context of the Ituri Interim
Administration remain a source of concern.

The international community as a whole needs to
increase its efforts to assist the Ituri Interim
Administration in restoring basic services in Ituri,
especially police, judiciary and corrections. In this
context, it would be important that special initiatives be
developed expeditiously to develop such local capacity
as soon as possible. A Department of Peacekeeping
Operations MONUC mission is currently in Bunia to
examine this issue and produce an action plan. In the
meantime, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and MONUC are also working hard to ensure a
seamless transition from the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force to the MONUC force, the first
Bangladeshi elements of which arrived in Bunia on 15
July. In order to continue deterring and dissuading
further military action, it will be crucial to maintain the
robust character of the troops deployed in Bunia.

Another challenge that must not be neglected is
the apparent continued re-arming of the various Iturian
groups. During the recent reconnaissance mission to
Kasenye and during the searches of houses conducted
by the Multinational Force in Bunia, significant
numbers of brand-new weapons have very recently
been encountered.

(spoke in French)

It may seem that the challenges facing us are
even greater than the progress that has been made. Yet
we are convinced that with the deployment of a robust
brigade-size force the vicious circle of impunity can be
broken and the Ituri Interim Authority will be able to
expand its authority throughout Ituri.

A great deal has already been achieved to this
end.

I am grateful to Member States for quickly
responding to the Secretary-General's appeal for an
effective intervention in May. The fact that a
multinational force was deployed by the European
Union - the first operation of the European Union
outside Europe - sends a clear and strong signal to all
those who are concerned that the world is not reacting
as it should to those who undermine peace efforts by
engaging in destructive acts, which have cost the lives
of thousands of innocent civilians. MONUC will
continue to build on the political foundation that has
been created through the deployment of Operation
Artemis.

We have every confidence in the development of
our cooperation with the European Union and with
other Member States to assist the citizens of the Congo
in overcoming the challenges still facing them.

