Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We welcome the adoption of
resolution 2444 (2018) this morning.

The historic the historic and significant
developments in the Horn of Africa that we have
witnessed over the past year, triggered by the Eritrean-
Ethiopian reconciliation, have dramatically changed
the dynamics in the region and open a new chapter of
peace and cooperation. The basis for the restrictive
measures against Eritrea adopted almost a decade ago
is no longer in place, which is why we supported the
resolution. It is imperative that the Security Council
continues to support the courageous decisions taken
by the leaders in the region, as these developments
will have far-reaching and positive consequences for
the greater Horn of Africa region and beyond. As the
Secretary General said in his address to the General
Assembly, despite the chaos and confusion in our
world, there are also winds of hope blowing around the
globe (see A/73/PV.6).

The developments in the Horn of Africa represent
a unique opportunity that promises to bring not only
stability to the region but also allows its countries and
peoples to reap the benefits of the political, economic
and social cooperation that will follow. It shows how
regional cooperation can turn the page on war and
conflict. There is still hard work ahead to secure
the full potential of the peace dividends. We need
to offer our full support in seizing the opportunities
and addressing remaining concerns. In this regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General's recent decision
to expand the mandate of the Special Envoy to the
Sudan and South Sudan to include the entire Horn of
Africa. It will give the United Nations greater ability to
support and facilitate further positive developments in
terms ofpeace and security, human rights, stability and
ultimately development, economic growth and welfare.

Turning to Somalia, the sanctions regime in
place continues to play a critical role in supporting
the international effort to defeat Al-Shabaab, through
averting the flow of illicit arms and preventing the
group from raising funds, while at the same time
allowing the important build-up of the Somalia national
forces, as Somalia is preparing to take greater charge
of its own security. Our continued strong support to
the State-building and peacebuilding processes in the
Somali region will be crucial, and we must stay the
course together with the Somali people in keeping
up the momentum and build on what has already
been achieved.

