Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): We are glad
resolution 2240 (2015), which Lithuania co-sponsored,
is finally adopted. When the European Union (EU) High
Representative, Ms. Federica Mogherini, addressed the
Council in May (see S/PV.7439), she conveyed the sense
of urgency to address the human suffering and crisis in
the Mediterranean. Predator smuggling and trafficking
networks feed on the human tragedies in Syria, Iraq,
Afghanistan and elsewhere. The money they squeeze
out of the people fleeing destruction falls into the hands
of arms traffickers, organized crime and terrorists,
thereby contributing to ever new cycles of violence and
death. We must absolutely stop this evolving industry
of human smuggling.

The resolution we have just adopted sends a strong
message to all those who seek to profit unscrupulously
and cynically from human suffering. It enables us
to tackle the networks of human smuggling more
expeditiously and effectively. It also enables us to
take life-saving actions that safeguard respect for the
dignity and human rights of the smuggling victims.
The EU naval operation is just one step of the many
that comprise the EU's comprehensive and continuous
efforts to respond to the human smuggling crisis.
Ongoing cooperation on Africa and the Middle Eastern
and European countries is essential as is cooperation
with the countries of origin and transit, as well as the
countries of destination. In that context, we welcome
in particular Libya's cooperation and engagement
on the matter as it works to redefine and reshape its
own future in a peaceful way. We are looking forward
to the forthcoming EU and African Union summit
in Malta, which will build on existing cooperation
processes between Europe and Africa in order to
improve assistance, strengthen cooperation on return
and readmission policies and address the exploitation
and trafficking of migrants.

While the smuggling crisis is often referred to as
a European migrant crisis, let us remember the root
causes that drive people out of their homes. Protracted
conflicts, the breakdown of governance and the rule of
law, oppressive regimes and rampant corruption, the
exclusion and abuse of minorities, extreme inequalities
and systematic gross violations of human rights all
contribute to displacement and refugee flows. Tackling
those root causes, which send people running out oftheir
homes, is therefore fundamental. Without addressing
the driving factors, we will be left to continue picking
up the pieces and dealing with the heavy consequences
of migrant flows and the cynical abuse of human
tragedy by unscrupulous profiteers, criminal gangs and
terrorists.

