Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Mr. Menkerios, Special Representative of the
Secretary- General to the African Union for his briefing.

Last week, the eleventh annual consultative
meeting of the Security Council and the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Council was successfully
convened in Addis Ababa. Members of the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council had
an in-depth and frank discussion on issues of common
concern to both Councils. This has brought about a
close partnership between the United Nations and the
AU. China welcomes this and, once again, extends its
appreciation to the AU and Ethiopia for its meticulous
preparation and thoughtful arrangement for this year's
annual meeting.

For a long time, the AU and other subregional
organizations in Africa endeavoured to promote unity
among African countries and played an important
role in maintaining peace and stability and promoting
regional economic and social development in Africa.
They made a great contribution to the United Nations
goal of fostering peace and development. China
commends those efforts.

At present, the overall situation in Africa is stable
with good development momentum. At the same
time, as stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/744), there are challenges facing peace and
stability and economic and social development in
Africa. Greater close cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU is needed.

First, both sides should further enhance targeted
cooperation and raise the efficiency ofsuch cooperation.
This past April the Secretary-General and Chairperson
of the AU signed the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security in which four key areas of cooperation
were identified: preventing and mediating conflicts and
sustaining peace, responding to conflict, addressing
root causes, and continuous review and enhancement
of the partnership between the United Nations and the
AU. For the next phase of work, both sides should bring
into a full play their respective comparative advantages
and accelerate the implementation of the Framework.

Secondly, both sides should further expand
their fields of cooperation and help Africa tackle its
fundamental issues. Supporting Africa's economic
and social development is an important thrust of
enhanced cooperation between the two sides in the
future. It is also an important means of helping Africa
to resolve the roots of conflicts. The United Nations
should closely integrate the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development with the African
Union's Agenda 2063. The international community is
urged to prioritize assistance and investment in health
care, education, trade and connectivity and other
infrastructure areas to help enhance the economic and
social development of African countries.

Thirdly, the Security Council and AU Peace and
Security Council should further play their leading
role. Supporting capacity-building in Africa's peace
and security is a key area for an enhanced United
Nations-AU partnership. The AU Peace and Security
Council's operations are an important complement to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council should
further communicate and coordinate with each other
and quickly establish a mechanism for joint planning,
decision-making, assessment and reporting, joint
early warning on crises, strategic review, mandate
authorization and deployment. The Security Council
should provide more support and assistance in
providing predictable, stable and sustainable funding
and enhancing African countries' capacity-building
in security.

China has consistently and resolutely supported
Africa's peace and development. President Xi Jinping
of China proposed five pillars and ten cooperation
programmes in building China's relationship with
Africa. The Belt and Road Initiative is also conducive
to the development of Africa.

China will maintain its approach of extensive
consultations, joint efforts and shared benefits. It will
closely corporate with African countries and continue
to assist and support Africa in enhancing its capacity-
building in peace and security, resolving its regional
hotspot issues more quickly, and achieving peace,
stability and development on the African continent.

