Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the presidency of Japan for convening this
briefing, and especially thank Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for her detailed and clear briefing
this afternoon.

The year 2017 has seen a great deal of debate
concerning the future of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The Security Council, as well as the
General Assembly, the Fourth Committee, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping and the recent
Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference held
in Vancouver, which Uruguay had the honour of
co-hosting, give us reason to be optimistic that that
work will continue in the coming months in addressing
the issues that were raised in all those forums.

One particular highlight of the past year's activities
was the high-level debate on peacekeeping operations
held under the presidency of Ethiopia (see S/PV.8051),
at which the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2378 (2017) - a key reform document that sets out areas
where the Security Council can and must do more. An
essential component that resolution, which is also the
focus of today's meeting, is an emphasis on the need to
continue working to fill the existing gaps in capacities
and force generation to ensure that peacekeeping
operations more effectively and adequately meet
current challenges.

Uruguay believes that the strategic strengthening
of force generation is essential for improving the
effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
The timely availability of appropriately trained and
equipped uniformed and civilian personnel is a key
element for the success of peacekeeping operations.
Likewise, mandates cannot be fully implemented if
missions do not have the capacity required to meet the
new challenges they face. Following in the footsteps
of our colleague Francois Delattre, I will address
three aspects.

First, regarding the planning and design phase,
including the reconfiguration of peacekeeping
operations, we believe it is crucial for the Security
Council to pay greater attention to identifying the
capacities required to deliver a given mandate.
Planning must be based on clear, attainable and
prioritized objectives with reference parameters and an
exit strategy providing for appropriate drawdown and
handover to a successor entity when those parameters
have been satisfied. To that end, triangular cooperation,
as others have already mentioned, among the Council,
the Secretariat and police- and troop-contributing
countries, is essential. The Secretariat, and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Field Support (DF S) in particular,
play a decisive role in providing advice when it comes
to taking decisions on, among other things, timely
needs in terms of equipment and personnel.

With regard to the procurement of equipment, I
should like to add that this must not depend solely on
a country's financial resources. In our View, we must
work on alternatives for such procurement, for example,
by developing greater cooperation among police- and
troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
donor countries. At the same time, many of the new
technologies that missions now require are highly
expensive, underscoring the need to find alternatives
for their procurement. Likewise, when it comes to
decision-making, the Security Council must fully
take into account the opinions of police- and troop-
contributing countries since, as the ones who will be
providing services on the ground, they can greatly
facilitate operational planning and thereby ensure that
their personnel have the capacities they need to respond
to changing demands.

Changing demands call for new approaches, and
we note how peacekeeping operations have taken
on a range of new tasks such as, for example, in the
context of peacebuilding, human rights monitoring and
civilian protection. On this last point, we must consider
and expand the range of methods used to protect
civilians. That includes considering the potential of
unarmed methods to complement other peacekeeping
strategies. This diverse range of methods includes
greater involvement with communities, with the direct
participation of all sectors of society greater, and better
coordination with other United Nations entities present
on the ground and non-governmental organizations.

Second is the importance of personnel deployed
receiving appropriate training, especiallypredeployment
training. It is essential that peace personnel be trained
and prepared to perform the tasks required in their area
of operations. This requires joint efforts on the part
of troop- and police-contributing countries to ensure
better training for their personnel and of the Secretariat
when it comes to conducting relevant evaluations and
verifications. As a country contributing to peacekeeping
operations, Uruguay ascribes direct responsibility
to troop- and police-contributing countries for the
pre-deployment training and preparation of their
personnel. We cannot talk about the efficiency and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations unless troop-
and police-contributing countries fully meet their
responsibilities in this regard. We also recognize the
excellent joint efforts of DPKO and DFS in developing,
applying and monitoring standards and advice for
training in peacekeeping, especially in the areas of
human rights, protection of civilians and prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse.

Thirdly and finally, we must address not only force
generation but also the full functioning of forces once
deployed. This is a topic that my delegation has raised
continuously and vigorously throughout its two years
on the Security Council because we understand that,
unfortunately, it affects many peacekeeping operations,
representing an issue on which the Security Council
should assume greater responsibility. We are talking
about obstacles on the ground that have anegative impact
on the effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations. On one hand, greater attention must be paid
to national restrictions, so-called caveats - whether
explicitly declared or, worse still, undeclared -because
they can hamper the mandate implementation.

On more than one occasion, Uruguayan troops
have had to deal with emergencies in another force's
area of operations because that other force has, at
the last minute, brought up caveats in order to avoid
complicated violent situations. Such actions are not
only unfair to other forces; they are unacceptable. The
Security Council must demand that host States fully
respect and comply with the terms of status-of-forces
agreements: these constitute the guarantees protecting
the personnel that countries voluntarily contribute to
peacekeeping operations.

We have noted with concern the increasing
frequency of attacks targeting United Nations
personnel and facilities, leading to significant human
and material losses. The most recent such tragedy
was the death of 15 Tanzanian peacekeepers from the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo a few weeks ago.
This trend represents a threat to the activities of the
United Nations.

We are fully aware that there is a fine line between,
on the one hand, a proactive posture seeking to
strengthen respect for a United Nations deployment
and thereby facilitate the performance of its mandate,
and, on the other, the possible interpretation of such
a posture, depending on the circumstances, as support
for one of the parties to a conflict. However, those who
choose to attack United Nations forces must be repelled
with equal or stronger force. Refusing to assume
responsibility is not the right answer, and we must step
up efforts to equip the various components with as
many tools as possible to face Changing circumstances,
passive defence measures and strengthened rules of
engagement, and we must exhaust all avenues to hold
those who commit crimes to account.

I wish to emphasize the need for actors and
competent bodies in the field of peacekeeping
operations to work in full synchrony. We must overcome
the rivalry among organs or commissions that burden
the process, since each one has specific competencies
that make a positive contribution. We understand that
the efforts that the Secretary-General devotes to that
issue in his initiative to reform the peace and security
architecture of the Organization. I reiterate Uruguay's
unflagging and unchanged commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We shall continue
contributing to their development both in the field with
peacekeepers, as well as in the political debates on the
reform process.

Following the example of my Bolivian colleague,
as this is the final meeting of the Security Council for
this month, according to its programme of work, I wish
to commend you, Sir, for the manner in which you and
your team have led the Council this month. This may
also be the last meeting in which Uruguay participates
as a non-permanent member. I should therefore like to
offer a few very brief expressions of gratitude.

I begin by thanking Council members for having
supported the election of my country two years ago,
in particular those 185 countries that voted in favour
of our candidacy. Secondly, I wish to thank those
countries that have served as members of the Council
these past two years for their tireless support for the
delegation of Uruguay.

In particular, I offer a strong expression of thanks
to each and every member of the Security Council
Affairs Division, who have always - and especially
during our two terms as President f assisted us
with their deep knowledge of the Security Council,
the items on its agenda and its working methods
with great professionalism and, I acknowledge, with
enduring patience.

We also thank the Translation and Interpretation
Services, who have sometimes had to struggle with
our tendency to stray from our prepared statements
and to navigate the swells of our oratory. I also thank
the conference officers for their work circulating
documents and preparing the Chamber.

I have saved the best for last. I thank the entire team
of my delegation here in New York and in the Ministry
in Montevideo. We all know that they are the true, if
hidden sustainers of our work in the Council. It has
been a privilege for me to work with such an excellent
groups of professionals.

