Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for us to have you, Sir, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bulgaria, present and presiding over this
meeting. Your presence emphasizes the importance that
your country attaches to its participation in the Security
Council.

I also wish to thank Mr. Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for the
information he has provided on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

The province of Kosovo continues to pose a
challenge to the international community, despite the
enormous political and economic capital invested there.
To speak of Kosovo is to speak of a project for peace
that has at times been thwarted by events that recall the
conflict from which it emerged.

My delegation supports the concept of a Kosovo
without ethnic divisions. However, acts of aggression
among groups have not cease. Refugees of Serb origin
who have decided to return to their homes face an
adverse social environment, as demonstrated by the
case of Stupelj. It is good to know that in the first half
of this year, approximately 1,000 refugees returned to
Kosovo. However, the total number of returnees has
not reached 4,500 since 2000. Therefore we express the
hope that the sustainable return programme will bring
about better conditions for refugees returning to their
homes in future years, and thus increase their number.

Mexico considers that the rule of law must be
established in Kosovo, guaranteeing full respect for
human rights. However, recent developments relating
to the arrest of persons of Albania and Serb origin
prompt us to think that despite the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and of the international community, we are
still far from the day when Kosovars, without
distinction, will have full confidence in their
institutions. In particular, we regretted the reaction of
the Provisional Government, which questioned the
legitimacy of these acts.

In reiterating its support for UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), Mexico expresses its
conviction that all persons who by virtue of their acts
must appear before the courts should do so without
distinctions, and with legal guarantees.
My delegation feels that unfortunate statements
and acts of intolerance foment irrational and
irreconcilable divisions among the citizens of the
province. This is not the time to foment divisiveness.
To the contrary, in a few weeks municipal elections
will take place in Kosovo, and Kosovars will have
another opportunity to express their democratic will in
a peaceful way.

Democracy and the rule of law are the two
concepts which in political practice complement and
support each other. With regard to the rule of law,
much remains to be done in Kosovo, especially as
regards the administration of justice. Many of the
problems faced by Kosovo could be overcome with the
support of a trustworthy judicial system. The
international community must make an effort to
improve the administration of justice in the province
without yielding to the temptation of employing a
larger number of international judges.

All Kosovars and the international community are
responsible for the future of the province. Many
international and civil society organizations daily
express their support for Kosovo, but that same
international community wants to see greater inter-
ethnic tolerance, stronger consolidation of democracy,
and the establishment of the rule of law, under which
human rights would be fully respected.

