Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): When the
Council discussed yesterday the practical and pragmatic
means of confronting African issues and problems, we had
hoped to have an interactive dialogue in the form of an
open discussion and an exchange of views between the
presidency, the members of the Council and the other
Members of the United Nations as a whole. Instead, we
merely heard statements and speeches.

Many ideas and proposals were raised yesterday that
might have been discussed. Yesterday, too, the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was mentioned
several times. Although that demonstrated the importance
of this issue, we do not want it to monopolize the
Security Council's attention for a certain period of time,
only to be forgotten as just another conflict in Africa.
That is no way to remedy the situation.

In this connection, my delegation has two main
observations to make. First, after the signing of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, the peace process seems to
be progressing rather slowly although the major military
battles have long since ceased. What is hindering the
restoration of normalcy - including national
reconciliation, the withdrawal of foreign forces and the
return of refugees - to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo? Why has this failed to happen?

Secondly, the United Nations is clearly reluctant to
intervene appropriately to resolve this issue. The United
Nations must be effectively present on the ground if the
peace process is to continue and lasting peace is to be
established in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Yet,
the current situation - which is one of neither peace nor
war - is very dangerous. Should it persist, there is a
strong likelihood that peace will fail and that war will
break out once again. The conflicting forces remain in
position and the combatants remain armed. We foresee
that this situation, which remains suspended between
heaven and earth, could become semi-permanent with the
passage of time. Neighbouring Angola is a case in point.

My question is this. Why does the United Nations
hesitate to intervene? We are aware that financial
assistance is necessary to fund a United Nations
peacekeeping mission, but do we or do we not establish
such a mission in all its military and civilian aspects
before we enter Kinshasa? Such reluctance will perpetuate
the "no war no peace" situation not only in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also in Angola
and Sierra Leone, along the borders between Eritrea and
Ethiopia, as well as in Somalia and elsewhere. How long
will the African continent - as represented by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other hotbeds of
tension - be victimized by the illicit arms trafficking on
which it squanders its wealth of diamonds, petroleum and
other natural resources? The Democratic Republic of the

 

Congo actually needs these resources for its social and
economic development.

In brief, I have two questions for Mr. Miyet. First,
why is the peace process based on the Lusaka agreements
so slow? I would stress here that this situation is of great
concern to us. Secondly, why is the United Nations so
reluctant to engage in the intervention necessary to replace
the current precarious peace with a solid lasting one?

