Judge Byron: I would like to join Judge Patrick
Robinson in expressing congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for December, the last month of your country's
membership in the Council. I wish you all the best for
a successful tour of duty.

On 8 November 1994, the Security Council
adopted resolution 955 (1994) and created an
international tribunal to bring justice to the hundreds of
thousands of Rwandan victims of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Today, 15 years later, I
am pleased to inform the Council of the remarkable
progress in the conduct of trials and judgement
deliveries. But yet, significant work remains ahead
before we can safely say that we have achieved our
mandate and tried the principal perpetrators of the
horrendous atrocities committed in Rwanda in 1994.

Since my last briefing in June, our Tribunal has
rendered five first-instance judgements in single-
accused cases, including a sentencing judgement
following a guilty plea, and one appeals judgement. We
have mastered the difficult task of commencing 10 new
trials in the course of this year. In two of the cases,
judgements have already been delivered; in three other
cases, including a retrial, the entire evidence has been
heard. In the remaining five cases, the defence phase
will be completed before the end of this year or in the
first half of 2010. The spillovers are mainly linked to
fair trial concerns; defence counsel have needed more
time to prepare their cases initially or more time to
respond to the prosecution case.
The four ongoing multi-accused cases continue to
pose the greatest challenge to the Tribunal, even where
the evidence phase has been completed, as is the case

in three of the trials involving 17 accused. The
judgement drafting in those cases is expected to be
completed in the course of next year, but progress is
continuously challenged by parallel assignments of the
judges and their legal staff to support other cases.
While the judges sit full days over months in the
courtroom to hear sometimes several additional trials,
the scheduling of complex deliberations in the
multi-accused cases is difficult and risks delays.

The fourth trial, Karemera et al., continues to be
delayed largely due to the illness of one of the
defendants, requiring the Chamber to sit in half-day
sessions only and to allow additional breaks in the trial
schedule to accommodate medical needs. Despite those
unavoidable impediments, we aim to complete the
evidence phase in this case by the end of 2010.

The Karemera trial will be one of three ongoing
cases in which judgement drafting will continue in the
first half of 2011. The other two, Ngirabatware and
Nzabonimana, are likely to spill into 2011 because the
presiding judges are also members of the bench in the
largest multi-accused case, the "Butare" trial. Priority
must be given to judgement delivery in that case,
which is expected for autumn 2010, even though this
may delay the delivery of judgements in the other cases
by some months.

In September, the plenary of judges adopted an
amendment of the rules of procedure and evidence,
allowing for the hearing of special depositions for the
preservation of evidence against the remaining
fugitives. That amendment aims at preventing the loss
of evidence 15 years after the crimes were committed.
The hearings, which are planned for the last quarter of
next year, will focus on those of the three currently
top-ranked accused who still remain at large.

As Council members can see, we have another
busy year ahead, in which we need to provide
increased output with declining resources. During the
first half of 2010, we will focus on the completion of
the evidence phase in all ongoing trials, with the
exception of Karemera. In addition, we expect
judgement delivery in four single-accused cases.
During the second half of 2010, additional judgements
in six cases involving 17 accused are to be rendered. In
short, and provided we manage to retain the current
level of legal support staff, we expect judgement
delivery in trials against 21 accused in 2010.
Furthermore, two new trials will commence, and we
aim, to the extent possible, for completion of their
evidence phases during the coming year.

As I mentioned before, most of the 7 permanent
and 11 ad litem judges currently serving at the Tribunal
are involved in several cases in parallel. That situation
will continue for the majority of next year. Judges are
also needed to handle the cases of the two newly
arrested accused, for possible requests for referral of
cases to national jurisdictions under rule 11 bis, and for
the special deposition hearings. I therefore ask the
Council to extend the exception granted in resolution
1855 (2008), allowing for a maximum number of 12 ad
litem judges to serve at the Tribunal at any one time,
until the end of 2010.

I explained in June our concerns about the
inequality in the terms and conditions of service
between permanent and ad litem judges, concerning in
particular the entitlement to pensions. Resolution 1878
(2009) took note of those concerns. I have had bilateral
discussions with representatives of numerous Member
States and the Secretariat on the matter, and they have
expressed their sympathy for our endeavour to achieve
a review of the terms and conditions of service in the
interest of equity and the completion strategy. I am
confident that the matter can be addressed by the
General Assembly in early 2010.

Let me now turn to another fundamentally
important issue, namely, State cooperation. The arrests
in August and October of two of the fugitives, Gregoire
Ndahimana and Idelphonse Nizeyimana, are very
positive developments, and I would like to thank the
respective national authorities in the Democratic
Republic of Congo and Uganda for their important
contribution to the fight against impunity. The transfer
of Idelphonse Nizeyimana to Arusha only one day after
his arrest in Uganda should serve as an example of
efficient and swift cooperation between the Tribunal
and Member States.

I am sure that Council members agree with me
that 11 fugitives remaining at large today, more than
15 years after the genocide, are 11 too many. The list
includes three top suspects, Felicien Kabuga, Protais
Mpiranya and Augustin Bizimana. The time for their
arrest is long overdue. They have benefited from
impunity for far too long.

I would like to recall once again that it was the
Council that determined, when setting up the Tribunal
in 1994, that genocide, war crimes and crimes against

09-6300}

humanity constitute a threat to international peace and
security. That proposition was as true then as it is
today. It is in the interest of the entire international
community that the remaining fugitives be arrested and
tried fairly. This Tribunal has not accomplished its
mandate, if top-level fugitives continue to benefit from
impunity, while victims wait for justice. I strongly call
upon all Member States, and in particular those where
there is significant evidence that fugitives are hiding in
their territory, such as Kenya, to fully cooperate with
the Tribunal.

The fugitives need to be arrested and transferred
to Arusha now, before the Tribunal closes down. The
trial functions of a residual mechanism are
indispensable as long as fugitives remain at large. But
we should all aim at leaving behind a heritage of trials
that is as limited as possible, so that the mechanism
can focus on truly residual work, such as the
management of the Tribunal's archives, continuous
witness protection and the supervision of sentences.

Recent developments at the Tribunal highlight the
essential need for cooperation by Member States in
another area. During the last weeks, two accused were
acquitted, Hormisdas Nsengimana at the trial level and
Protais Zigiranyirazo by the Appeals Chamber. For
them and two others who were previously acquitted
and who all live currently in safe houses in Arusha, the
Registrar of the Tribunal is seeking countries for
relocation. It is of fundamental importance and in the
interests of fair justice that Member States be ready
and prepared to accept the relocation of acquitted
persons to their territory.

The third essential area of cooperation by
Member States and a cornerstone of the completion
strategy is the referral of cases to national jurisdictions
under rule 11 bis. The Prosecutor, assisted by the
Registrar, continues his efforts to ensure that more than
the two cases that were transferred to France in 2007
can be handled by national courts now or in the near
future. The focus of the efforts continues to be
technical support for Rwanda in order to ensure that
the State in which the crimes were committed can take
over cases. But other Member States with jurisdiction
are also urged to consider accepting some of the
remaining cases of fugitives from the Tribunal for trial
on the national level. In this regard, we are pleased to
note legislative changes that have been introduced or
are under way in several countries, providing
jurisdiction over genocide, crimes against humanity

and war crimes committed, for instance, in Rwanda in
1994. Such laudable legislative changes not only
support the Tribunal in its efforts to transfer cases to
national jurisdictions, but underscore the willingness of
those countries to effectively fight impunity for the
most serious international crimes, irrespective of where
or by whom or against whom they were committed.

Our efforts are channelled towards the
completion of our remaining trial and appeals work. At
the same time, we have been following up on the
recommendations for the transitional period, contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the residual
mechanism (S/2009/25 8). An overview of the measures
taken so far is contained in our completion strategy
report (see S/2009/587), and we will continue, to the
best of our abilities, to provide the Council with
comprehensive information to support its decision-
making process.

The discussions in the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee on the Tribunal's budget submission for the
2010-2011 biennium are ongoing. Since our
submission, many developments have occurred, for
example the two new arrests, which will lead to certain
adaptations in the initial request. Any change in the
judicial calendar at this stage, when contract extensions
are tightly linked to trial schedules, affects all who are
involved in the trial work, from legal officers and trial
attorneys to court reporters and interpreters. I ask for
the understanding of all Member States for that
increased need for flexibility.

Over the past six months, the Governments of the
members of the Security Council have continued to
provide support for our work through the adoption of
resolution 1878 (2009) in July, the arrest of fugitives,
voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund, and intense
preparatory work for the residual mechanism. I would
like to assure the Council that all of us at the Tribunal
in Arusha greatly appreciate that support. The
Secretariat, in particular the Office of Legal Affairs,
has facilitated our cooperation with the Council and
with the Governments of its members and has assisted
in communicating our mutual needs and concerns. We
extend our appreciation and thanks to all their staff.

It remains a fact that the ad hoc Tribunals have
laid the ground for the rapid and astonishing
development of international criminal justice during
the past decade and a half. Without them, there would

be no International Criminal Court. Without their
jurisprudence, support and policy-setting examples,
convictions of Rwandan ge'nocidaires in Canada, the
Netherlands and Belgium and the ongoing
investigations against alleged perpetrators of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity worldwide
would have been less likely, to say the least.

We all know that the days of our Tribunal are
numbered. It is essential that we reflect on the lessons
we can learn from the past 15 years and on how best to
address the fight against impunity for international
crimes in the future. If we succeed together in
establishing a more effective rule of international law,
the suffering of countless victims will not have been
completely in vain.

At the same time, we know that the last part of
the Tribunal's lifespan is not an easy one. We must
remain committed and strive to improve our work,
while our experienced and hard-working staff faces the
imminent end of their contracts and the need to secure
their professional careers.

The future of the international fight against
impunity will rest mainly on the shoulders of national
jurisdictions and the International Criminal Court.
However, today, I ask for the Council's continuous
support so that our Tribunal, which was at the starting
point of that amazing development of international
criminal justice, can complete its mandate
expeditiously and with all due respect for the highest
standards of fair trials.

