Mr. Mitri (spoke in French): The security
situation in Libya remains precarious. Worry and
discontent among the civilian population has increased
significantly. In recent weeks, mass demonstrations in
Tripoli, Benghazi and Darnah have given the people
an opportunity to express their frustration loudly and
clearly about the political process and their distrust of
the brigades.

(spoke in English)

In Tripoli, public anger directed against the
revolutionary brigades and other armed groups has been
further fueled by frequent clashes among them. A minor
dispute quickly escalated into fierce fighting that spread
through the capital. Prompted by calls, including from
the Tripoli local council, for mass protests to demand
the withdrawal of armed groups from the capital,
demonstrators took to the streets, following Friday
prayers on 15 November, and marched on compounds
in the Gharghour district held by revolutionary
brigades from Misrata. Tragically, 46 people lost their
lives, and another 516 were injured. Large groups of
the population were mobilized into a campaign of civil
disobedience demanding the evacuation of all armed
formations. Bowing to public pressure, Misrata forces
have since announced their withdrawal from the city.
A number of other brigades have also vacated premises
that they had previously occupied.

There has also been a wave of protests in Benghazi
demanding the eviction of armed brigades and the
reconstitution of the police and army. That public outcry
comes against a backdrop of unprecedented levels of
insecurity over the past few weeks, with assassinations
and abductions of security and State officials
appearing to intensify in both Benghazi and Darnah.
The authorities appointed a military commander for
Benghazi charged with the task of restoring stability
to the city and its surrounding areas, followed by a
large-scale deployment of Libyan army units. Despite
those measures, there are still serious problems to
be overcome. On 18 November, Benghazi's military
commander survived an assassination attempt, seen
as a continuation of the sustained targeting of symbols
of State authority. Heavy fighting erupted in Benghazi
on 25 November between special-forces units and the
Ansar Al-Sharia brigades. The official death toll was
put at nine, in addition to an undisclosed number of
Ansar Al-Sharia casualties. While there is a negotiated
truce, it remains tenuous, given reports of subsequent
killings targeting members of the special forces.

Despite the efforts of the Government to quickly
deploy army units in Tripoli to prevent a security
vacuum, the weak capacity of State military and policy
institutions remains a serious problem. Doubts also
remain as to how comprehensive or lasting some of
the recent moves will be. The events of the past month
have again highlighted the need for dialogue with the
main armed groups. At present, we believe that it is
essential for all parties to engage in dialogue and create
the right balance of incentives in order to stimulate
a comprehensive process of the reintegration and
eventual disarmament of the armed groups, ultimately
moving towards the establishment of a State monopoly
on the use of armed force.

In the context of the insecurity that has prevailed
for many months, the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMlL) has asked that protection of
its premises be strengthened, which is a standard
measure for diplomatic missions and international and
regional bodies in Libya and elsewhere. The Secretary-
General's request for a guard unit to be sent to Tripoli
and the Council's response to the request were grossly
misunderstood by groups in Libya, some going as far
as to suspect that the proposed arrangement was a
prelude to an international intervention. The Libyan
Government and UNSMIL issued clarifications and
found themselves forced to state the obvious. We will
have to spare no effort in dispelling misinterpretations
and suspicions, no matter how unjustified they may
seem, and in reaffirming the role of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, which is committed to the
full respect of the country's national sovereignty.

The situation of the 8,000 conflict-related detainees
remains a source of concern. The majority continue to
be held by armed brigades, awaiting judicial process.
Prolonged detention and interrogation in the absence
of effective State control or oversight has created an
environment conducive to torture and other forms of ill-
treatment. UNSMIL has found hard evidence of torture,
with 27 deaths in custody recorded since the end of the
conflict, ll of which took place this year. Our report
on torture, "Torture and deaths in detention in Libya",
released in October by UNSMIL and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, has received
notable attention in Libya, and the Government has
welcomed its recommendations. We do take heart
from the improvement in the conditions of detention
facilities that have been placed under the authority of
the newly trained officers of the judicial police. In that
regard, UNSMIL will continue its monitoring work and
its efforts to assist the judicial police in developing its
capacity to manage all detention centres in line with
international human-rights standards.

I am pleased to report that a new law on transitional
justice was promulgated last week by the General
National Congress. It includes provisions on truth-
seeking and reparations for victims and requires that
detainees be released or handed over to the judiciary
within 90 days of its promulgation. UNSMIL provided
extensive comments, based on best practices, and some
of them were duly taken into account. In a related
context, I welcome the recent release of four senior
leaders of the Warfalla tribe, held for more than a
year in the city of Al-Zawiyah without charge or trial.
Similar initiatives will undoubtedly contribute to the
process of establishing the rule of law and achieving
national reconciliation.

Since my briefing of the Council on 4 November
on the control of man-portable surface-to-air missiles
(MANPADS) and uranium fissile material, otherwise
knownasyellowcake,UNSMILhasreceivedpreliminary
information, but has requested the Libyan authorities to
share more documentation on the MANPADS that are
subject to its control. In addition, the Mission hopes to
see greater cooperation with international partners on
issues of arms proliferation. With respect to yellowcake,
we have received information indicating that 6,400
barrels are stored in a non-functioning former military
facility close to Sabha, in the South. They are under the
control of a Libyan army battalion.

With UNSMIL support, an inspection team from
the International Atomic Energy Agency will visit this
month to verify existing stockpiles and conditions of
storage. Further to the verified destruction in April
and May 2013 of almost nine metric tons of mustard
gas, an inspection team from the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is expected
to visit later this month to observe and verify the
destruction of chemical weapons, in line with Libya's
obligations under the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. The
Prime Minister has established an interministerial
committee tasked with developing a national arms and
ammunition management strategy, and UNSMIL will
be closely assisting in that regard.

Progress towards the election of a 60-member
constitution-drafting assembly remains steady, with the
nominations process having closed on 7 November with
a total of 700 registered candidates, including 74 women
who will contest the six seats reserved for women. A
vetting process with the right to appeal is now under
way. The preliminary candidate lists were published
on 7 December. With the support of UNSMIL, a joint
action plan has been developed by a newly established
national women's network to empower women and
strengthen their participation in the political process,
particularly the upcoming elections.

Although the first phase of voter registration
commenced on 1 December, the High National Election
Commission remains cautious about committing itself
to a firm date for polling. That is partly a result of
the Amazigh community's boycott of nominations.
Notwithstanding the fact that six seats have been
reserved for cultural and ethnic minority groups, a
resolution of the disagreement over constitutional
guarantees on minority rights awaits an acceptable
compromise solution.

In view of the continued absence of political
agreement on the tenure of the General National
Congress, in November I convened a consultative
meeting of 40 leaders of major political forces, women
and other independent personalities to explore options
for the management of the democratic transition. As
with the first consultation I had convened a month
earlier, the exchanges were markedly frank, but also
reflected a shared desire among all participants to
reach an agreement on the way forward that would be
grounded in a commitment to the democratic process
and conscious of the need to prevent a political vacuum
at all costs.

In my previous briefings to the Council, I have
underlined the important role that an inclusive national
dialogue can play in defusing excessive political
polarization and producing a shared vision for the
future - both the immediate future and a longer-
term one. A number of national dialogue initiatives
have been announced over the past few months, and
UNSMIL continues to underscore the need for a single
process that enjoys the acceptance of all parties.

(spoke in French)

UNSMIL continues to contribute to preparations
for the national dialogue by providing advice and
technical assistance. Those efforts have made some
progress. In November, we held a training session on
dialogue and discussion among the representatives
of the various political groups. I am heartened by the
interests voiced by our Libyan interlocutors and their
appreciation for UNSMIL's role in that respect. We
were urged to be fully committed to that effort, and I
can assure the Council that we shall be.

