The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Norway.

The peace process in the Middle East is facing its
most serious crisis ever. Norway is extremely
concerned about the dramatic escalation of violence in
recent weeks and days. Present developments are
threatening all of the achievements made since the
Declaration of Principles was signed in 1993.

Norway strongly condemns the Palestinian
terrorist attacks. There is no excuse for the killing of
innocent civilians. No society can live with suicide
attacks and violence at the level we see at present. The
Palestinian Authority must fight terrorism vigorously
and dismantle the terrorist networks. Nothing less than
a 100 per cent effort is acceptable.

The Israeli bombardment of Palestinian cities and
institutions, which has led to death and destruction, is
unacceptable. Norway strongly objects to the ongoing
military operation against President Arafat's
headquarters in Ramallah and urges Israel to put an
immediate end to it. Norway fails to see how these
attacks can contribute to greater security.

It is Norway's conviction that both parties must
now adopt forceful and immediate measures to stop the
escalating Violence. These steps include the following.

The Palestinian Authority must do its utmost to
halt Palestinian terrorist attacks. Continued terrorist
attacks cannot be tolerated.

Ongoing military operations against President
Arafat's headquarters in Ramallah must be halted.

Israel must stop its attacks on Palestinian
infrastructure, stop incursions into area A and
withdraw its armed forces.

A serious political dialogue must be resumed
immediately with the aim of ending the Middle East
conflict and establishing a viable Palestinian state
alongside Israel within secure and recognized borders,
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 1397 (2002), as well as the Oslo Accords.

The Tenet plan and the Mitchell
recommendations must be implemented immediately
and unconditionally.

Humanitarian and development assistance to the
Palestinians must be increased to counter the
increasingly difficult economic and social situation.

The international community, and indeed the
Council, must stand united in its demand that these
measures be implemented.

The Israeli and Palestinian leaders seem today
locked in a battle with no exit strategies. This is
untenable. The final responsibility for ending the
hostilities remains with the parties themselves. At the
same time, the Security Council must assist the parties
in reaching this goal, building on the recent adoption of
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002). Norway
stands ready to make its contribution in this regard.

The aim of the Oslo process was to end the
occupation and to create security for Israel. We can still
achieve this goal, but only if a political process is
started now. In this regard, Norway welcomes Crown
Prince Abdullah's peace initiative.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Algeria. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

