Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and her detailed
briefing to the Council, and reiterate France's full
support and trust in the fulfilment of her mandate.

On 31 March 2005, the Council adopted resolution
1593 (2005). This decision had three clear goals: first,
to promote the fight against impunity; secondly, to
prevent new atrocities in Darfur; and thirdly, to foster
reconciliation and stability in the Sudan. More than 12
years later, unfortunately, we note yet again that these
goals have not been achieved and that impunity prevails.

Only prosecutions will put an end to this situation,
and it is only with the cooperation of States that it
will be possible to successfully conduct such judicial
procedures. That is why France calls on all States
concerned - and, of course, the Sudan - to implement
the arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and to respect the remainder of their
obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).

It is the Council's responsibility to act resolutely in
the fight against impunity, which is critical to helping
end the instability that continues to blight Darfur,
where civilians are the primary victims. It is true that
the recent reports of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Darfur have reflected certain encouraging
developments on the ground, particularly a lessening
of confrontations between the Government and rebel
forces in Darfur, as well as an overall reduction in the
level of violence. However, intercommunity conflict
remains one of the main sources of violence in Darfur.
The activities of militia continue to threaten civilian
populations and many of the displaced are still too
afraid to return home or even simply to venture outside
the camps. The proliferation of weapons continues to
contribute to such activities and sexual exploitation and
grave human rights violations persist.

In light of the situation outlined by the Prosecutor,
the protection of civilians can be assured only if
these encouraging developments are consolidated,
entrenched and maintained over time. To that end, it is
essential that the Sudanese authorities allow the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to fulfil its mandate in accordance with the
decisions of the Council and of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union. That would require,
inter alia, facilitating access to all areas mandated for
UNAMID intervention. It also requires facilitating
the implementation of the Mission's reconfiguration
pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017), particularly through
the establishment of the base in G010.

Let us not forget that today 2.1 million of Darfur's
inhabitants are still displaced - almost a third of the
region's population. Encouraging their return requires
us to put an end to all forms of violence and to address
the deep-rooted causes of the conflict. In order to
break the spiral of violence, those responsible must be
held to account. That is why now, as in the past, we
must not allow our attention to this issue to wander.
The perpetrators of the crimes must be prosecuted and
brought to justice. We owe that to the victims. This also
serves as an imperative for the future.

France once again recalls the importance of the
obligation to cooperate with the Court in accordance
with resolutions adopted by the Council. That applies
not only to the implementation of the arrest warrant
issued against Mr. Al-Bashir but also with regard to
the other four suspects identified by the Court. France
refuses to allow this refusal of States Members of
the United Nations to cooperate to become the norm,
especially if they are States parties.

Of course, this obligation falls primarily upon
the Sudan, which must implement the arrest warrants
against its nationals for crimes committed on its its
territory and cooperate with the Court, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). States parties to the Rome
Statute have a special role to play with regard to their
statutory obligation to cooperate with the Court and
to implement arrest warrants when suspects are found
within State territory. In this connection, France regrets
that this has not been the case, particularly with regard
to Mr. Al-Bashir.

The Council's responsibility is clearer than ever.
We must respond to the legitimate demands ofthe Court
so that it can fully accomplish its mandate. We must
make cooperation with the ICC effective and ensure
that arrest warrants are implemented. The same goes
for the Council's implementation of its own resolutions,
especially resolution 1593 (2005). In that regard,
France remains determined to consider the Council's
modalities of action based on the proposals made by the
New Zealand delegation in December 2016.

In that spirit, France reiterates its proposal that
States deemed by the Court to have breached their
obligation to cooperate be invited to address the
Council and that, on the basis of such an exchange, the
Council then determine the next steps to be taken.

