Mr. Schulz (Germany): We thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa for her update and briefing.

We strongly condemn the cowardly attack that
took the lives of staff members of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and injured
others, including Libyan nationals. We extend our
heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims and
to the Government and the people of those injured and
killed. Our thoughts and prayers are with them today.
We look forward to the results of the investigation into
the incident by the local authorities and trust that the
perpetrators will be brought to justice.

Today's events remind us of two things. First of
all, they again remind us of the laudable courage and
determination with which United Nations mission staff
all over the world carry out their duties in difficult and
dangerous environments. We express our firm support
to all UNSMIL staff members, under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Mr. Salame', and their tireless work for peace
and stability for the benefit of all people in Libya.

Secondly, these events also remind us of the
tragedy suffered by the people in Libya and of the
extremely high number of people in Libya who have
lost their lives or been injured or displaced due to the
outbreak of hostilities since the beginning of April.
We therefore very much welcome the announcements
by the parties to honour the truce proposed by Special
Representative Salame on 29 July for the Bid Al-Adha
festivities. It is high time for the fighting to stop and for
the humanitarian disaster caused by it to finally end.
The Eid truce could be the first step and the parties
need to hear an unequivocal message from the Council
today. The truce needs to hold so as to relieve the
suffering among civilians and to open the door for a
return to the negotiating table. The only solution to the
conflict is political, not military. Therefore, we appeal
to all international actors to impress upon the parties
the importance of preserving the truce.

Today we focus on the next hours and days in
Libya. The commitment of the parties to honouring
the truce is of key importance and no effort should be
spared to successfully implement it. At the same time,
we need to look simultaneously beyond the next few
days and hours. To that end, it is imperative that all
Libyan parties commit to a permanent ceasefire and a
return to a United Nations-facilitated political process
that paves the way for lasting peace, political stability
and unified institutions.

We therefore call on all parties to return to the
negotiating table. We strongly support the three-point
plan that Special Representative Salame has proposed,
aimed at reviving an inclusive political process under
United Nations auspices. We ask all international
actors to support the implementation of the three-point
plan and use their influence to bring all parties back
to the political process. In that vein, we also call on
all United Nations Members to fully respect their
obligations to contribute to Libya's peace and stability,
and in particular to respect the arms embargo, in line
with relevant Security Council resolutions.

