I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this Security Council meeting. For Colombia and all countries, it is essential that the United Nations continue to work on its pillars and mandates, especially in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global crisis and its serious challenges. On behalf of President Ivan Duque Marquez, I wish to express our gratitude to the members of the Security Council for their ongoing support to my country. I also take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his report (S/2020/239), as well as his Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his important work in Colombia. I welcome the briefing by the representative of Colombian youth. In our public policies for sustainable development and peace with legality, young people play a central role as both participants and beneficiaries of actions. In the first quarter of 2020 our country faced numerous challenges. Among them I highlight our efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, I note the exodus of 1.8 million Venezuelans who have settled in Colombia and require humanitarian and social care. I take this opportunity to thank all the countries that are providing us meaningful cooperation to help us face those challenges. Even amid these circumstances, President Duque has reaffirmed his determination to pursue the peace with legality policy in order to advance and fulfil our commitments to victims, ex-combatants and the communities and families covered by the policy, including those who participate in voluntary illicit crop substitution programmes. We have made progress in consolidating the 16 development programmes with a territorial focus in the 170 municipalities most affected by violence and poverty. The implementation of those programmes, which are also essential for comprehensive rural development, is now backed by the new regional and local authorities who took office in January. After several meetings with the national Government, the new governors and mayors are incorporating the peace with legality policy into their agendas and territorial planning instruments. By the end of February 166 municipalities and 15 provinces had approved such instruments. I would now like to refer to the two mandates of the Verification Mission, the first of which is the reintegration of ex-combatants. The report notes the country's significant progress in this area. President Duque has emphatically reaffirmed that since he took office, 20 months ago, the sustainability of the reintegration process has been decisive in preventing new cycles of violence. We have also made progress on complex issues related to the legal situation of the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. Approximately $4 million have been allocated to the acquisition of the land they currently occupy. At the same time, several municipal councils are seeking to incorporate those areas into their land-use planning to facilitate income-generating and housing projects. Decisions about those areas are being made through inclusive processes. Food supplies and the payment of utilities, leases, health insurance and childcare continue to be guaranteed for more than 13,000 accredited ex-combatants. The Government remains committed to expanding their access to income-generating projects and to educational and job-training programmes. As the report notes, the Government adopted the social and economic reintegration route that was approved 29/31 30/31 in the National Reintegration Council. That framework applies to ex-combatants residing inside and outside the former territorial areas. The second issue is our biggest challenge: guaranteeing the safety of ex- combatants, human rights defenders, social leaders and vulnerable communities. State institutions as a whole have strengthened their actions and coordination in three areas: increasing the effectiveness of prevention and protection, expediting judicial investigations and combating criminal organizations responsible for attacks. The safety of former combatants and their families, as well as that of members of the current Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comin (FARC) political party, is a priority. The peace with legality policy establishes the coordination of security measures. Over 40 security and protection measures are being adopted as a manifestation of the State's commitment to the safety of ex-combatants. They do not replace or affect any of the provisions under the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. A total of 3,740 members of the police and the military ensure the safety of those ex-combatants settled in the former territorial areas. The national protection unit provides robust security measures to protect 300 ex-combatants. By presidential order, measures such as rapid-reaction initiatives, information centres, rewards, new risk-analysis methodologies and self-protection training have been established. Similarly, the National Commission on Security Guarantees has been working to strengthen protection and security policies. The Commission has met 15 times and has considered civil society proposals and differentiated approaches on ethnicity. In that context, the action plan of the Intersectoral Commission on Security, Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders was launched. The plan emphasizes the role of women in peacebuilding, in line with resolution 1325 (2000). In addition, the Government is finalizing the formulation of a plan to ensure the safety of the people participating in the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops. As for the judiciary, the Public Prosecutor's Office has made progress in the investigation of 102 of the 223 incidents reported since 2017 of ex-combatants as victims. That represents 46 per cent of the cases. As aresult, there have been 24 formal convictions and 178 arrest warrants have been issued for murder, attempted murder and enforced disappearance, including 51 related to intellectual authors. To put an end to those crimes and threats, the Government is acting on a crucial front - combating organized armed groups dedicated to drug trafficking and illegal mining. Those groups use violence to control trade routes for their illegal production, while threatening vulnerable communities. Colombia continues to suffer the consequences of the rapid increase of illicit crop areas between 2013 and 2017, which reached an unprecedented 200,000 hectares of coca plantations. As a result of President Duque's commitment, that trend was halted in 2018 and again in 2019. Our Government will not rest until we suppress those crops, as it is clear from our history that the main fuel for violence in Colombia is drug trafficking. I would like to refer briefly to a matter that exceeds the mandate of the Verification Mission. On 29 March, the terrorist armed group Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN) announced a unilateral ceasefire. It is worth noting that the so- called "active" ceasefire by the ELN is actually partial, because they maintain that they would attack in certain cases. President Duque has reiterated that the ELN must demonstrate its commitment to peace through concrete actions such as the release of kidnapped citizens and the cessation of all criminal acts. The 2016 Agreement envisages a 15-year time horizon for its implementation. It is important to stress that its implementation is a two-way process and requires the effective commitment of both the State institutions and the FARC political party. The Verification Mission strongly requests FARC to make progress in its pending matters, including providing information on drug trafficking routes, cooperating in the location of missing persons, handing-over assets for the reparation of victims and helping establish truth and justice for victims.. The peace with legality policy is an ambitious medium- and long-term strategy. Various State agencies are working together to stabilize the territories, bridge gaps and promote social progress for the communities most affected by violence and poverty. We trust that we can continue to count on the Security Council's support in advancing the consolidation of well-being, peace and the rule of law in Colombia.
