Ms. Lee (Singapore): In an essay entitled
"Children as Killers", writer Corinne Dufl<a describes
the following scene in Liberia:

"I came upon a group of five NPFL [National
Patriotic Front of Liberia] child soldiers, the
eldest, not more than 12, playing soccer on one of
the most heavily contested corners of the urban
war. I saw their rifles discarded on the street
below a rain-soaked Liberian flag, and only then
did it become clear that the white ball they
maneuvered was a human skull. The decaying
body lay some 20 meters away. They kicked the
ball over the debris of wall, spent cartridges, old
wallets, clothes dropped by fleeing civilians and
old photographs, and squealed with delight as it
entered the goal post marked by two rusting
sardine cans."

Kicking a skull around as a football must be a
brutalizing experience. It diminishes our humanity. Yet
these children are also trying to behave like normal
children playing football. Our challenge here is to
ensure that children like these can experience a normal
childhood and not be scarred for life. We are therefore
pleased that the Security Council is proceeding with
this debate despite the postponement of the special
session on children.

One year is a long period in the life of a child.
The sooner we try to rescue children from armed
conflict, the more of their childhood we will give to
them. Unfortunately, childhood, once lost, can never be
returned or replaced. The statement we heard this
morning from Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, delivered with
honest and moving eloquence, was nonetheless a brutal
and devastating reminder of how tragic the loss of
childhood can be. His statement has also highlighted
the importance of post-conflict programmes for
children who are scarred by armed conflict.

Even as we speak, Afghan children are suffering
from the war that is raging in their country. In an
Agence France Presse report of 16 November, last
week, it was reported that

"Some of those affected will never fully recover
physically and psychologically. Seth Mohammed,
11 years of age, will go through life without his
right leg, which was blown off when a bomb
landed close to a group of children playing near
the southern city of Kandahar. Twelve days after
he was admitted to hospital in shock and caked in
dried blood and mud, he is struggling to come to
terms with what has happened."

Ms. Bellamy and several other speakers have also
highlighted the potential devastating effect of winter to
Afghan children.

The problem of children in armed conflict is not
new. For millennia, children have been marched off to
war as drummer boys, porters, servants and
messengers. The ill-fated Children's Crusade of 1212
involved thousands of doomed children. Hoards of
French children died of hunger and disease during their
march, while thousands of German youngsters froze in
the Alps or plummeted down the mountainsides.
During the American Civil War the youngest known
soldier, Avery Brown, was enlisted in the Union
infantry just shy of his ninth birthday, after claiming to
be age 12 on his enlistment papers. More recently, an
estimated 250,000 children, even as young as age 5,
have been reportedly conscripted to serve as soldiers in
dozens of armed conflicts around the world, some with
armed insurgencies and some in regular armies.

The problem of child soldiers is just one part of
the grim canvas of children in armed conflict. The
broader picture was first sketched out in the ground-
breaking and comprehensive 1996 report entitled
"Impact of armed conflict on children", by Ms. Graca
Machel. Her report noted that

"more and more of the world is being sucked into
a space in which children are slaughtered,
raped, and maimed; a space in which children are
exploited as soldiers; a space in which children
are starved and exposed to extreme brutality.
Such unregulated terror and violence speak of
deliberate victimization. There are few further
depths to which humanity can sink." (A/5J/306, section LA, para. 3)

Against that backdrop, we clearly need to inject a
greater sense of urgency in our work on this subject.
The Secretary-General's excellent report on children
and armed conflict of 7 September 2001 spells out
comprehensively what we have to do. Both Ms. Carol
Bellamy and Mr. Olara Otunnu have also done
excellent work in this field, and can provide the
Council with clear guidance. Mr. Otunnu deserves
special commendation for eliciting 59 specific
commitments from Governments and representatives of
armed groups in several zones of conflict where
children have suffered immensely. It is one thing for
the Council to issue declarations, it is more heartening
to see their real impact on the ground.

The five-point programme of actions that
Mr. Otunnu persuaded all the parties in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to accept is a significant
breakthrough. So too is his success in persuading the
Government of Rwanda to enact legislation that
enables girls, including tens of thousands who became
heads of households after the 1994 genocide, to inherit
farms and other properties crucial to their survival.

The question for us in the Council is how to build
on that good work. One way is to endorse the report,
especially the action points. We will do that when we
adopt our draft resolution later. But in endorsing a long
report, it is sometimes useful to spell out some
priorities that deserve immediate attention. We would
like to suggest four areas.

First, effective, continuous monitoring is a key
feature to successful implementation.

Secondly, those who Violate the basic rights of
children must pay. Amnesty should be withheld from
adults who abduct, recruit or use child soldiers in
combat. Those individuals should receive no impunity
and no sympathy.

Thirdly, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration (DRR) are the only viable long-term
solutions for child soldiers. We should also give weight
to the reports of the child-protection advisers operating
within the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), and ensure that similar advisers are sent to
Afghanistan when the United Nations establishes itself
there.

Finally, we need to continually refine and
improve our approach. The Secretary-General has
proposed the launch of an international research
network on children and armed conflict. This deserves
serious consideration. The network could become an
invaluable source of information and recommendations
for child-protection issues.

Our work on children and armed conflict cannot
be separated from the work we are doing on conflict
prevention. One of the operational weaknesses of the
Council is that it looks on each issue or theme as
belonging to different compartments. But the
compartments are not separate; indeed, they are more
like cabins on the same boat. All issues touching on
armed conflict have to be handled together. We
therefore have to remind ourselves of the commitment
we made when we endorsed, in resolution 1366 (2001),
the Secretary-General's comprehensive report on the
prevention of armed conflict of 7 June 2001. That
report spelled out 10 principles to enable the United
Nations to move from a culture of reaction to a culture
of prevention. It is worth recalling in particular the
fifth principle, which pointed out that:

"The primary focus of preventive action
should be in addressing the deep-rooted socio-
economic, cultural, environmental, institutional,
political and other structural causes that often
underlie the immediate symptoms of conflicts."
(S/2001/574, para. 169)

Let me recall also the sixth principle, which
outlined the components of an effective preventive
strategy, and noted that a strong focus was required on
gender equality and the situation of children.

Similarly, the debate we are having here today
cannot be divorced from the discussion that the
General Assembly had yesterday on the
implementation of the Millennium Summit
Declaration. This is one reason why we should, when
we complete our discussion here, report in full all of
the progress made to the special session on children,
which will be held in May next year.

But there is another, more important reason to do
this. The Security Council, which represents only 15
States, cannot deliver the political commitment of the
international community. The special session on
children can do this. Without such a commitment, our
progress will remain only as words on paper.

