Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2011/43) on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
commend Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Kosovo,
for his briefing on recent developments in Kosovo, as
well as the staff of UNMIK for their efforts.

We welcome the participation in today's meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, as well as
Mrs. Vlora Citaku.

Bosnia and Herzegovina commends UNMIK,
operating within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) in its role of maintaining peace, security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo. We
appreciate UNMIK's efforts in encouraging the process
of reconciliation and the facilitation of constructive
dialogue and regional cooperation, as well as its focus
on mediation between the communities and its support
to minority communities.

During the reporting period, political
developments in Kosovo, in particular the
extraordinary elections of 12 December and their
aftermath, have slowed down the momentum generated
by General resolution 64/298, adopted on 9 September
2010, which welcomed the readiness of the European
Union to facilitate a dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. We regret that UNMIK was excluded from
the Assembly elections process and could not certify
the results. We also note that the elections were held in
a peaceful atmosphere and did not provoke additional
tensions among the population. In that regard, we

ll-23603
believe that it is important that all stakeholders
maintain their positive and constructive approach
towards dialogue in order to address and resolve
longstanding issues, which would contribute
significantly to the consolidation of peace, stability and
reconciliation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina wants to express its
strong concerns regarding the allegations contained in
the report of Special Rapporteur Dick Marty entitled
"Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo". Furthermore, we welcome
the willingness of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to consider any evidence
that the Special Rapporteur may have uncovered and to
provide its full support to any future investigation that
may be conducted into the allegations.

We have taken note of the fact that the security
situation in Kosovo has remained relatively calm, in
spite of some incidents, mainly in northern Kosovo,
where the situation continues to be sensitive and
politically delicate, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report. In the context of improving inter-community
dialogue and building confidence among the parties,
we are encouraged by the latest developments in the
five recently decentralized Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities, which have implemented capital
projects at a cost of€l million each, received from the
Pristina budget, mainly for investments in roads, water,
sanitation and other local infrastructure projects.

Although the number of voluntary minority
returns remains low, we are encouraged by the fact that
there has been an increase in returns as compared to
the previous year. In addition, while stressing the
importance of providing conditions conducive to
sustainable returns, we welcome UNMIK's efforts to
decrease tensions and draw attention to common needs.
Furthermore, during the reporting period, UNMIK and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees facilitated several "go-and-see" and "go-
and-inform" visits, which gave an opportunity to
displaced persons to visit their properties and make
first-hand assessments of conditions in the receiving
community.

With regard to the rule of law, we reiterate our
support for the activities of UNMIK and EULEX,
operating within the status-neutral framework of the
United Nations. We also support the existing practice
of cooperation and coordination between UNMIK,
EULEX, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and NATO - the latter present
through the troops of the Kosovo Force - and we
hope that this practice will continue.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our long-
standing position that stability and security in Kosovo
are significant for achieving lasting peace and
prosperity in our region. We believe that the
international community should continue to play an
important role in supporting the aspirations of the
countries of the region towards integration into
European and Euro-Atlantic structures, respectively.

