Mr. Sall (spoke in French): First of all, on behalf
of Mr. Abdoulie Janneh, UNDP Director of the African
Bureau, who is present here, I would like to
congratulate Guinea on its presidency of the Council
and to thank it for the very important initiative it is
taking at this extremely important time, when the
subject of weapons of mass destruction holds the
attention of the international community.

We are going to give the Council a Power-Point
presentation on the projection screen in this Chamber,
and we will try to remain within the given time limits,
bearing in mind the fact that later discussions will
make it possible to go into further detail for those who
wish so.

The point of our statement is to demonstrate
UNDP's role in the fight against the proliferation of
weapons in West Africa through PCASED. First, we
would like to give Council members an idea of the
range of proliferation of arms in West Africa, and then
show how the Programme has been set up as a response
to arms proliferation, before looking at measures on
how to combat this proliferation in West Africa.

The situation of arms proliferation in West Africa
today is extremely worrying, which has made this
subregion one of the least stable in the world - first of
all, because of the number and impact of coups
d'etat - 72 coups d'etat took place between 1972 and
1980, of which 50 per cent were successful - with
very typical examples. There is one country, for
instance, where there were five attempted coups d'etat
in four years, with one of them alone creating
approximately 250,000 refugees. Also, as we have
stressed, there has been mercenary activity, a gearing
down of trouble-spots that destabilize the subregion, 12
years of war in Liberia, 10 years in Sierra Leone, a
revolt in Casamance which lasted for 20 years, and so
forth.

Hence, the situation is explosive. There are more
than 10 million arms in West Africa and, according to
the most recent estimate, between 90 and 100 million
persons are enduring this situation in the rest of Africa.
Furthermore, 50 per cent of these weapons are used by
organized criminal groups, and 80 per cent of the
victims are the most impoverished - women, children
and the elderly.

A very dark picture has emerged in the course of
about 10 years: 2 million children have been killed; 5
million persons have been handicapped; 12 million
children have been made homeless; 300,000 children
have acted as combatants and over 10,000 mercenaries
have emerged. All this points to the intensity,
irreversibility and frequency of armed conflicts. Those
conflicts have both direct and indirect effects on human
security. It is in that context, therefore, that the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) justified the
rationality of the Programme in its 2002 mission
statement.

I have not mentioned the specific situation in
Nigeria, where, although there is no domestic rebellion
there is nevertheless a great deal of insecurity. That
insecurity could result in attacks on the civilian
population, which will be the subject of the following
images.

An image was projected on screen.

This is an image of the results of an attack with a
Kalashnikov rifle, which is a weapon of war. That
attack took place at a location where we had gone to
establish a national commission to combat the
proliferation of weapons. We came across this incident
involving a vehicle being used to transfer funds that
was attacked by Kalashnikov or AK-40 fire. It is pretty
cheap to buy a Kalashnikov: one can find such a
weapon on the market today for $30. The toll in this
case was certainly terrible: a bullet in the abdomen, a
lost eye and another bullet in the head. This level of
insecurity is the daily fare in the region. It is therefore
important to ask what the response of the Programme
has been.

First of all, the response of the Programme set up
by UNDP is based on the concept of human security. It
involves extending the concept of human security not
only to people and goods but also to economic and
social rights. The link between development and
security, as well as the security paradigm itself, are
also part of that response.

Another element that I believe is important has to
do with the fact that the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development is a
typical example of a comprehensive response to a
problem that has itself become global in nature. A
range of actors is involved in this effort. International
organizations, States, national organizations, non-
governmental organizations (NGO), media and civil
society groups are all participants in a system of
partnership and coalition that is attempting to take
ownership of the Programme through the national
commissions established by States and the national and
transnational bodies of civil society. Having been given
a formal platform, those bodies have been actively
participating in the Moratorium since the latest summit
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

Multidimensional and multidisciplinary strategies
are being put in place to deal with certain elements
relating to legislative reform. They also exist because
we are somewhat ahead of the game in West Africa
with regard to the issue of combating the proliferation
of arms. We have succeeded in establishing norms and
in putting in place a programme of action. We are now
attempting to link standards and behaviour though an
incentive system. To that end, we are today relying on
diplomacy and capacity-building. It should be
remembered, however, that we do not yet have the
power to impose sanctions or carry out public
negotiations.

An image was projected on screen.

This next image is of a young man from Sierra
Leone who stepped on a mine. We used this image in
our campaign during the Africa Cup to illustrate how
people's dreams are also shattered.

Our response has therefore been comprehensive.
But above all it has been an interesting response in that
for the first time in the fight against the proliferation of
arms, we have both a political delegation comprised of
ECOWAS States and the political legitimacy necessary
for the Programme to be able to be involved on a
country by country basis and to make direct contact
with ministers for foreign affairs, defence and security
to discuss the issues at hand. This state of affairs
indeed makes for the effectiveness and level of
specificity that are among the strengths of the
Pro gramme.

Lastly, with regard to comprehensiveness, the
most important thing about the Programme established
by UNDP in Africa is that it involves a programme for
practical disarmament that goes beyond lofty
principles. Through the UNDP Programme we have
today been able to respond to the issue of how to
resolve the problem of proliferation on the ground. Our
mission is to promote the culture of peace, train
security forces, establish border controls, create a
regional register of light weapons, harmonize laws,
collect and destroy weapons, extend the spirit of
moratorium to the rest of the African continent,
mobilize resources and begin a dialogue with arms
manufacturers.

The most important thing today is to establish
what we refer to as national commissions to combat the
proliferation of weapons. This is a matter of
establishing such commissions in all ECOWAS States.
Created by States themselves, which would also
determine their composition, such commissions would
serve as the implementing agents in combating the
proliferation of weapons. They would also be
responsible for ensuring the durability of the effort and
for strengthening the capacity of States in the area of
combating proliferation.

Up until 2001 there were only five national
commissions. Thanks to intense work done by a team
in the field, 13 out of a potential 15 national
commissions have been established in a single year.
Thirteen out of the 15 countries in the West Africa
region therefore have national commissions to combat
proliferation. Due to the current instability in the
country, Cote d'Ivoire is one of the States without a
commission. We hope that, with the support of the
Executive Secretary, we will be able to benefit from the
establishment of the new Government to set up a
national commission, set up a register in any future
peacekeeping operation and move towards destroying
surplus arms. Liberia is the other exception. That
situation is due to the civil war in the country.
However, it has demonstrated a firm commitment to
establish a national commission. Moreover - and this
is the second point I wish to make in this regard -
once established, national commissions become part of
a network that exists for the purposes of sharing best
practices, cooperating to combat the proliferation of
weapons and exchanging information.

Decentralization has now been instituted. For
example, Mali's commission is so far ahead that it has
already created local commissions to combat
proliferation in the north, east and west of the country.

The Programme must now complete that network
by incorporating Nigeria. What is most important,
however, is that we move from the state of institutional
integration that has always existed between the
Programme and UNDP resident representatives to an
operational integration that includes in national
commissions those responsible for good-governance
programmes. From an operational standpoint, that
would serve to integrate the United Nations system into
anti-proliferation efforts.

Strengthening border controls is also part of our
Programme. Just a few days ago, we provided Mali
with over $200,000 to secure its borders with
Mauritania and Algeria. We are now in the process of
helping Benin, and are considering extending
assistance to Ghana and Niger.

We are also involved in training security forces.
We have trained trainers, namely, over 300 senior
officers throughout the 15 participating countries. With
the national decentralization now in place, and using
our own training manual, over 7,500 agents will be
trained in advance of the unit-level decentralization of
security and armed forces.

With regard to actual figures, we have destroyed
38,000 weapons in West Africa. The Council will note
that, as we have already stated, we have, paradoxically,
destroyed the most weapons in Liberia. In addition, as
they exit the Chamber, members will find a film on the
destruction of weapons in Liberia, which has been an
extremely significant event.

In tandem with that, we are paying particular
attention to the subject of light weapons that includes
anti-personnel mines, as they too fall within this
category. We have a zero-mines initiative in place in
West Africa. With Canada's help, we intend to destroy
all Government landmine stocks. We will also follow
that with demining programmes, to begin a year after
the destruction of those weapons.

Three projects are currently under way. The first
entails promoting the culture of peace. In that regard, it
is important to point out that we intend to reform
primary, secondary and university curricula in West
Africa in order to include the teaching of the culture of
peace. Another project involves harmonizing security-
related legislation into a single law through an
international convention, as we have done in the area
of business law. The third, and last, programme
involves establishing a regional register of light
weapons. As the Council is aware, a regional register
of conventional arms was established following the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 46/36 L.
However, after three years of work by a group of
experts, it has not been possible to include light
weapons in the Register of Conventional Arms. Light
weapons will therefore be included in regional
registers. ECOWAS will be working on this issue
through the establishment of pilot projects on a
country-by-country basis. Several countries have
already volunteered to provide comprehensive
information on their stocks of small arms and
ammunition, which will make it possible for us to go to
the source in order to coordinate our efforts to come up
with genuinely national registers.

I now wish to refer to the future of the
Programme. First, we will seek to integrate the
Programme into the framework of international efforts,
beginning with the United Nations Conference on
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Their Aspects.
We will then seek to associate ourselves with the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). If
memory serves me, I believe that France has been
entrusted with the peace and security portfolio, and that
it is in the process of working on that matter. That is
how we plan to involve ourselves in new international
efforts.

We also hope to expand and improve our
partnership with implementing bodies, the agencies of
the United Nations and donors in particular. In that
regard, I believe that it is very important that we have
put in place a mechanism at the level of regional
programmes that makes it possible for all the
Ambassadors of donor countries to meet their
counterparts from recipient countries in order to be
able to discuss all aspects of the Programme in total
transparency.

Another important point is integrating the UNDP
resident representatives and, further, those responsible
for the good governance within the framework of the
struggle against the proliferation of arms.

But the most important aspect of efforts to
combat proliferation, as the Executive Secretary said,
is not only political commitment and will, but also the
mobilization of resources. It must be understood that
our Programme started with a 60 per cent deficit in
resources. Of the estimated $13 million needed to carry
out the Plan of Action, we were able to mobilize only
$5 million.
I would like to give a very simple example.
Today, the minimal programme - and I stress
minimal- to strengthen borders of the 15 West
African countries, which would mean four sites per
country, would call for $6 million. But since PCASED
was established in 1998, we have not been able to
mobilize this sum. So this gives you some idea of our
shortfalls and deficit problems.

The last operational perspective is the matter of
reducing demand through the Moratorium and through
stricter monitoring and assessment regimes. I believe
the Interim Commissioner for Peace, Security and
Political Affairs has clearly stressed that. We need a far
more restrictive regime for countries that have adopted
the Moratorium. At the same time, on the supply side,
the proposal that the export of weapons to conflict-torn
regions be avoided is important, but that implies that
declarations be made.

Today, the customs statistics collected by the
United Nations are not sufficient, partly because
military arms are not declared, arms are in transit, and
free-trade areas are proliferating, and all this means
that important data are not available to us. Therefore,
we have to rely on voluntary reporting by States. It
should be noted that even now, among the more than
100 exporting countries, only 29 submit reports, and
they do not always provide data that are relevant to our
efforts to combat the proliferation of weapons.

Therefore, we will also step up the campaigns for
demobilization and micro-disarmament operations, and
especially for public awareness, as we have been able
to do in Chad concerning human development, saying
it is a race to be won. Another image that we would
like to put forward is that of tolerance and of all of us
coming together in national unity. Lastly, there is the
image of the flame of peace. Let us act before it dies
out.

