Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The signing of the peace Agreement in
Guatemala on 29 December will go down in the history
of Central America. The conflict in Guatemala, the oldest
in the area, had been going on for more than 40 years.
The settlement of the conflict is the culmination of a
process that began in Esquipulas in 1987. That has made
it possible to arrive at a settlement of the conflicts in the
other countries of the region, particularly in El Salvador
and Nicaragua.

The United Nations has played a central role in this
process. The United Nations assumed this role
successfully in Guatemala through the negotiation of
various agreements which constituted the framework for
peace.

Particularly sincere tribute is due to the efforts of the
Secretary-General. I shall also mention, as was done

 

earlier by the Ambassador of Mexico, the special
contribution by the United Nations Moderator of the Peace
Talks, Mr. Jean Arnault.

It is natural that the Guatemalan parties turned to the
United Nations to ask it to supervise the implementation of
these agreements. Obviously, if we wish to express
congratulations and good wishes, it is first and foremost to
the people of Guatemala that we should address ourselves.
The United Nations Mission for the Verification of Human
Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala
(MINUGUA) has already been entrusted by the General
Assembly with supervising those aspects of these
agreements which relate to human rights. With regard to the
military aspects, the Secretary-General has proposed to the
Security Council the creation of an observer unit attached
to MINUGUA with a mandate of three months.

No one can doubt - as has been pointed out and
stressed - that this proposal is in keeping with the United
Nations mission and with the competence of the Security
Council and the responsibilities of its members. This is why
France has given its support to this proposal. It will thus
vote in favour of the draft resolution before the Council,
which in principle enjoys the broadest support.

