Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for scheduling this meeting. I also
thank Martin Griffiths and his team, Mark Lowcock
and all the humanitarians. I think it is very good that
the Security Council has been able to be united on this
very important issue. It is very good that we can have a
timely update on the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, but also on wider implementation of
resolution 2451 (2018). I am grateful for that.

I think it is very important that the parties accelerate
efforts to implement the important steps that they agreed
to in Stockholm. Martin set out what those were. I want
to reiterate our full support for Martin's efforts. We
look to the parties to continue constructive engagement
with him, including a commitment to attend the next
round of talks once Martin has finished his preparatory
work. We look to the parties to facilitate the United
Nations work to stand up a team in Al-Hudaydah to
support their efforts.

For our part, as penholder, we will take forward work
on a short technical draft resolution to mandate the new
United Nations team to support the implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement. We will hear bit more on
that in consultations from Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock
and retired Major General Cammaert. Of course, the
Council will need to continue to follow progress on the
ground very closely.

On the humanitarian side, I think we all need at
to have that at the forefront of our minds Mark's last
words: although all this progress on the political track
is absolutely vital, it does not help us feed starving
children. That 80 per cent of Yemenis need assistance
is quite a shocking figure. We must not let up any of the
pressure up to try to help Mark and the humanitarians
deliver aid and commercial supplies.

I want to specify very clearly today how important
the access issue is - access to the Red Sea Mills, as
Mark set out, but also access through the ports and into
all the areas onemen where people need assistance. The
numbers involved are vast, and therefore there is not a
day to lose in terms of access. We call on all the parties
to address the issues Mark mentioned, in particular in
terms of things like notice periods, which should go
back down to 48 hours. Access should be unhindered.
Commercial supplies should be got through. We have
had some good news on visas and fuel imports, but that
good news needs to be extended across the commercial
and humanitarian supplies needed.

I have kept my remarks short because ifI know many
people will want to speak and we have consultations
following this meeting. But I want to repeat that it is
very good news that the Council has been united so far.
We hope that the Council can stay united as we follow
progress on both the humanitarian and political tracts.

