Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to see you, Sir, preside over the proceedings of the
Security Council, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of a
country friendly to Egypt. We not only have friendly and
affectionate ties; we also share cultural Islamic traditions
that have impacted human civilization throughout history.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for providing us with
an opportunity to participate in the debate in the Council
today. The contribution, input and views of States that are
not members of the Council are undoubtedly important and
should be taken into consideration when the Council tries
to formulate its position on any subject under debate. Our
views are anchored in our conviction that, in dealing with
specific issues, the Council's actions are undertaken on
behalf of all Members of the United Nations.

Our first comment on the subject under discussion
today is that the title of the agenda item provides a very
loose framework for discussion, making it very difficult for
many Member States to address the issue accurately or to
speak about it in specific or definitive terms. The term
"humanitarian aspects" can be used to raise various subjects
and ideas and involves too many concepts and measures.
Frankly, this makes it difficult to deal with the various
dimensions or component parts of the question with any
reasonable degree of confidence.

However, the delegation of Egypt would like to
emphasize a crucial matter we have long discussed over the
past few months and years: the importance of maintaining
the delicate balance established in the Charter between the
responsibilities and functions of the primary bodies of the
United Nations, so that each one can fulfil its respective
tasks without encroaching upon the responsibilities of the
other. Today's debate should not, therefore, be interpreted
to mean that the Security Council has become the
executive arm of the United Nations system in all areas
of its operations and activities or, indeed, of the United
Nations system as a whole.

That having been said, we would like, within our
understanding of the subject under discussion, to
emphasize several points. First, the delegation of Egypt
would like to reconfirm its commitment to the long-
standing, steadfast position of the Non-Aligned Movement
on the need to differentiate between peacekeeping and
humanitarian activities. This steadfast position essentially
proceeds from our conviction that both activities are
premised on neutrality, and that by intervening on a
general basis in humanitarian activities and relief efforts
when the need arises, peacekeeping forces would strip
those humanitarian activities of their neutral character and
would make them a legitimate target when conflicts were
renewed.

On the other hand, when the Security Council
decides to incorporate, within a peacekeeping mission,
functions relating to the protection of workers providing
humanitarian assistance or relief to those in need of it on
the ground, we strongly affirm that there is a need for the
Council, within that peacekeeping mandate, to provide for
the appropriate resources for United Nations personnel
and troops so that they are able to fulfil such missions, as
many cases, such as that of Bosnia, have clearly shown
the extent of the danger inherent in such operations.

Secondly, the delegation of Egypt has noted that
over the past months there have been persistent attempts
by various parties, both from within the United Nations
membership and from outside, to include vague concepts,
or concepts that have not been agreed to, under the term,
"peacekeeping", which has become too loose. Regrettably,
such attempts, including those formulated outside official
United Nations forums, are far from established concepts
of peacekeeping, whether conventional ones or even the
advanced and modern ones, which are scrutinized by
many Member States with a degree of unease.

Furthermore, there is a potential risk, which I must
highlight here, that the concept of peacekeeping
operations as we have known them in the past might be
eroded to such an extent that they might disappear
altogether, to be replaced by new concepts that are
developing along the lines of, for example, "peace
operations". This matter must be determined by the
General Assembly and its competent bodies, as they

 

represent the full membership of the United Nations system.
The ruling of the Security Council cannot be considered
sufficient in this regard, especially given the fact that the
General Assembly is the forum where the idea of
peacekeeping operations originated, having been established
back in 1957.

Thirdly, we note, on the other hand, the interest -
indeed, the willingness - of the Council, within the terms
of the Charter, to respond favourably in cases of conflict in
which humanitarian assistance has been deliberately
impeded. At the same time, we would like to emphasize
that there is a need for such responses to be carried out in
full respect for the operational rules for relief efforts and
delivery of assistance to those in need, including respect for
the national jurisdiction of the host country, securing its
approval in advance in line with the guidelines annexed to
General Assembly resolution 46/182, which emphasize the
principles of neutrality, impartiality and humanitarianism
that form the basis of such humanitarian activity.

Fourthly, as a follow-up to that point, the delegation
of Egypt would like to commend the many non-
governmental organizations for their humanitarian and relief
assistance efforts, whether such efforts are made in cases of
natural disaster or of armed conflict. The most important
factor that lends credibility to and enhances the
effectiveness of their role is the extent of their commitment
to humanitarian and charitable causes and their total
impartiality and integrity in dealing with humanitarian
assistance cases. That must be coupled with full respect for
national sovereignty and the national laws of the host
country.

Fifthly, children are, perhaps, the group that is most
seriously affected and vulnerable in times of armed conflict,
whether they are used as fodder for war or are the victims
of such conflicts in other ways. The physical, emotional,
health and educational damage inflicted on them does not
really end with the termination of hostilities. The adverse
impact of such damage continues into the next generation.
The suffering of women in war is no less severe. Paying
adequate attention to women and children in post-conflict
reconstruction and recovery programmes has therefore
become a major component of post-conflict peace-building
efforts.

These matters must be addressed so that the root
causes of conflict can be eliminated and prevented from
erupting again. From the perspective of the broad United
Nations membership, this matter falls well within the
purview of the General Assembly, which has the primary
role in determining such matters. Indeed, the General
Assembly was the body that developed the conditions of
and criteria for post-conflict peace-building within the
open-ended working group on an Agenda for Peace. It is
the General Assembly that can reinvigorate the United
Nations system in all its components, organs and agencies
in order to rehabilitate any given society once conflict has
ended and a crisis is resolved. Furthermore, it has the
primary role of mobilizing resources to achieve that end.

Sixthly, the Security Council, in fulfilling its tasks,
must act in compliance with all the provisions of the
Charter and in conformity with the specific role and
responsibility it has been assigned, in order to address all
threats to international peace and security. We feel that
we must be cautious in expanding the framework and
concepts of the Security Council's responsibilities so long
as there is no agreement on its recomposition, rules of
procedure and current working methods, responsibilities
and mandate. Otherwise, the Charter may be at risk of
serious violation or the Council may fail to fulfil its tasks
and to meet its obligations, which would certainly affect
its role, prestige and authority in addressing all legitimate
concerns in defence of the interests of the international
community, as defined by a consensus of the membership
of the world Organization.
Furthermore, we support the idea of ongoing
consultation between the Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council in order to achieve
greater coordination and to avoid duplication. This would
lead to complementarity in the functions of the Council,
the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council in
dealing with conflicts at subsequent stages, in full respect
of the mandates of all organs of the United Nations, as
laid down in the Charter.

