Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation joins the warm expressions of
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and to Peru for
holding the presidency of the Security Council. We also
join others in thanking you for organizing this open
debate to share ideas on the matter we are discussing
today. We also express our appreciation for the valuable
briefings that inform our discussion.

Terrorism, as a threat to international peace and
security, as well as transnational organized crime,
which constantly threatens the security of States,
were perceived in the past as differentiated criminal
phenomena that were unrelated to each other. Over
the years, these threats have developed close links,
forming a criminal alliance that can affect any State,
which is why my country considers it of the utmost
importance to create international awareness about
this relationship and its consequences, with a view to
developing responses together to fight them effectively.

Although the nature of terrorism and criminal
organizations vary according to their context, both
phenomena benefit from illicit profit and logistical
support. That implies the generation of complex and
dynamic links that require coordination at the local,
national, subregional, regional and global levels in
accordance with international law. Colombia promotes
an integrated and multidimensional approach to
combating terrorism that acts on the widest possible
levels of cooperation among States, as well as within
the framework of effective coordination among
international organizations.

We must understand that terrorism and transnational
organized crime can manifest in networks and shared
logistical activities that allow for the acquisition of
weapons, ammunition and explosives; the hiding of
assets, including through the use of cryptocurrencies;
the maintenance of constant communication;
guaranteed displacement of their personnel through the
production and use of false documentation and, finally,
the conduct of criminal and terrorist actions in certain
places, hiding in others and escape from the action ofthe
States in defiance of which they act. With the objective
of containing their ability to act, special emphasis
must be placed on the pursuit of their finances and the
laundering of assets produced by their illicit activities,
as highlighted in resolution 2462 (2019). There, control
of both the international financial system and the
systems for informal funds transfers will allow for a
significant reduction in their financial capacity, which
in turn reduces their ability to act in defiance of States.

The fight against terrorism requires comprehensive
actions that make it possible to strike at their finances
and economic and logistical support networks. To obtain
effective results against this threat, strong international
cooperation is required, framed in legal structures
informed by the technical capacities of States, and
allowing for the development of joint operations and
the constant exchange of information. We believe in the
need to continue gathering information in order to better
understand the nature and extent of those links, with
the aim of generating more comprehensive measures.
In the contemporary global context, international
conflicts, migratory crises and the growing power of
transnational organized crime all pave the way for
terrorist organizations to diversify their methods,
logistical corridors and sources of funding.

