Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, Mr. President, I wish
to thank you for holding today's debate. I would also
like to thank the respective Chairs of the Council's
three counter-terrorism-related Committees for their
briefings this morning, and especially to thank them for
their important efforts in leading the work of their
respective Committees over these many months.

Over the past five years, the Security Council has
rededicated its efforts to take measures to prevent

terrorism and has taken various initiatives in order to
strengthen Member States' counter-terrorism policies.
While it is true, on the one hand, that there have been
significant improvements in the counter-terrorism
capacity of Member States, it remains a sobering,
alarming reality that terrorists have grown more
audacious and sinister in their designs and acts, with
the net result that the threat of terrorism that we face
has not actually abated at all.

The international community, through the United
Nations, must step up its efforts to fight this scourge,
using all means available. In this vein, the Japanese
Government welcomes the General Assembly's
8 September adoption of its resolution 60/288, on the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
Security Council continues to play a vital role in this
global strategy of the United Nations. In conducting its
activities in the days to come, it is important that the
Council needs to bear in mind that the strategy adopted
by the General Assembly calls for further improvement
in the work of the three counter-terrorism-related
Committees.

My Government welcomes the fact that a report
(S/2006/737) has been submitted to the Council by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) pursuant to
resolution 1624 (2005) of September last year, based
on the reports submitted by Member States on the
prohibition of incitement to terrorism. The content of
the report is of great interest to us. However, in view of
the fact that approximately two thirds of the Member
States have not yet submitted their reports, we would
like to join in encouraging those Member States to do
so at the earliest possible time, so that it will be
possible for the Council and others to gain a better
understanding of the status of implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005).

One of the areas in which the three Committees
need to continue their work is the efforts to ease the
reporting burden of some Member States. There are
two aspects to this work. One is to consider possible
kinds of assistance that might be provided to those
States which have the will to submit reports but lack
the capacity to prepare them. Another aspect is to
consider the possibility of consolidating in a single
questionnaire the questions addressed to Member
States. Both of those aspects need to be addressed in
tandem and with a sense of urgency.

Japan appreciates that, for the former objective,

that of assistance, the expert groups of the three

Committees have recently prepared a common strategy

paper. We expect that its consideration in the Council

will be expedited to make tangible progress in this
regard.

With regard to visits, we understand that the three
Committees have gradually undertaken measures to
consolidate Committee visits to Member States, which
we welcome. It is also important to note that the
follow-up of those visits should be carried out
effectively. Considering that the CTC has already
conducted visits to a number of States and that there
are more than five States that are expected to be visited
by early next year, we need to elaborate and implement
even more thorough follow-up activities, so that the
visited States will be able to regard the visits as
beneficial to them as well. Such an approach will lead
to enhancement of this kind of cooperative relationship
between the Committees and the States visited.

My Government continues to attach great
importance to the clearing house role of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
in close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Action
Group (CTAG), in identifying specific assistance needs
of States and providing necessary information to
donors to concretize the needed donor support. We
appreciate the proactive efforts of Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Loj of Denmark, Chairperson of the CTC,
and of the CTED, since our last meeting on 30 May, to
enhance the dialogue with some of the Member States
requiring such assistance, including, in our part of the
world, the Pacific island States. As one of the donor
States, Japan wishes to continue sharing its experience
and information in this regard.

The listing and de-listing of individuals and
entities on the Consolidated List of the Al-Qaida and
Taliban sanctions Committee are also of great interest
to many Member States, including Japan. Although it
has not yet reached a final conclusion, the Committee
has had substantive discussions on the listing issue,
and is very close to reaching a conclusion. In order to
enhance the accuracy and reliability of the
Consolidated List and to effectively contain terrorist
activities, we intend to actively contribute to the
discussion, so that this issue, including the de-listing
aspect, will be resolved as early as possible. We
appreciate Ambassador Cesar Mayoral's ongoing
efforts to resolve this issue.

Finally, with regard to the 1540 Committee, we
are grateful to Ambassador Peter Burian of Slovakia
both for his work and, particularly, for his participation
in the eighteenth United Nations Conference on
Disarmament Issues, which was held in Yokohama,
Japan, in August, in which more than 30 countries,
mainly from the Asian region participated. The
Chairman of the 1540 Committee made a presentation
on the work of the Committee, which was most timely,
coming at this juncture when the international
community is facing urgent issues that need to be dealt
with effectively and decisively in the fields of
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, including,
in our part of the work, namely, Asia, in the far East,
North-East, South and West Asia. I wish to take the
opportunity to commend Ambassador Burian for his
presentation which contributed to enhancing the
awareness of the significance of resolution 1540 (2004)
and the importance of its successful implementation.

Each of the three Committees will continue to
rigorously pursue its activities as we approach the end
of the year. At that point, it will be necessary for each
individual Committee to review its achievements and
to consider ways for the Council to realize a more
efficient and effective counter-terrorism policy. The
comprehensive review of the CTED and the review of
the mandate of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee's Monitoring Team will also be a good
opportunity in that regard. Taking into consideration its
experience in the Committees, my Government will
continue to play an active role in advancing the work
and reform of the three Committees.

In closing, my delegation wishes to acknowledge
the dedicated and excellent work of the members of the
CTED, the experts on the Monitoring Team of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, the experts
on the 1540 Committee and the Secretariat.

