Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the countries of the
stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves
with this statement.

Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his timely report (8/2009/304).

During the past decade, the international
community has increasingly been called upon to
prevent States from collapsing, fracturing or falling
back into conflict. The task we are confronted with is
often that of assisting in building functioning State
structures in areas torn by political strife and the legacy
of violence. Over the years we have learned important
lessons, and the report of the Secretary-General
provides an opportunity to further strengthen the
peacebuilding capacity of the United Nations. Many of
its important recommendations need to be urgently
implemented. We look forward to the Secretary-
General's continued engagement and to his
commitment to this important agenda.

The report rightly focuses on the immediate
aftermath of conflict. We know from experience that
this is a particularly vulnerable and critical phase of
peacebuilding, characterized by fragile security
conditions, severe humanitarian and human rights
needs and significant political uncertainty. For the
international community, it is a phase where our ability
to deliver assistance is put to a difficult test.

While a basic level of security is vital to
achieving peaceful development, all aspects of
peacebuilding must be considered from the beginning
of the process. The successful disarmament and
demobilization of former combatants requires a
framework in which those people can be reintegrated.
Alongside the deployment of peacekeepers, efforts
must be made to stimulate economic recovery, support
the provision of basic services and restore the rule of
law, good governance and respect for human rights.
The central challenge is to build the structures of
functioning State institutions. That process requires the
participation of all relevant stakeholders. National
ownership is essential, as underlined in the Secretary-
General's report. Special efforts should be made to
reach out to women, youth and minority groups at risk
of exclusion.

A coherent strategy among international actors in
field operations is crucial in order to effectively
support national processes. Unfortunately, such
coherence is often lacking. The European Union
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation on
the need for an effective and accountable United
Nations leadership on the ground, empowered to lead
immediate international efforts in support of national
authorities. A common set of priorities is necessary to
bridge the gap between early stabilization and recovery
efforts and longer-term development planning.
Mechanisms for more effective monitoring, evaluation
and adjustment of strategies also need to be developed.

The European Union welcomes the emphasis in
the report on joint needs assessment, planning and
support. Ways must now be found to put this into
practice. We look forward to the recommendations on
the integrated task forces and on Headquarters support
to Resident Coordinators and United Nations country
teams.

We echo the Secretary-General's call for greater
clarity on the roles and responsibilities of core
peacebuilding actors, both within the United Nations
and between the Organization and the World Bank and
other international actors. Those designated as lead
agencies bear a special responsibility to make the
appropriate investments in order to provide timely and
predictable support. Those arrangements should be
subject to regular review.

We have been encouraged by the positive
assessment of the Standing Police Capacity and would
welcome the further development and expansion of
rapidly deployable civilian capacities to other areas
pertaining to the rule of law. We look forward to the
proposed overall review on how the United Nations
can help broaden and deepen the pool of civilian
experts, particularly from affected regions and from the
South. In that context, the European Union would also
like to stress the important role of women in
peacebuilding, as outlined in resolution 1325 (2000).
The Peacebuilding Commission has existed for
three years. It is unique in its membership structure, its
involvement of civil society and its country-specific
approach. The strategic potential of the Commission
lies in its ability to stimulate coordination, mobilize
resources, maintain a spotlight on countries emerging
from conflict and provide advice to all relevant bodies
of the United Nations system. As suggested by the
Secretary-General, the European Union would like to
see the Commission's advice be more proactively
considered. The 2010 review will offer an important
opportunity to learn from the first years of operation
and to make appropriate improvements. It is also
essential that the Peacebuilding Support Office be
utilized to its full potential. To that end, the role of the
Office should be clearly defined.

Access to timely and flexible funding is often one
of the main challenges to maintaining the momentum
in a peace process immediately after the conclusion of
a peace agreement. The European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General's recognition of the need to
strengthen the role of the Peacebuilding Fund in the
early stages of peacebuilding. We must strive towards a
Peacebuilding Fund that sets an example by providing
seed funding to bridge the gap between conflict and
recovery at a time when other funding mechanisms
may not yet be available.

Over the past decade, the European Union has
gradually enhanced its capacity to support efforts to
secure peace in war-torn areas around the world.
Today, the European Union is one of the main
contributors to peacebuilding activities, working
closely with the United Nations, the African Union and
other actors in those efforts. The continued
strengthening of those partnerships, particularly with
the United Nations, is a key priority for the European
Union.

The report of the Secretary-General provides
many useful recommendations for strengthening the
peacebuilding capacity of the United Nations. It is
fully in line with the appreciated efforts of the
Secretary-General to enhance the overall coherence,
effectiveness and accountability of United Nations
operations in the field. The European Union is
committed to supporting that agenda for change in all
relevant intergovernmental forums as well as at the
country level.

