Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like, at the outset, to thank you, Sir,
and through you to thank all our colleagues for their
very kind words regarding Spain's recent presidency of
the Council. I wish to assure you and your entire team,
Mr. President, of our full support during your mandate.
You know you can count on our full support.

I would also like to express our thanks to the
Prosecuor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her presence here today and for the full and detailed
briefing she provided on the situation in Libya. Spain
wishes to commend the very valuable work of the
Court and in particular of the Prosecutor. We know that
she is working under very difficult conditions for the
members of her Office. We also wish to express our
support for her investigations of the crimes currently
being committed in Libya and to offer our cooperation
in that regard.

The unanimous message conveyed by the adoption
of resolution of 1970 (2011) must not be allowed to
remain mere words. The Security Council has reiterated
on numerous occasions and in its resolutions the
importance of holding those responsible for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
accountable for their actions. We cannot tolerate
impunity. It is incompatible with true reconciliation
and sustainable peace. Nor can we be indifferent to the
horrors that the people of Libya are suffering on a daily
basis or to the contempt all parties to the conflict have
shown for international law. Reports of indiscriminate
attacks on the civilian population, including abductions,
assassinations, illegal arrests, torture and other crimes,
is disheartening. Spain firmly condemn each and every
one of those barbaric acts, with particular stress on
the particularly cruel acts of Daesh and its affiliates.
Once again, we call on all parties and their allies to
comply with their obligations under international
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.

With regard to the relationship between Libya and
the International Criminal Court, we are grateful for
the updated information on the case of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi.
Concerning the former, we wish to recall the decision
by the Court's Pre-Trial Chamber 1, of 10 December
2014, noting Libya's non-cooperation, in particular
with respect to handing over Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
to the Court. We strongly condemn the continuation
of his trial in the Libyan courts and the death penalty
imposed on him on 28 July. We repeat that he must be
immediately handed over to the International Criminal
Court in accordance with the obligations under
resolution 1970 (2011) and other resolutions of the
Council, which reiterate that compliance is mandatory.
The foregoing does not detract from the value of the
ongoing dialogue between the Libyan Government and
the International Criminal Court and the cooperation
taking place in implementing the memorandum of
understanding of 2013, especially by the Prosecutor
General and the representative of Libya to the Court.

Turning now to the second situation, the case of
Abdullah Al-Senussi, we are concerned that he was
condemnedto death and about the allegations that torture
was used during his interrogation. We will closely
follow the information provided by the Prosecutor and
we note the possibility that the Court may review its
decision with respect to the admissibility of his case
in accordance with the provisions of the Rome Statute.

Let me now turn briefly to the resources available
to the Office of the Prosecutor. We note that the current
scarcity ofresources is making it difficult for the Office
to conduct its investigations. We should remember once
again that the costs of referrals are being covered only
by States parties to the Rome Statute and that article
13 of the relationship agreement between the United
Nations and the ICC has still not been implemented.

In conclusion, we are absolutely convinced that
there is no military solution to the crisis in Libya. Only a
political agreement among the parties can guarantee the
stability that the country needs. We support the efforts
of the United Nations and of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bernardino Leon. We
welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin Kobler as
the new Special Representative. We reiterate our call
to all parties to refrain from all acts of violence. We
furthermore call on them, in a spirit of reconciliation,
to conclude the process of dialogue under the auspices
of the United Nations. That will enable them to approve
the political agreement that will permit the formation
of a Government of national accord that can establish
the basis for the country's reconstruction. Such an
agreement will also help restore to the Libyan people
the stability and security that can guarantee the rule
of law, the end of impunity, justice for victims and the
protection of the fundamental rights of all the country's
inhabitants.

