Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would also
like to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her enlightening
briefing on the important issue of small arms and
light weapons. The control of such weapons is without
question of crucial importance for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1025)
before us today is timely in View of the persistence of
numerous hotbeds of tension throughout the world,
in particular in Africa and the Middle East, which
shows that the maintenance of peace and stability
remains a battle that is far from being won. Indeed, the
consequences of the misuse and the illicit circulation of
small arms and light weapons continue to be a source
of great concern to the United Nations and to the entire
international community. West Africa and the Sahel
have clearly not been spared that scourge. That region
faces multifaceted threats, including the proliferation
and the illicit trafficking of conventional arms and
drugs, as well as the activities of terrorist groups.
The inadequate regulation of such weapons is
a significant factor of conflict. Added to that is the
availability or even the proliferation of weapons in the
absence of adequate control systems, which fosters
a wide range of human rights violations, resulting
in, among other things, increased poverty and an
impediment to sustainable development. In September
2015, during the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, Member States therefore
recognized that sustainable development is impossible
without peace and security and that without sustainable
development peace and security will continue to
be threatened. Furthermore, target 4 of Sustainable
Development Goal 16, which focuses on the promotion
of peaceful societies, access to justice for all and the
establishment of effective institutions, provides for a
significant reduction in arms trafficking.

Although many problems remain, the past two
years have been marked by some successes in the area
of conventional weapons. For example, we would note
the adoption by consensus of the outcome document
of the sixth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eliminate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. There were also some
recommendations on concrete confidence-building
measures in the area of conventional weapons, adopted
by consensus by the Disarmament Commission at its
substantive session of 2017 after two decades of work
without success. Those recommendations underscore
the importance of conventional arms control to
the maintenance and enhancement of regional and
international peace and security.

For its part, Senegal wishes to recall its commitment
to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), the first international
convention whose specific purpose is to regulate the
international arms trade in order to put an end to the
disastrous consequences resulting from the transfer
of conventional arms between countries. We therefore
again call for the universalization of the Treaty and of
the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition.

In addition, we encourage regional cooperation in
order to share best practices and the ongoing involvement
of civil society in awareness-raising actions regarding
the ATT. West Africa, which has taken a number of
initiatives to harmonize regional legislation with a
view to promoting common actions to combat the illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons, is an
excellent illustration of that regional cooperation.

The proliferation, illicit transfer, accumulation and
diversion of small arms and light weapons continue
to jeopardize international peace and security, with
devastating effects on civilian populations, particularly
women and children, in conflict and post-conflict
situations. That is why we should pay closer attention
to the implementation of the Programme of Action
and work towards strengthening physical security
measures and stockpile management for weapons
and ammunition.

We therefore reaffirm our country's commitment
to fully implementing the Programme of Action and to
strengthening cooperation and assistance. To that, we
must add the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons and international
cooperation and assistance for the implementation
of the Programme of Action and the International
Tracing Instrument, in particular capacity-building
and training, as well as the transfer of technology and
equipment to States that have requested such a transfer.

We also call on the Security Council, as the
Secretary-General does in his report, to periodically
review the issue of small arms and light weapons, in
particular by holding a regular debate specifically on
that issue. We also encourage national authorities to
use existing standards and practical guidelines, such
as the International Small Arms Control Standards and
the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines,
to strengthen the control of small arms and light
weapons, as well as ammunition, in order to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals.

