Allow me first to welcome the initiative of the French presidency to organize this important Security Council meeting, which takes place in an international context strongly marked by a health crisis that is unprecedented in the recent history of nations, as well as an increasingly worrying security situation in the Sahel with the upsurge in terrorist attacks. We are very pleased at the interest the Security Council has shown in the Sahel, and since we want to build a relationship of trust with the Council, the duty of loyalty requires me to speak in the language of truth and frankness. The security situation in the Sahel is visibly deteriorating with unusual consistency. For several years, the evil alliance of terrorist and drug-trafficking groups has been ravaging the Sahel region with successive malignant tumours. The Sahel is already structurally weakened by the heavy burden of climate change effects that we have long been the only ones to suffer: recurrent droughts ruining our fragile agro-pastoral economies, depopulating our lands and casting those in need of ongoing support into the periphery of our major cities. Insecurity and underdevelopment have taken such a heavy toll in the Sahel to the point that it is deeply scarred. Violence spreads to new territories every day. However, let there be no mistake: the security threat that is sweeping the Sahel is not only a local problem, but is of global dimension and scope. It therefore warrants a comprehensive response. We are still legitimately requesting the Security Council to consider the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. But because we will never be content to do nothing while waiting for that, we have undertaken, each individually and as the five countries together, a robust effort to recover lost territories and assist those in distress. Our objective is not only to restore military control over the land taken from us by the terrorists but also, above all, to return to the areas devastated by the occupying criminals, to restore, as I said, the protecting State and the public services so essential to people's lives, in particular schools and hospitals. The response is currently being undertaken simultaneously on all fronts, from security to development, but the challenge is huge and the gains are always tentative and reversible. We and our allies need to have staying power, the patience to persevere and the steadfastness to succeed. Several initiatives are under way on the ground, which have been intensified since January 2020 in the devastated tri-border area. In that regard, I mention with pride the Chadian army's resounding successes against Boko Haram in the Lake Chad area in the past few weeks. This shows that the terrorists can be defeated and that fear has now changed sides. We Sahelians have the special trait of resilience. This remarkable ability to cope will lead us to victory against the terrorists. We have the stubbornness and the patience of those who well know that they are right, even if they are unable to prove it today. We will defeat them because the future belongs to us. With regard to development, the Coalition for the Sahel is a relevant political, strategic and operational framework, which is structured around four pillars and focuses efforts on the fight against terrorism, military capacity-building, support for the restoration of the State in conflict areas and development aid. This is also an opportunity to thank all multilateral and bilateral partners for their support to the G-5 Sahel countries. By way of example, I will mention France, the United States of America, Germany, the European Union (EU), Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the African Union and the United Nations. However, mobilizing funds to finance of the Priority Investment Programme, which is critical to our populations, is not yet commensurate with expectations. The Mauritanian Presidency realizes the extent to which the operationalization of the Joint Force is a complex, long-term undertaking. Today we have put aside any doubts about the relevance and the capacity of the Force, which is tangible proof of the readiness of the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel to jointly counter terrorism in their common area. The support of our partners in all its forms and cooperation with the United Nations Mission are therefore crucial in every respect. In addition, the implementation of the tripartite agreement among the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the European Union training mission in Mali and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will significantly contribute to strengthening the capacities of the Force. Such technical arrangements should be continued in the future in order to strengthen and develop cooperation in that area of activity. This is an opportunity to commend the close collaboration between the Joint Force and MINUSMA. The inauguration two days ago of the third Joint Force command post in Mali, built by MINUSMA with funds made available by the EU, demonstrates not only the resilience of the Force but also the firm commitment of the international community at its side. Since we are a few days away from discussing the report of the Secretary- General on the mandate renewal of MINUSMA (S/2020/481), on behalf of my G-5 colleagues, I would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm our firm support for MINUSMA and for the extension and strengthening of its mandate. Its added value and contribution to stability and peace in Mali are well recognized. In conclusion, the Sahel is today a region where almost all world's problems converge. It is determined to recover and become a region of promise and opportunity.
