Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): We join other
Member States in expressing our appreciation to
Sweden for having convened this open debate on the
situation the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. It is our belief that these periodic debates are
necessary to maintain the attention of the international
community, specifically the Security Council, to assist
both Palestine and Israel in finding a lasting solution to
the conflict, which has seemed intractable for so long.

However, it must be emphasized that these open
debates should not be a substitute for the regular
consideration by and deliberation of the Security Council
on the matter, but should, rather, reinforce the work of
the Council in moving the peace process forward.

The escalation of violence typified by the exchange
of mortar and rocket fire between Gaza and Israel and
the excessive use of force by the Israeli military on
13 and 14 July is of serious concern to South Africa. We
further lament the recent tightening of the restrictions
on cargo crossing into Gaza through the Kerem
Shalom border crossing and the retaliatory limitations
placed on Gaza's fishermen, which we see as an act of
collective punishment against the residents of Gaza.
Such disproportionate and brutal acts constitute a
grave violation of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law while further exacerbating tensions in
the region and hindering the possibility of any efforts to

resume Palestinian-Israeli peace talks. In that regard,
I wish to stress that South Africa remains committed
to the belief that there can be no military solution to
the conflict and that peaceful negotiations are the only
means of ensuring lasting peace, security and stability
in the region.

We must take note of the stark realities outlined
in the most recent report of Secretary-General on the
situation (S/2018/614). The fact that Gaza experiences
power cuts for up to 22 hours per day severely
undermines providing essential services. In addition to
that dire situation, water is available to households for
only a few hours every four to five days. Such severe
conditions are exacerbated by the unprecedented
$250-million budgetary shortfall that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) presently faces. We therefore
appeal to all Member States to continue and increase
their vital humanitarian assistance and support to
the Palestinian people and UNRWA, which, beyond
humanitarian aid, also provides for the preservation of
the dignity and rights of the Palestinian people. South
Africa remains committed to continuing its support for
UNRWA through its financial contributions.

My delegation is deeply concerned about the
continuation ofillegal Israeli settlement activity which,
as outlined in the Secretary-General's report, continues
unabated and undermines the hope of establishing
a viable Palestinian State. The decision by Israel to
advance, approve and tender some 3,500 housing units
in the occupied West Bank - the largest single batch
of advancements in 2017 - only serves to further
obstruct the possibility ofa two-State solution. Besides
the practical impediment that those settlements pose,
we also agree with the Secretary-General's view that
the construction of further settlements constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law, in accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016).

The Palestinian people continue to look to the
United Nations, specifically the Security Council, to
assist them in realizing their right to self-determination.
The assumption of the Council's responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security, particularly in terms
ofthe long-standing Palestinian-Israeli conflict, is long
overdue. The Council has a fundamental role to play in
de-escalating tensions and encouraging the resumption
of peace talks between the parties in an increasingly
difficult political and security context, defined by
inflammatory rhetoric, distrust, escalating violence,
ongoing settlement activity and the deteriorating
humanitarian crisis in Gaza.

In conclusion, we strongly believe that the
situation on the ground cannot be allowed to continue
unchanged and remains a blight on the conscience of
the international community. South Africa concurs
with the international community that the only way
to bring about genuine and lasting peace between
Israel and Palestine is through comprehensive and
unconditional negotiations dealing with all final-status
issues, including the unrelenting expansion of Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories of Palestine, the
lifting of the illegal Gaza blockade and the continuing
occupation of Palestinian territory. That will contribute
immensely towards peace and security throughout the
wider Middle East region.

