Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Ms. F atou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We take note of her briefing on the ICC twenty-seventh
report on the Sudan.

The State of Kuwait, in its capacity as the Arab
member in the Security Council, recalls the 514th
resolution adopted at the twenty-second Arab Summit
in Sirte, in 2010. The resolution represents the Arab
position vis-a-vis the proceedings ofthe ICC against the
President of the Republic of the Sudan, a position that
rejects the politicization of the principles of international
justice and their use to challenge the sovereignty, unity
and stability of States under the guise of international
criminal justice. The Arab position underscores the
need to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of the Sudan. That is challenged by the
ICC decision, which is considered to be a precedent
against a sitting Head of State, enjoying immunity
as provided for heads of states by international law.
The decision of the ICC did not gain the support of
regional organizations to which the Sudan is party,
such as the League of Arab States, the African Union
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. All
these organizations are part of the international labour
organizations, as set forth in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is of vital importance
to ensure coherence and harmony in their work, as well
as in the work of other international organizations, such
as the ICC.

The Secretary-General's report on the situation in
Darfur (S/2018/530), issued last month, demonstrated
the significant reduction in intercommunal conflict
and the continued efforts by the Government of the
Sudan to extend the ceasefire and achieve continued
progress in the weapons collection campaign, as well
as a significant reduction in the crime rate. The twenty-
seventh report of the Prosecutor, which is before us,
also welcomes the continued stability of the security
situation in Darfur.

Therefore, when the Security Council addresses
the issue of Darfur, it must do so in a comprehensive
and coherent manner in order to assist the efforts of the
Government of the Sudan to build peace and remove
any obstacles to peace, as called for in relevant Security
Council resolutions. Accordingly, we hope that the ICC
proceedings will not become an obstacle to achieving
peace in the Sudan. That is the noble objective of the
entire international community, especially in the light
of the positive, tangible developments that we have all
witnessed in Darfur, a region that has moved away from
the hardest phase of conflict towards building peace.

In conclusion, we renew our commitment to
respecting the principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations on that matter,
including respect for State sovereignty. We reaffirm
the importance of respecting the sovereignty and
independence of the Sudan.

