Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf ofthe Alliance of Small
Island States (AOSIS), which represents 37 States
Members of the United Nations.

I would like to thank Sweden, the President of the
Council for the month of July, for convening today's
important debate on climate-related security risks.

AOSIS welcomes in particular the participation
in today's debate of His Excellency Mr. Baron Waqa,
President of Nauru, and the Prime Minister of Curacao,
Kingdom of the the Netherlands. I would also like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed;
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq; and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim of the International
Indigenous People Forum on Climate Change for
their briefings.

Three previous Security Council debates have
been held on this very issue 4 on 30 July 2015, chaired
by New Zealand (see S/PV.7499); 22 November 2016,
chaired by Senegal (see S/PV.7818); and 20 December
2017, chaired by Japan (see S/PV.8144). In addition,
there have also been two Arria Formula meetings on
climate change and security. In 2011, the Council issued
presidential statement S/PRST/201l/15, on climate
change, calling for the inclusion in the Secretary-
General's reports of conflict analysis and contextual
information on the possible security implications of
climate change.

Should the Security Council discuss climate
change? That is the wrong question to ask. A more
appropriate question is: Should the Council take
appropriate measures when man-made actions result
in the destruction of islands, cities, nations or entire
livelihoods in some countries? AOSIS therefore
welcomes today's debate on how the Council can
perform its functions more effectively through a better
understanding of climate-related risks to international
peace and security.

As we are faced with new and emerging risks,
including those arising from climate change, it
is important to understand these issues to tailor
responses accordingly. AOSIS believes that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) should remain the primary United Nations
agency for responding to the phenomenon of climate
change. The United Nations existing institutional
architecture on the issue of climate change 4 whether
concerning mitigation, adaptation, the transfer of
technology or advancing basic principles, such as
common but differentiated responsibilities related
to respective capabilities in responding to climate
change 4 should be promoted within the framework
set out by the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. Yet, where there are clear threats to the
security and survival of any country 4 whether such
threats originate in climate risks or from conventional
military aggression 4 the Security Council has to take
appropriate action.

The group of countries that I represent here - the
37 small island States 4 are on the front line of impact
from climate change, and the very existence of some of
those countries is threatened by climate change and the
security risks arising from its impacts. As the Atlantic
hurricane season is under way, a number of small island
developing States have yet to recover fully from last
year's hurricanes, which uprooted entire communities,
caused substantial damage to vital infrastructure and
rendered entire islands uninhabitable.

But it is not just extreme weather events with
which we must contend. Many small island States are
experiencing unpredictable rain patterns that have
resulted in prolonged droughts, as well as floods. We
are also experiencing coastal erosion and saltwater
contamination of agricultural lands and freshwater
reserves. The documentation related to this issue rightly
notes that climate change is reshaping the world's oceans
and coastlines. As large-ocean States, our futures are
closely related to the health of oceans. From sea level
rise to ocean acidification, to ocean warming, the
impacts of climate change on our oceans is threatening
the existence of our livelihood as we know it. We are
calling on States Members of the United Nations to take
urgent action to reverse the trend.

The Paris Agreement on Climate Change was
a historic milestone in the global effort to address
climate change. However, it is well established that
we will well exceed the maximum increases of 1.5°C
and 2°C for global average temperature, which we set
for ourselves, and enter into truly uncharted territory.
But climate change is no longer just about the future.
The danger is already here in the present, with the
potential to become a destabilizing force nationally and
regionally. According to the UNFCCC, our first line
of defence must be to ensure that developing countries
have the support that they need to adapt. There have
been persistent funding gaps for adaptation that trail
far behind climate financing provided for mitigation.
That must be remedied, with a larger share of public
and grant-based financial resources for adaptation.

We also require a strong international mechanism
to address loss and damage for when climate change
impacts exceed the capacity of nations to adapt. We
therefore urge all Member States, especially developed
country partners, to fully uphold their commitments
and obligations of the Paris Agreement and other
international conventions and agreements relating to
climate change. We also emphasize the critical role
that the international community plays in providing
adequate, predictable and additional financial
resources, the transfer of technology and capacity-
building to developing countries, in particular small
island developing States.
It is important that the United Nations system
have a full understanding of how climate change
threatens international peace and security and how the
phenomenon drives conflicts. The Council has already
recognized the adverse effects of climate change in
several specific contexts - the Lake Chad basin, West
Africa, the Sahel and Somalia - and has also stressed
the need for improved climate-related security risk
assessments for more effectively predicting potential
conflicts. The Council has also commenced work on
adapting peacekeeping operations to be better informed
of the impact of climate change and how that can impact
stability in the target countries. However, capabilities,
knowledge and understanding of climate-related risks
need to improve across the United Nations system.
The inclusion of relevant analyses in the Secretary-
General's regular reporting, risk assessments and early
warnings is vital.

Were the Security Council to ignore climate-induced
risks to international peace and security, that would be a
mistake ofhistoric proportions. From fires to famine, to
flooding, every continent is feeling the fury of climate
change, and we cannot wait until we clarify which
United Nations agency is most appropriate to respond.

