Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and
Mr. Hedi Annabi for his introduction of the report.

I wish to warmly welcome the participation of
President-elect Gusmao and Chief Minister Alkatiri in
the debate. We are happy to have them with us today.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement that will be
made soon by the representative of Spain on behalf of
the European Union. I would like to make a few brief
comments in my national capacity.

On behalf of the President of the Republic of
Bulgaria, I wish to warmly congratulate President-elect
Gusmao on his election as the first President of East
Timor. The presidential election is an auspicious
prelude to the independence that will be proclaimed on
20 May 2002 in Dili. My delegation was very satisfied
with the peaceful and transparent holding of the
election. Bulgaria highly appreciates the efforts and the
activities of President-elect Gusmao and the political
leadership of East Timor that is aimed at anchoring
democratic and human rights principles and practices
in the political life of the young country.

In this context, Bulgaria commends the
outstanding results of UNTAET's work and wishes to
thank once again the Special Representative and
Transitional Administrator, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
for his remarkable work. My country welcomes the
Secretary-General's proposals to continue providing
United Nations support in the country's post-
independence period.

We would like to draw attention to the need to
resolve two problems that are important to the stability
of the new State and the region as a whole. The first is
the need to accelerate the border demarcation process.
Beginning the land border demarcation process will
contribute to resolving problems linked to security.
Secondly, we would like the United Nations to
continue working to bring about a return of refugees,
including in the period after independence has been
declared.

Bulgaria hopes that international assistance to
East Timor will not suddenly drop off after
independence has been declared. On the contrary,
assistance should be provided in such a way as to
enable the country to develop a viable economy and its
own sources of income so that its people can enjoy a
decent standard of living.

The integration of the country into the
international community and, in particular, into the
economic and political structures of the region is of
crucial importance. In this context, we welcome the
trilateral consultations that took place in February
between the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Indonesia and Australia, as well as the
agreements that were signed to improve relationships
with neighbouring countries.

The forthcoming declaration of Timorese
independence will be one of the great success stories of
our Organization and the international community as
whole. We believe that the United Nations Mission has
been able to create such a positive model for the
peacekeeping activities of the Organization.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the positive
part played by Australia and Portugal in achieving this
result. We are also gratified that the President of
Indonesia, Ms. Megawati Soekarnoputri, will attend the
independence ceremony. This augurs well for the
development of positive bilateral relations between
those two countries.

