Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We are gratified, Sir, to see you presiding
over the Security Council, and we wish you the
greatest success.

For the third time in less than six months Israeli
tanks and bulldozers have once again broken into the
facilities of the Palestinian National Authority in
Ramallah. This time, they have virtually destroyed
everything, toppling buildings, cutting off water and
electricity and keeping President Arafat and a group of
his men under siege and in danger of losing their lives.

It is no secret to anyone that the Government of
Israel's open defiance of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions the rules of international law is
in good measure the result of the Security Council's
passivity and failure to act. It is the result of the
arbitrary use of the powers and prerogatives of a
permanent member which, with its vetoes and threats
of a veto has prevented the Security Council from
fulfilling its mandate.

The world super-Power is determined to unleash
a war against Iraq, whether by imposing it on the
Security Council or acting unilaterally, as was
reiterated by President Bush in Trenton, New Jersey, a
few hours ago; it is preparing a dossier of that
country's violations of Security Council resolutions,
with which it seeks to attempt to justify its plans for
military action.

Why does the United States not prepare a dossier
of Israel's many flagrant violations of Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions? Why does it act so
different in one case than in the other? It would seem
essential for the Security Council, in the days to come,
to convene a debate like this one on the question of
Iraq and to cease its usual secret gatherings on a topic
that is on the front pages of every newspaper.

If the United States is truly worried about the
supposed presence of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East, why does it not demand of Israel that
it immediately destroy those it possesses? Now they
are attempting to explain that the credibility of the
United Nations is at stake if the Organization does not
support the new doctrine of preventive war. But by
what moral right does a country speak of credibility
when that country, using the anachronistic,
undemocratic privilege of the veto has, for many
years- 25 times - prevented this body from
fulfilling its mandate on the question of Palestine?
When they do not veto, they only permit the adoption
of timid resolutions that say little and are implemented
even less.

In Conference Room 4 of this building, the
International Conference of Civil Society in Support of
the Palestinian People is taking place, bringing
together 159 non-governmental organizations and 26
experts from all the world, including Israel. They have
not shown special interest in what is happening here.
They know that nothing will be done and that the
Security Council will not listen to them. There, the
Security Council simply lacks credibility.

In the meantime, the Palestinian people continue
to be completely unprotected. This organ has not even
been able to seriously consider the Secretary-General's
proposal to establish a multinational force in the
occupied territories. We reiterate that the United States
must immediately suspend its financial support for
military purposes and its military supplies for Israel,
including tanks, helicopters, missiles and aircraft that
are being used against civilians.

State terrorism unleashed by Israel must come to
an end. The flagrant, systematic and massive violation
of the human rights, including the right to life, of the
Palestinian people, must be halted. The repression,
torture and demolition of homes must come to and end.
The illegal occupation of Palestinian territory must
end.

Innocent Israeli civilians are also unfortunate
victims of the spiral of violence and terror unleashed
by the policies of their Government. We demand that
the Government of Israel withdraw its troops
immediately from the facilities of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah and that it immediately cease
the encirclement of President Arafat and his men. We
demand also a halt to the repression of the Palestinian
population, which has come out in the streets in several
cities to protest these new actions of the Israeli
Government.

Cuba will not waiver in denouncing the crimes
committed against the Arab peoples, in particular the
Palestinian people.

