Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation, together with Kazakstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, its partners in the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), was the
initiator in convening today's special meeting to consider
the situation prevailing in Afghanistan.

The proposal for discussion of this question by the
Security Council was dictated by our shared deep concern
regarding the events, which have taken a highly dangerous
turn, not only for the long-suffering Afghan population but
also for the whole vast Central Asian region.

Russia, like the other countries that took part in the
Almaty meeting, considers the approach of the flames of
war in neighbouring Afghanistan towards the borders of the
Commonwealth to be a direct threat to its national interests
and security and a threat to stability in the region.

Having reached these conclusions, the participants in
the meeting called upon the Taliban movement, as well as
all the other Afghan parties, immediately to cease hostilities
and to begin to seek ways of achieving national accord; the
parties also emphasized the inadmissibility of external
interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.

Recent events have demonstrated that the seizure of
Kabul by the Taliban movement has by no means brought
the prospects for stabilization in Afghanistan any closer.
The attempt by the Taliban to monopolize state power is

 

encountering growing resistance. Through brutal
retaliation against former President Najibullah, violations
of human rights, in particular those of women, the
propagation of inhumane dogmas and demonstrations of
chauvinism, the Taliban have set themselves against a
significant part of the Afghan population, which has
manifestly sensed a threat to their lives, security, dignity
and freedom.

In reaction to this threat there was an exodus of the
population from Kabul - a new wave of refugees and
displaced persons. This is a new and serious exacerbation
of the internal conflict, which could lead to the collapse
of Afghanistan and have highly negative consequences
reflecting on the stability of the region.

Considering these complex conditions, it is
particularly important to put an immediate halt to armed
confrontation and resume a broad inter-Afghan dialogue,
excluding the claims of any of the parties to the role of
dominant force.

In our view, in this multinational and multireligious
State, the only possible option for a solution to the crisis
is to achieve an accord based on recognition of the
legitimate interests and rights of all groups of the
population. The United Nations must focus its efforts on
the achievement of precisely these objectives.

During the past one and a half to two years, while
the seeds of the present crisis were growing, Russia drew
attention on numerous occasions to the fact that the
Security Council must be more active in dealing with the
problem of Afghanistan and in not consigning these
problems to oblivion. Today's events demonstrate the
extent to which those who believed that it was
unnecessary to involve the Security Council in a serious
consideration of the situation in Afghanistan were wrong.

We attach extremely great importance to the role of
the United Nations as a universally recognized impartial
mediator and peacemaker in Afghanistan. Such a United
Nations role was confirmed in the Security Council
presidential statement of 28 September 1996, adopted on
Russia's proposal, which also contains an appeal to all
States to undertake all steps necessary to promote peace
in Afghanistan and to work together with the United
Nations in achieving this goal.

During these last few days, the United Nations
Special Mission in Afghanistan, and its leader, Mr. Holl,
have been actively working in Afghanistan in trying to

 

persuade all of the Afghan parties to cease hostilities and to
sit down at the negotiating table. We fully support these
efforts. Unfortunately, the Taliban movement so far is
refusing genuine inter-Afghan talks.

Russia, acting from a position of non-interference in
the internal affairs of Afghanistan, and from a position of
respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity, reaffirms
its readiness to participate together with other States in
international efforts to promote a settlement, under the aegis
of the United Nations, to the internal conflict continuing in
Afghanistan.

We take particular note of the fact that the major brunt
of the consequences of the many years of conflict in
Afghanistan is being borne by the long-suffering people of
that country. Therefore, we welcome the activity of
international organizations in implementing programmes in
Afghanistan to provide humanitarian assistance to the
peaceful population and to refugees.

The importance of humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan
has been stressed by the Secretary-General on numerous
occasions. Russia is participating in rendering emergency
humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people. Recently a
significant quantity of flour and clothing were sent for
distribution among the refugees in the northern provinces of
Afghanistan through the representatives of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). This humanitarian action is being carried out in
accordance with the decisions taken at the meeting of the
leaders of Russia and the Central Asian countries members
of the CIS in Almaty. We are counting on the continuation
of cooperation with UNCHR on these questions.

The Russian delegation believes that today's
discussion in the Security Council must give a new and
strong impetus to efforts to settle the Afghan conflict.
Based on its results, the Security Council could adopt a
politically authoritative resolution with an appeal to all of
the Afghan parties immediately to halt all hostile armed
action, to begin political dialogue in order to seek ways to
achieve national reconciliation and establish lasting peace
in Afghanistan, and to ensure compliance with human rights
and norms of international humanitarian law.

We are convinced that the primary responsibility for
the search for a way out of the existing impasse lies with
the Afghan parties. However, the international community
can also render effective assistance. It is important for the
Security Council to emphasize the inadmissibility of

 

external interference in Afghan affairs, including the need
for any delivery of weapons to be stopped.

The international community must contribute to the
search for a political settlement to the conflict in
Afghanistan on the basis of the establishment of a
representative interim government reflecting the interests
of all Afghans. We hope that all those involved in the
conflict in Afghanistan will take note of this signal and
that it will be able to have a real impact on speedy
cessation of the conflict.

