Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for underlining the salient dimensions of the judicial
activities undertaken by her Office. We are encouraged
by its continued monitoring and reporting on trends
that could potentially constitute crimes under the Rome
Statute. Such preventive initiatives in our view will
serve as deterrents against impunity and send a clear
message that violators will be held accountable for their
actions.

Nigeria is concerned about the increased violence
and insecurity in Darfur, which has contributed
significantly to the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons in that part of the country. It is
disconcerting that since the Prosecutor's last report
(see S/PV.7337) in December 2014, there have been 500
incidents of alleged crimes resulting in approximately
1,200 violent deaths. We believe that this is attributable
to the escalation of the armed conflict. We expect that
the deployment of troops by the Government of the
Sudan to act as a buffer between the southern Rizeigat
and Ma'alia tribes in Darfur will ease tensions between
the two communities. Mediation efforts should however
be intensified and must seek to address the root causes
of the conflict for sustainable peace.

While preferring suggestions designed to achieve
lasting peace in Darfur, Nigeria condemns the sexual
crimes against women, attacks against the peacekeepers
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and the alleged abductions of humanitarian
aid workers. We call on armed actors to refrain from all
acts of violence against civilians and to cease all forms
of violations and abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law. In the same vein, we
believe that safe and unhindered access must be granted
to humanitarian agencies and personnel to facilitate the
timely delivery of assistance to those in need.

On recent judicial activities, we see merit in an
engagement between the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the African Union. We believe that robust
dialogue could bridge understanding gaps between
their differing perspectives. In this connection, it is
our view that the President of the Assembly of States
parties to the ICC could play a key role in facilitating
understanding between the ICC and the African Union.

In closing, we reiterate our call on the parties to
the conflict in Darfur to resolve their differences in the
most peaceful manner in order to preserve the lives of
innocent civilians. Experience shows that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Darfur. A return
to normalcy and a resumption of economic activities
will be in the interest of the people, for development
can only thrive where peace prevails.

