Mr. Brencick (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open briefing on resolution 1308 (2000). We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and Dr. Piot for their statements and for the
comprehensive report on the progress in implementing
resolution 1308 (2000). The report demonstrates that
the response of the United Nations to the resolution is
increasingly institutionalized. We will study its
findings and recommendations closely.

We are pleased to note some of the achievements
since November 2003 - when we last met to discuss
resolution 1308 (2000) - particularly with respect to
peacekeeping missions. The assignment of HIV/AIDS
advisers or focal points to all missions is an important

accomplishment. We are encouraged that missions
increasingly have the tools to raise awareness among
peacekeepers. In that context, we commend the wide
distribution of the HIV/AIDS awareness cards that
Dr. Piot referred to, including their availability in
multiple languages, as well as the regularly scheduled
training on preventing the transmission of HIV/AIDS.

The United States is a world leader in its
commitment to combat HIV/AIDS, a fight that is one
of the moral imperatives of our time. Our commitment
is exemplified by the President's $15 billion
emergency plan for AIDS relief, which is achieving
targets in the areas of prevention, care and treatment
ahead of schedule despite capacity constraints and very
difficult operational environments.

The United States has fully supported, and will
continue to support, Security Council resolution 1308
(2000). The United States Department of Defense and,
more recently, the President's emergency plan have
provided resources and technical assistance to
implement long-term strategies for HIV/AIDS
education prevention, counselling, testing and
treatment in more than 70 military and peacekeeping
populations around the world.

Since the adoption of the resolution, the United
States has assisted in HIV/AIDS education for over
2million uniformed personnel, trained 7,000
uniformed peer educators, established more than 200
HIV/AIDS counselling and testing facilities on or near
bases, provided HIV/AIDS diagnostic and screening
equipment to 30 militaries and trained 600 uniformed
medical personnel in the care and treatment of HIV-
affected personnel and their families.

The United States plans to continue to expand our
assistance to uniformed populations through bilateral
programmes in countries around the world and in our
multilateral cooperation, including those that provide
personnel for peacekeeping operations. Our future
objectives include strengthening host-nation military
HIV testing capability, providing resources to support
more comprehensive and targeted HIV/AIDS
prevention education programmes for uniformed
populations and providing consultation for the
development of sound HIV/AIDS prevention, care and
treatment policies in ministries of defence. As Dr. Piot
noted, we also strongly support the further
development and expansion of HIV/AIDS prevention
activities in uniformed populations more generally, in
coordination with international organizations, other
donors and non-governmental organizations.

We commend the progress to reduce the spread of
HIV/AIDS through military and peacekeeping
operations, but we note the enormous challenges that
remain. We look forward to returning to this issue on a
regular basis. Again, we thank you, Mr. President, for
focusing on such an important issue during your
presidency.

