Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr
Tanin, for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
Ambassador Citaku and Foreign Minister Dacie back
to the Security Council.

Today, like others, I will be adhering to the guidance
in presidential note 507 (S/2010/507), which encourages
Security Council members and non-members to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less.

It has been three months since the Council last met to
discuss the situation in Kosovo (see S/PV.7940). As the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/640) makes clear, it
has been a comparatively quiet period in Kosovo. In
June, we saw the successful holding of free and fair
elections in the country. While the European Union's
election observers noted some voter intimidation and
violence in Kosovo and Serb parts of the country, we
are pleased that the vast majority of Kosovans were
able to carry out their democratic duty peacefully.
We now look to all parties in Kosovo to take the next
vital steps and form a Government swiftly. The people
have spoken. They now expect a Government to get on
with the business of governing, getting institutions up
and running and returning the country to the path to
European integration.

Crucially, that means getting back to implementing
the European Union's facilitative dialogue. Progress
in the dialogue is absolutely vital for both Kosovo
and Serbia. It is the only path to the normalization of
relations between those two independent countries.
The lines on the map are set; they are fixed. They
will not be changed. We should not be distracted by
the quarterly angry and excessively lengthy exchanges
between Serbia and Kosovo in the Chamber. All that
matters are the constructive exchanges in Brussels,
such as those between President Vueie and President
Thaci only last month.

Progress on dialogue commitments will also be
vital if Kosovo is to continue to improve its standing
with international organizations. We will support
Kosovo in its efforts to do so. While we welcome our
mixed facilitating role between the Kosovo authorities
and INTERPOL, we look forward to Kosovo's own
independent membership of INTERPOL, so that
Pristina can respond directly to requests from partners
and so that, together, we can tackle the challenges posed
by international crime.

The other notable development since we last
met has been the agreement on the United Nations
peacekeeping budget. At a time when $600 million was
found in savings from the peacekeeping budget, it seems
extraordinary that the budget of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
should find itself increasing rather decreasing. What
message does that send to the world about the Council's
priorities? What is the message it sends when Kosovo
gets additional money for solar panels at a time when
the Council was able to find savings in our missions in
Darfur, South Sudan and so many other places? That
increase in funding is particularly hard to fathom given
how peaceful and stable Kosovo has become. As the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/640) makes clear,
there have been comparatively few challenges to security
in Kosovo in the past few months. That is something that
the recent Kosovo Force report also makes clear, noting
that the trend in Kosovo is incrementally positive. We
all recognize the important work that UNMIK has done
over many years to Kosovo's benefit. But it is time for
the Mission to shrink, not grow. In view of that, we
are disappointed that its budget has increased this year,
particularly in the wake of the numerous calls in the
Security Council's previous three meetings for the
Mission to be downscaled.

I would like to conclude by echoing the comments
made by the representative of Japan, and by reiterating
the United Kingdom's long-standing position that it is
past time for the Council to meet less frequently on
this issue. The number of issues on our agenda only
continues to grow. As a Council, we should focus our
time and attention on genuine threats to international
peace and security. All of us in this Chamber should
be thankful that the situation in Kosovo no longer falls
into that category.

