Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia): I thank you very much,
Sir, for convening this very important open debate. I
also thank the Foreign Minister of Luxembourg and the
group of friends of this cause.

(spoke in Spanish)

I wish to express my appreciation for the very
moving words spoken by the briefers, including
Mr. Whitaker, Sandra Uwiringiyimana and Ms. Brandt.
I say that because we are experiencing a time of great
upheaval owing to a state of conflict that impacts
international peace, security and stability.

I would like to say that, having listened to
Ms. Zerrougi this morning and having read the
discouraging report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2014/339), I have
nothing but gratitude and admiration for her work. In
the case of my country, Colombia, her efforts have
provided genuine and effective support to face up to
this problem.

Although the situation in Columbia is not on the
Security Council's agenda, we have been mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General. It is clear that the
internal conflict in Colombia has affected our citizens.

And, as the Special Representative has correctly
pointed out, the conflict has impacted children through
actions that Colombia's Government and society
resolutely reject. Therefore, since August 2012, we
have been working on a general agreement on an end to
the conflict and the building of stable and lasting peace.
In the course of converstations at the dialogue table in
Havana, the Government and the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia are discussing the fifth point of
the agenda on victims, including special provisions in
peace agreements with regard to children affected by
the conflict, as Ms. Zerrougi pointed out in her briefing.

For us there are no victims more important than
others. But we especially aim to avoid that women,
which according to our constitutional court have
suffered a disproprotionate brunt, as well as boys,
girls and adolescents in Colombia continue to suffer
the severity of the conflict. On the contrary, we aim to
ensure that the next generation can grow and flourish
as individuals and citizens for the first time living in
an atmosphere of peace. And we are not confining
ourselves to political rhetoric. As we have said here in
previous debates, the Government of President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderon has succeeded in passing a
law through Congress concerning victims and property
resitution. That marks significant progress on the right
track. The law was a historic milestone for Colombia,
in that it set up a process for reparations - in fact,
it began before the agreements were even signed. We
are prepared to share with everyone the drawbacks,
successes and difficulties as we learn from our
experience on the ground.

In the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General, with a view to opening up space
to educate populations at risk on issues relating to
anti-personnel mines and preventing recruitment and
sexual Violence against children, we have put in place
a genuinely innovative national system to provide care
and comprehensive recovery. That mechanism allows
for evaluating the victim-recovery process not just in
the urban areas of our country, but also in rural parts of
Colombia - which is more difficult - where we daily
continue to face the confrontation.

The relationship that Colombia has established with
the United Nations system in the course of many years,
including its agencies, has been one of cooperation and
support during even the most difficult moments of the
conflict that we want to leave behind, without failing
to take on the lessons learned. My task, therefore, is
to build up a harmonious and stable relationship of
mutual respect with the system through which it can
be possible to improve conditions on the ground so
that Colombia - having signed a peace agreement and
implemented the principles set out in the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign, which we resolutely support- is
never again included in the Secretary-General's report
on this issue. Our commitment is indisputible. It is clear
that there is much left to do and that for us in Colombia
there is always room for improvement. But we have the
tools at our disposal, as well as the clear politial will,
to work with the boys and girls of our country. That is
their right, as well as our responsibility.

