Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank the delegations of
China, Angola and Senegal for organizing this debate
on the threat ofpiracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun for
his briefing.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is having grave
consequences for the economies of the countries of the
subregion. It hampers maritime activity and threatens
the stability and security of those States. It is therefore a
major concern for countries around the Gulf of Guinea,
including Nigeria.

We welcome today's adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/4, which is an indication of
the Security Council's commitment to the restoration
of safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea. Nigeria
looks forward to the Council's continued engagement
on this issue, in accordance with its mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Criminal gangs motivated by access to crude oil
and those involved in the trafficking of illicit goods
and small arms and light weapons are operating in
the region. Their activities have led to an escalation
in criminal acts, including armed attacks on ships
in the Gulf of Guinea. The recent incidents of pirate
attacks off the coast of Nigeria are an indication of the
enormity of the challenge. There is an urgent need to
help countries in the region to implement the integrated
maritime security strategy. Governments in the region
need to pursue sustained enforcement actions against
piracy networks on land. We believe that the region also
needs to increase its naval assets and maritime aviation
to enable it to respond appropriately to maritime attacks.

At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has adopted the
ECOWAS Integrated Maritime Strategy. The Strategy
is in line with resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012),
concerning acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea. It ensures a holistic maritime policy
framework for action and cooperation within West
Africa. It also strengthens collaboration with other
African regional bodies. We believe such initiatives
complement the efforts of other regional organizations
and the United Nations in tackling piracy.

An important step in the implementation of
the ECOWAS Strategy was the inauguration of the
Multinational Maritime Coordination Centre in March
2015 for a maritime zone known as Pilot Zone E. That
demonstrates the commitment of ECOWAS member
States to address the critical issue of maritime piracy,
along with other illicit activities at sea. Pilot Zone E,
which includes Nigeria, the Niger, Togo and Benin,
lies mainly in the Gulf of Guinea and is considered to
be one of the most dangerous maritime zones in West
Africa. It is clear that robust protection measures are
needed in that area.

Nigeria believes that strategies to combat piracy
require adequate funding. Fighting piracy involves
maritime domain awareness and the acquisition of
surveillance equipment to ensure an effective response
to incidents of piracy. In that regard, we reiterate our
commitment to the 2013 Declaration of the Heads of
State and Government of Central and West African
States on Maritime Safety and Security in Their
Common Maritime Domain, in which those Heads
of State and Government committed to mutually
collecting and sharing information among themselves,
with regional coordination mechanisms and the support
of strategic partners.

At the national level, the Nigerian Maritime
and Safety Administration and Safety Agency and
the Nigerian Navy have enhanced their operational
collaboration. That has resulted in a substantial
reduction in attacks around the Lagos harbour. The
Agency and the Navy, backed by electronic surveillance
assets, also conduct law-enforcement and anti-piracy
patrols. Those efforts are helping to curtail piracy and
other illegal activities in the Gulf of Guinea.

Nigeria stands ready to form strategic and lasting
partnerships with international stakeholders to
exchange information and technical know-how, mount
surveillance and formulate interception techniques
aimed at curbing piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. We call on the international community to
accord the same level of priority given to the threat of
piracy in the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean to
the Gulfoquinea, as it is ofno less significance to the
world in terms ofcommerce and strategic access.

We take this opportunity to express curappreciation
for the assistance from the European Union, the
International Maritime Organization, France, the

United States of America, the United Kingdom,
Germany, Japan and China and others too many to
mention here. Their individual and collective efforts
have been crucial to enhancing peace and security in
the Gulfoquinea.

The meeting rose at 1.55 pm.
