Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I also
thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing. My
delegation welcomes the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel.

We recall that in January, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1860 (2009), which
provided an opportunity for all parties in the Middle
East to engage and find a lasting solution to the Middle
East question. I wish to reiterate Uganda's full support
for that resolution and call for its full implementation.

Uganda welcomes the statement issued by the
Quartet following their meeting of 24 September 2009
in New York on the sidelines of the General Assembly.
We also welcome the first tripartite meeting of
President Barack Obama, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and President Mahmoud Abbas, on the
sidelines of the General Assembly. We hope that these
meetings will give renewed impetus to restarting the
negotiations process aimed at achieving a just and
lasting solution with the two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. To
that end, we look forward to seeing practical steps on
the ground towards the resumption of negotiations. We
are encouraged by the commitment of the Palestinian
Authority to rebuild State institutions. We commend
Egypt and others for the role they have continued to
play aimed at promoting intra-Palestinian dialogue. We
call on all Palestinians to resolve their differences
within the framework of an intra-Palestinian dialogue
so as to achieve unity.

My delegation welcomes the removal of
checkpoints and roadblocks in the West Bank and
commends the Israel-Palestinian ministerial contacts
on the economic situation in the West Bank. On Gaza,
we also welcome the opening of commercial points by
Israel, but regret that the blockade remains in place.
We therefore call for the complete lifting of the
blockade and for a freeze on all settlement activity,
including natural growth. We also call for an end to
arms smuggling into Gaza.

We are concerned about the recent clashes over
the Holy Sites in East Jerusalem. We call on all sides to
exercise maximum restraint and stop any incident,
incitement or provocation. We also call for the release
of all political prisoners.

Uganda welcomes the release of the Goldstone
report on 15 September 2009. We note with grave
concern the findings in the report of serious violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
that were committed during the Gaza conflicts. We also
note the recommendations in the report addressed to a
number of United Nations organs, Israel, the
Palestinian armed groups, the Palestinian authorities
and the international community on various issues. We
further note that the report was formally presented to
the Human Rights Council on 29 September and that a

09-5573]
decision was taken to defer its consideration. We are,
however, concerned that the decision to defer
consideration of the report has heightened tension in
the Palestinian Territory, which, if not checked, could
escalate and negatively affect the peace process.
Uganda therefore welcomes the decision of the Human
Rights Council to reschedule early consideration of the
report.

Uganda calls on all parties in the Middle East to
take concrete steps to restart peace negotiations and to
respect previous agreements and undertakings. Uganda
will continue to support the efforts by all parties to
achieve comprehensive peace in the Middle East as
envisaged in resolution 1850 (2008).

On Lebanon, my delegation is concerned about
incidents that continue to occur and are likely to
heighten tension in the region. We call upon all parties
to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006).

