Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): Allow me to join
previous speakers in thanking Special Envoy Eliasson
for his comprehensive briefing. My delegation is
always delighted to have him among us in any of his
United Nations incarnations. At the same time, we
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his valuable briefing on the deployment
of the hybrid force in Darfur.

Slovakia welcomes the opening of peace talks in
Sirte under the leadership of the United Nations and
the African Union (AU). We would like to commend in
particular the joint efforts of the two Special Envoys,
who have been relentlessly promoting a negotiated
political settlement to the Darfur conflict. The
international community must do whatever is possible
to move that process forward. We fully support the
AU - United Nations mediation, and we hope that the
Sirte process will lead to a sustainable political
settlement in Darfur.

We are pleased that both the AU and the United
Nations have made Darfur their top priority. The joint
endeavour of both organizations in that respect is very
encouraging. At the same time, we appreciate the
active diplomatic engagement of several regional and
international partners. Even though the political and
peacekeeping processes have proved to be extremely
difficult and challenging, we continue to believe that
there can be no military solution to the conflict.

The situation in Darfur is undoubtedly at a very
important crossroads. With a very fragile political and
security situation on the ground and a deteriorating
humanitarian situation, the international community
needs to act urgently in order to change the fortunes of
the people of Darfur, who have suffered too much over
the past four-and-a-half years. It has become obvious
that, if we are to move beyond the status quo, full
cooperation and genuine commitment on the part of the
Sudan are also required.

If the peace process is to be successful, it remains
essential to immediately stop the violence by all parties
and to broaden the participation in the peace talks. We
encourage all rebel movements to join and engage fully
in the peace process. It is likewise important to
reiterate the Security Council's call on all parties to
urgently agree on and implement a cessation of
hostilities. In that connection, we also call on all
parties to implement the Council's decision in good
faith, as well as their commitments with regard to the
protection of civilians.

The deadline for the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) pursuant to resolution 1769 (2007) is
drawing near. The Council has authorized deployment
of a robust and effective force that should be able to
make a real difference on the ground. In order to
ensure that, it will be indispensable to find the missing
transportation and aviation units and to deploy the key
technical and engineering units on the ground. It is
clear that UNAMID cannot be deployed if it does not
receive support from all Member States.

At the same time, UNAMID will not be a
successful operation without a sufficient level of
cooperation from all parties, primarily from the
Government of the Sudan. Unfortunately, throughout
the two years of our non-permanent membership in the
Security Council, we have been witnessing a perceived
mistrust and repeated attempts to delay the deployment
of a peacekeeping force, rather than actual cooperation,
from the Sudan. In our View, under the current
circumstances, when the situation on the ground
requires an immediate United Nations response, it is
unacceptable to pick and choose which UNAMID troop
contributors will be allowed to participate in this
crucial peacekeeping undertaking. We therefore call on
the Government of the Sudan to agree without any
further delay on the proposed composition of the force
and thus to allow the United Nations and the AU to
expedite and finalize the process of UNAMID's
deployment.

Furthermore, the international community, in
cooperation with the Government of the Sudan, should
do more to address the alarming humanitarian situation
in camps for internally displaced persons. We strongly
urge all parties in Darfur to cease the violations and to
recommit to full implementation of the Joint
Communique on facilitation of humanitarian activities.

In conclusion, since there can be no peace
without justice, I would like to underscore our full
support for the investigation and prosecution of crimes
committed in Darfur that fall under the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). We would like
to recall that, under resolution 1593 (2005), all States,
including the Sudan, shall cooperate fully with and
provide any necessary assistance to the ICC and its
Prosecutor. We look forward to the forthcoming
briefing by the Prosecutor of the ICC in the Security
Council next month.

The current efforts of the AU-United Nations
mediation team, as well as the engagement of both
organizations in the deployment of the Hybrid
Operation, represent a window of opportunity for a
long-awaited breakthrough and a departure from the
vicious circle of violence in Darfur. Slovakia continues
to fully support the pursuit of that important goal.

