Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): A few
days ago, the European Union (EU) paid tribute to the
memory of the victims of terrorism. Four years
following the Madrid attacks, the date of 11 March has
become a day of remembrance in Europe for all the
victims of terrorism, whose numbers are unfortunately
continuing to increase. In that regard, given that an
attack can take place anywhere and at any time,
concerted action by the international community is of
crucial importance. The legitimacy of the United
Nations in this area gives it an essential and unique
role to play.

First of all, I should like to express my gratitude
to Assistant Secretary-General Mike Smith for his very
clear, sober and effective presentation. I would like
once again to reiterate to him the full support of
Belgium. The revised organizational plan that he has
just presented, which was endorsed by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) last month, is the result of
the broad consultations he has held since he took up his
functions as the head of the Executive Directorate.

Belgium welcomes the directions decided on,
which favour a more proactive communication and a
more frequent dialogue with Member States. Those are
measures that will without a doubt contribute to
enhancing support for the Committee support and for
the Executive Directorate itself.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statement that will be made by the Permanent
Representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European
Union, and I would like to add a few additional
comments.

The United Nations strives to fight against
terrorism in a global and holistic way, as reflected
in its Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
implementation of Security Council resolutions in the
fight against terrorism, which include, first and
foremost, resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), are
an especially important facet of Member States'
commitment in this field - a commitment that the
Committee must monitor and encourage.

That implementation requires that States show
determination, but it also requires resources and
expertise that they do not always have. Strengthening
the role of the Executive Directorate as facilitator for
the provision of technical assistance, including by
means of regular dialogue with other international,
regional and subregional partners, is of course a
priority.

Cohesiveness, coordination and complementarity
in the actions of the various United Nations bodies are
a guarantee of heightened efficiency. In this context,
Belgium welcomes the strengthening of cooperation
between the various Security Council committees that
deal with counter-terrorism. It also welcomes the
elevated commitment of CTED to the work of the task
force established within the framework of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

The fight against terrorism will only be genuinely
effective in the long term if it takes root in legitimacy,
the respect of human rights and the respect of
fundamental rights. This is the yardstick against which
the results of our work will be judged.

In this context, Belgium welcomes the more
systematic integration and incorporation of this
dimension in the Committee's and Executive
Directorate's work, and endorses a continuation of
dialogue between the CTC and United Nations bodies
responsible for the protection of human rights,
including the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism.

My delegation wishes to see all the
aforementioned elements reflected in the draft
resolution that will be submitted for our Council's
consideration tomorrow to renew CTED's mandate.
Through the adoption of such a text, the potential for
action of the Committee and the Executive Directorate
will be even further strengthened and diversified so
that it can discharge its very important mandate.

