Ms. Coleman (United States of America): Liberia
will soon mark 14 years of peace - the same period
of time as the devastating civil wars that inflicted
immeasurable suffering on the country's people, ravaged
the country's infrastructure and left a generation mired
in poverty.

And yet, since that time so much that was destroyed
has been rebuilt with the support of the United States,
the United Nations and others in the international
community, including roads, power generation,
electricity grids, schools, hospitals and the social fabric
of communities torn apart by war. As Liberia has made
this progress, it has taken on more responsibility for
functions that were once carried out by the United
Nations. On 30 June, Liberia assumed full responsibility
for its own security from the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL).

We commend the brave men and women who have
served as United Nations peacekeepers and police, as
well as the countries from which they come, which
played a critically important role in restoring a climate
of security that enabled Liberia to emerge from conflict
and rebuild. But despite more than a dozen years of
peace, Liberia's recovery is unfinished, its institutions
are fragile, and corruption and impunity remain all too
common. The deadly Ebola outbreak that began in 2014
paralysed the country, taking the lives of nearly 5,000
Liberians and undercutting some of the progress the
country had made.

In 2017, Liberians will elect a new leader to succeed
President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. As the country's first
peaceful and democratic transition of power from
one living President to another in seven decades,
the election holds the promise of elevating Liberia
alongside other models of post-conflict transition in
the region that contrast undemocratic trends elsewhere
on the continent, where leaders have refused to hold
elections, rigged their outcomes or rejected the results
when they have lost. We are committed to working
with the Liberian Government to ensure a peaceful and
secure environment in which the people can participate
in free, fair and peaceful elections in October 2017 and
through the stable transition to a new Government in
January 2018.

This mandate recognizes that the Government of
Liberia has risen to the challenge of ensuring security
throughout the country since the 30 June transition, and
further reduces the size ofUNMIL, cutting the military
presence by two-thirds and the police presence by half.
We expect a further reduction in the civilian presence as
well. But it also ensures a continued UNMIL presence
to support the Liberian security services through this
historic election in order to consolidate the hard-earned
security gains that Liberia has made.

In March 2018, UNMIL will close, but Liberia's
ongoing reconciliation and reconstruction efforts
will continue, as will its work to strengthen good
governance and transparency, improve accountability
and meet the basic needs of the Liberian people. That
is why peacebuilding efforts must start long before
the peacekeeping mission ends. Indeed, such efforts
should be well under way already, and they must
accelerate immediately.

To that end, resolution 2333 (2016) directs the
Secretary-General to prepare a report on a peacebuilding
strategy for Liberia that would guide the transition of
UNMIL's civilian tasks not only to the Government
of Liberia but also to the appropriate United Nations,
multilateral and bilateral partners that can bolster the
Government's efforts. Liberia's continuing peace,
stability and prosperity and all that the Liberian people,
Government and the international community have
invested in the country depend on getting the transition
right. We all have a stake in ensuring that it succeeds.

