Sir John Weston (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): Congratulations, Mr. President, on
your presence here today, which is welcome.

The subject of today's debate is broad and the issues
it raises are important, but it is difficult to deal with them
in the abstract. Carefully worked out formulae and
academic insights are of limited value when each situation
the Council must face is different. Nevertheless the
Council has had a good deal of experience in the last few
years in dealing with complex humanitarian emergencies
and there are lessons to be drawn from that experience.

First, it seems to us the Council must take into
account the underlying causes of these complex
emergencies. Almost invariably their origins are
political - often the results of intra-State conflicts which
spring from bad governance, the repression of minorities,
the violation of human rights and struggles over land and
other natural resources. Humanitarian action can offer
relief, but it cannot be a substitute for long-term political
solutions. The Council must ensure that its response to an
immediate humanitarian crisis is part of a broader
strategic framework.

Secondly, the Council must have up-to-date, accurate
information on the situation on the ground. Unfortunately,
such information is all too often lacking. More must be
done to increase the range of information available to the
United Nations and to ensure that the best use is made of
it.

Thirdly, the Council must recognize that helping to
ensure a secure environment for humanitarian agencies or
protecting the delivery of humanitarian assistance will
often have political consequences. Wherever possible,
intervention should be undertaken with the consent of the
parties. Often, however, especially in intra-State conflicts,
consent may not be forthcoming or will prove to be
incomplete and unreliable. In such circumstances, a
decision to provide protection for humanitarian assistance
is almost by definition a political act.

The mere deployment of armed troops will have
consequences on the ground, freezing the political or
military situation or altering the balance of forces. Once
troops become involved in securing safe areas, protecting
relief convoys or separating genuine refugees from armed
elements, they are taking part in operations whose
implications go well beyond the purely humanitarian. As
Bosnia and Rwanda have shown, the maintenance of
political neutrality and impartiality becomes extremely
difficult.

Fourthly, the Council must recognize that providing
protection for a humanitarian intervention is not a soft
option. The force has to be properly equipped to respond
to the threats it may face, be given a clear and feasible
mandate, and receive suitably robust rules of engagement.
It may require heavily armed peacekeepers operating

 
under Chapter VII auspices. All too often we have asked
the military to do the impossible and failed to give them the
resources they need.

Where the Council does choose to authorize such an
operation the normal lessons of multifunctional
peacekeeping apply. There must also be a clear and
proactive media policy for the operation, and close
coordination between it and the humanitarian agencies,
although the different actors will need to maintain their
distinct identities. Where there is one, a special
representative of the Secretary-General can play the key
role in promoting such coordination.

Fifthly, the Council must in the end itself be
responsible for deciding the shape, format and objectives of
any mission in support of humanitarian goals. Humanitarian
agencies, which understandably have their own priorities,
are not always or necessarily the most objective sources of
advice for the wider considerations that the Council has to
weigh and, if I dare say so, they are occasionally a little
over-optimistic about what peacekeeping operations can
achieve. Nonetheless, the views of agencies such as
UNHCR and the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) obviously should be taken into account in
elaborating the mandate and concept of operations.

As the events of the last few years have shown,
humanitarian crises, particularly large-scale refugee
movements, often have consequences for regional and
international peace and security. The Security Council has
a responsibility to respond to these crises, but it cannot deal
with them in isolation. Humanitarian crises do not belong
under a separate heading or in a separate box with their
own special rules and considerations. In response to such
crises, the Council must create an overall strategy which
addresses both the humanitarian symptoms and the
underlying political causes. And in agreeing to any
operation to provide protection for a humanitarian
operation, the same conditions and criteria which apply to
any United Nations peacekeeping operation must be
observed.

