The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

We listened with interest to the statements of
Mr. Zacklin, Assistant Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, and Mr. Kiganahe, Minister of Justice of
Burundi, whom we thank for coming here today.

Two years ago to the day, on 15 June 2003, the
Security Council mission that I had the honour to lead
in the region of Central Africa and the Great Lakes was
in Bujumbura. I recall that all the actors of the Burundi
transition process used the same words regarding the
need to put an end to impunity. All of them expected a
response from the Security Council with a view to
establishing an international judicial commission of
inquiry. Everyone knew how essential the issue of
impunity is in understanding the Burundi conflict. The
response that will be given will be decisive in
establishing long-term peace and reconciliation in
Burundi.

Two years ago there were questions regarding the
advisability and feasibility of the mechanism that had
been envisaged when the Arusha Agreement was
signed. And then important political developments
occurred that the Security Council could not ignore. I
believe that we also had in mind the more recent
experiences of efforts in other conflict situations -
particularly in Sierra Leone - to establish the truth,
promote reconciliation and prosecute those responsible
for the most serious crimes. Therefore, we asked the
Secretary-General to discuss the issue with the
Burundian people.

Today, I am very pleased that Mr. Kiganahe has
come to confirm that the Transitional Government
agrees with the Secretary-General's recommendations.
As we know, it was not easy to secure the agreement of
the Burundian parties, because the proposed
mechanism differs from what was envisaged and
agreed at the outset, in Arusha. But the Minister of
Justice tells us that the Burundian Government
supports the recommendations, which he says meet the
two concerns of the Arusha negotiators and the
Burundian people as a whole: first, establish the truth,
and secondly, prosecute and punish the guilty.

We hope that the discussions for the
implementation of this agreement between the
Secretary-General and the Burundian authorities can
begin swiftly. It is important that the various actors
concerned be consulted, because ownership of this
process by the Burundian people themselves will
guarantee its success. We therefore believe that the
discussions should begin immediately within the
framework of the transition. Everyone is well aware
that the transition has entered its final phase and that
the current priority is to successfully hold the elections,
which will culminate in August with the presidential
election.

Thus, we believe it will be the future
Government's responsibility to finalize matters with
the Secretary-General. We are confident in the resolve
of the Burundian people to harmonize the concern for
justice with the concern for reconciliation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Kiganahe to respond to
comments and questions raised.

