Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): My delegation greatly
appreciates the work carried out by the Government of
Switzerland and the Government of Germany through
the Interlaken process and the Bonn-Berlin process on
the important subject of sanctions. We commend their
efforts, contributions and suggestions for developing
and enhancing targeted sanctions regimes which form
part of the paraphernalia for exercising pressure on
States that act in defiance of international law.

Both reports are the fruit of extensive and
intensive consultations and appear to have taken on
board the views of a large number of players. The
reports will be a useful guidance to members of the
Security Council and the Secretariat in formulating
future sanctions regimes.

Since its inception, the United Nations has made
use of sanctions for diverse purposes - to stop
territorial aggression, restore democracy and the rule of
law, promote human rights, fight terrorism and contain
the proliferation of arms, among others. Until 1990, the
United Nations hardly ever used sanctions to achieve
the desired goals. It is only since the last decade of the
twentieth century that sanctions have been frequently
imposed. In the 1990s, the Security Council imposed
sanctions in 12 instances, and some of them are still in
effect.

The question that needs to be asked is whether
the sanctions regimes have really worked - whether
they have achieved the desired results. In most cases,
we find that they have not. Studies carried out on the
success of sanctions regimes have revealed that the
overall success rate has been paltry. If we were to
probe deeply into the reasons for their failure, we
would come to the following conclusions.

First, the continuing defiance of and failure to
observe sanctions gradually erodes their effectiveness.
Secondly, there is an absence of clear objectives and
targets in the sanctions regimes. Thirdly, extraneous
interpretations of sanctions regimes are made by those
desirous of giving wider meaning to sanctions.
Fourthly, a large number of States lack the capacity -
legal, administrative and financial - to enforce
sanctions. Fifthly, the economic and humanitarian costs
outweigh the benefits ofthe sanctions regimes.

In order for a sanctions regime to be effective and
enforceable, it is important that we set realistic and
achievable benchmarks. Firstly, sanctions should be
established and applied only in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter. Hence, there
is a need for more explicit, unambiguous and results-
oriented resolutions. Secondly, sanctions cannot be
imposed on a State in perpetuity, and must be clearly
targeted. There must be a sunset clause, based on either
results or time frame. Thirdly, sanctions should be
imposed incrementally, with a gradual ratcheting up of
the pressure. Fourthly, sanctions should be reviewed
and assessed regularly by the Council. Fifthly,
sanctions regimes should, at all costs, avoid collateral
damage, especially to innocent civilians.

It is no surprise that, throughout the history of
sanctions regimes, very little heed has been paid to the
effects of sanctions on the innocent civilians of the
targeted State and on neighbouring States. It is
imperative that such a negative impact be removed, or
at least minimized. The only way to achieve that goal
is to consider the imposition of targeted or smart
sanctions regimes wherever appropriate, in the form of
financial or arms embargoes or of travel and aviation-
related sanctions. We believe that sanctions regimes
can and must be crafted in ways that shield civilians
from unnecessary harm. Indeed, the two processes
address these concerns at great length.

The standardization of language and terminology
for use by the Security Council in all future sanctions
regimes, as proposed in both booklets, is therefore
most welcome. This would provide a pragmatic and
realistic answer to the questions raised by many States
and concerned parties about inconsistencies and
inadequacies and about the punitive side of sanctions
regimes. We agree with the introductory remarks in the
booklet on targeted financial sanctions that smart, or
targeted, sanctions apply to only a subset of the
population. We echo the observation that no targeted
sanctions can achieve the desired goals in isolation.
They must be considered as part of a broader,
coordinated political and diplomatic strategy.

We should give serious thought to the proposals
contained in the two reports before the Security
Council today. The Interlaken and Berlin processes
deserve our commendation for taking a realistic View.
We hope that the Security Council will give due and
deserved consideration to the proposed model
resolution and guidelines for a future course of action.

My delegation firmly believes that Security
Council resolutions must be implemented by all
Members of the United Nations. What we see most
often is non-observance and even overt flouting of
these resolutions by Member States. We are of the view
that a committee entrusted with the responsibility of
monitoring the implementation of all Security Council
resolutions, including those relating to sanctions,
would enhance the effectiveness of sanctions
resolutions. The committee would report and make
recommendations on how gradually to increase or
decrease the pressure of sanctions on the basis of any
development.

We commend the decision of the Swedish
Government to continue with its work on sanctions,
and we hope that all efforts combined will result in the
development of a fair and effective sanctions regime
that will promote, in the most pragmatic and realizable
way, the aims and objectives of the United Nations
Charter.

