Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We are
reminded every day that terrorism still represents an
undefeated, challenging and demanding threat of our
times. Therefore, the fight against terrorism holds the
highest priority. We are certain that only our joint
efforts and coordinated and decisive action can lead to
its ultimate defeat.

We thank Ambassador Wittig, Ambassador Puri
and Ambassador Sangqu for their leadership in those
efforts as Chairs of the committees that hold and play
an essential role in the overall counterterrorism
framework. Their detailed briefings have provided us
with an opportunity to re-evaluate tools and measures
taken, as well as to consider future steps in order to
further improve the Council's efforts in countering this
global and ever-present threat.

The past six months brought considerable
changes to the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), with the
primary focus on strengthening and further enhancing
its procedures and specific elements. Resolutions 1988
(2011) and 1989 (2011), adopted in June this year,
were a direct result of the changing dynamics in the
maintenance of international peace and security and
our fight against terrorism. The split of the 1267
regime was a necessary response to different
requirements and the evolved threat of terrorism, where
somewhat specific new approaches and perspectives
were needed for our fight against terrorism to be more
efficient.

My country fully supported the reform of the
sanctions regime, as resolution 1989 (2011) further
reinforced and strengthened substantial improvements
introduced in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009).
I particularly wish to emphasize the additionally
enhanced role of the Ombudsperson and the new
delisting procedures as crucial aspects in the
continuous demand for a more clear, fair and effective
overall system.

As we focus on the implementation of those
newly introduced elements, we are also aware that
upholding the credibility of the sanctions regime by
means of its effectiveness, transparency and fairness
requires our constant attention and the careful
consideration of future steps.

The date of 28 September was significant in both
2001, when resolution 1373 (2001) was adopted, and in
2011, when States reconfirmed the essential role and
importance of that resolution in the overall counter-
terrorism framework. As we put special emphasis on its
full implementation and the further strengthening of its
key aspects, together with resolution 1624 (2005), we
unconditionally support every effort of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, together with the valuable
assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, in that respect.

Thematic discussions and regional presentations
within the Committee bring more focus on challenges,
deficiencies and difficulties in the implementation of
the respective resolutions. We are pleased to see that
the plans of the Chair are moving in the direction of
continued engagement of the Committee in those
discussions and making enhanced use of its outcomes
and results. That can significantly complement the
monitoring component and appropriately direct the
delivery of technical assistance. We also note with
satisfaction that regular briefings for Member States
proved to be a step in the right direction and an
indispensable tool in enhancing transparency and
efficiency, creating a wider forum for the exchange of
views and recommendations.
The prevention of proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and their means of
delivery, especially their potential acquisition by
non-State actors, is critical to international peace and
security. With the unanimous adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) and the 10-year extension of the mandate
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), the Council sent a strong message that
resolution 1540 (2004) remains an important
instrument of the global non-proliferation and counter-
terrorism regimes.

Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches great
importance to the role played by the 1540 Committee
and its Group of Experts in promoting the
implementation of the resolution. We welcome in this
respect the Committee's report (see S/2011/579) on
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004), submitted to
the Security Council in September. The report
acknowledges that, while important progress has been
made, further efforts are required to fully implement
resolution 1540 (2004). The report also contains
important recommendations that should serve as a
basis for the Committee's future work.

We all are aware that the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) requires
continuous long-term efforts at the national, regional
and international levels. We also need to bear in mind
that, for many States, the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) presents a
very complex and costly process. Therefore, we look
forward to the Committee's efforts to strengthen its
role in channelling assistance to States in need and
matching requests with States providers of assistance.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate our call upon Member States to
extend their financial contributions in order to support
States in identifying and addressing their needs in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, terrorism is a global phenomenon
and no country can defeat it on its own. The
complexity of terrorism requires an equally complex
and comprehensive response, while cooperation and
coordination among all relevant stakeholders are sine
qua non conditions. Bosnia and Herzegovina will, for
its part, continue to give its fullest support and
contribute to the overall international efforts in
countering terrorism, through our actions at both the
State and the international levels.
