Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to express my deepest
condolences to the Russian Mission for the loss of
Ambassador Churkin, who was also well-known in
Belgium where he had also been stationed and where
tribute was paid to him this morning.

I thank the Ukrainian presidency for organizing
this open debate on the important subject of peace and
security in Europe.

Belgium supports the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and wishes to add the
following remarks.

Let us first highlight the reasons to be concerned
in the face of the increasing number of armed conflicts
around the world. Today, war seems to have become
once again an acceptable option and, for some, the
continuation of aggressive diplomacy. That is a step
backwards and an unacceptable insult to the ideals of
the Charter of the United Nations. We must denounce
this perplexing situation. The use of war and violence
does not provide lasting solutions; on the contrary, it
exacerbates crises and creates new threats.

European reconstruction is one of the most
successful examples of political voluntarism, which
led to reconciliation between historic adversaries.
The experience of the European Union offers a
reason to hope, as well as a source of inspiration, for
all modern-day conflicts - sometimes portrayed
as intractable - where the use of weapons is falsely
portrayed as the only viable solution.

While most European countries have experienced
an unprecedented period of peace in their recent
history, that is also the result of the establishment of
unique and efficient multilateral institutions. Alongside
the previously mentioned European Union, let us also
mention the Council of Europe, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Atlantic
Alliance, all of which have, in their respective fields,
contributed to the stability of our continent. Now more
than ever, those institutions must continue to play a
central role in the peaceful management and prevention
of conflicts in Europe. They are all actors that can,
working in close cooperation and in conjunction with
the United Nations, take effective action to promote the
peace and stability of the European continent.

Fifty years ago this year, Belgium, through its
then Minister for Foreign Affairs, Pierre Harmel,
proposed an innovative vision for emerging from
the division of the world resulting from Cold War
logic. That vision, known as the Harmel Doctrine,
advocated dialogue while maintaining a firm stance
on the need to defend our values in a divided Europe.
That doctrine helped pave the way for the East-West
detente. Although the international context has evolved
considerably since then, that doctrine is, in our view,
still relevant today. Dialogue should serve to clarify
our defence policies and postures, thereby becoming a
prime confidence-building and security measure. That
approach remains absolutely relevant today. Rebuilding
confidence begins with respect for the agreed
communication mechanisms of multilateral institutions
in Europe.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the full support
of Belgium for the Secretary-General in his goal to
increase the effectiveness of the United Nations in the
area of conflict prevention. Belgium is ready to play its
role in that field and has made contributions. Last week
we organized an international conference in Brussels
on mediation, and we propose to share the lessons from
that conference later on, here at the United Nations.

