Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, Mr. President,
to congratulate Pakistan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. We wish you every success during your tenure.

Venezuela endorses the statement made earlier by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is firmly
committed to combating terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, no matter who engages in it and
for whatever reason. In that context, we reiterate our
categorical condemnation of the commission of acts of
terrorism, given their negative impact on international
peace and security and on human rights.

Venezuela has been at the vanguard of efforts to
counter that terrible scourge, as demonstrated by the
countless treaties and conventions that our country
has adhered to as well as the many successful policies
adopted by our Government.

Venezuela has approved a series of influential legal
instruments that establish measures to control, prevent
and oversee efforts to combat the financing of terrorism
and money laundering. In May 2012 the Organic
Law against Organized Crime and the Financing of
Terrorism was enacted. Its objective is to prevent,
investigate, prosecute, criminalize and punish crimes
related to organized crime, with a particular emphasis
on the financing terrorism.

Venezuela has joined all the initiatives taken
within the context of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations and international treaties
and agreements, that important political instrument
recognizes that efforts to counter that serious scourge
is the primary responsibility of Member States. The
Strategy likewise states that combating terrorism
should be undertaken in the context of cooperation
and governed by existing international and regional
instruments and the norms of international law, human
rights and international humanitarian law. Venezuela
endorses such a holistic approach.

Terrorism takes on many forms and manifestations,
with State terrorism being among the most
reprehensible. In that regard, it should be underscored
that all States must strictly and unflaggingly comply
with the international responsibilities they assume.
Terrorism is practiced not only by non-State actors
behind the scenes, but also by States who act in the full
light of day. Some imperial Powers are engaged in State
terrorism, and they justify doing so with arguments
related to national security. State terrorism should be
condemned because it is contrary to the principle of
the sovereign equality of all nations, denies the rule
of international law and is a mass violation of human
rights.

The Palestinian case reveals the double standard
of some countries in their so-called efforts to
combat terrorism. Israel's military aggression as an
occupying Power deprives the Palestinian people of
their lives, their land, their freedom, their history,
their identity and, most important, their dignity. The
blockade, the acts of aggression and military threats
against Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip and the
construction of settlements in the West Bank by the
occupying Power are contrary not only to international
law and resolutions adopted by the United Nations, but
they are also a concrete expression of State terrorism.
The Security Council's silence and inaction in the face
of such practices are deplorable.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy calls upon States to discourage groups from
engaging in terrorism, to deny terrorists the means to
carry out their activities, to urge them not to support
terrorist groups and to respect human rights within
the context of combating terrorism. Consistent with
the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the plan of
action annexed to General Assembly resolution 60/288,
entitled "The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy", the Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela reiterates its request filed with the
Government of the United States for the extradition of the
well-known terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, for his direct
responsibility in planning the bombing ofthe Cubana de
Aviacion aircraft in October 1976. As will be recalled,
that terrorist attack resulted in the deaths of 73 Cuban
citizens, most of them athletes who had participated
in a competition in the territory of Venezuela. The
request for extradition by the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela Government has been repeatedly supported
by the Non-Aligned Movement, as noted in paragraph
380 of the final document (NAM. 2012/Doc.l/Rev.2) of
the sixteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, from 26 to
31 August 2012.

Venezuela also emphasizes the importance of
paragraph 382 of that document, in which Non-Aligned
Movement leaders reject the protection provided
by United States authorities to Raul Diaz Pefia, Jose'
Antonio Colina and German Rodolfo Valera, all
Venezuelan citizens who have been accused, and
indeed convicted, of terrorist acts in Venezuela against
the diplomatic headquarters of Colombia and Spain
in 2003. That conduct violates current international
instruments and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly relating to measures to
eliminate terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

In General Assembly resolution 60/288, of
8 September 2006, and Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), of 28 September 2001, among others,
States express their commitment to fully cooperate in
combating this scourge with a view to locating, denying
refuge to and bringing to justice through extradition
and trial any person who is involved in the execution,
financing or planning of acts of terrorism or offering
refuge to such persons.

Allow me to conclude by saying that there is a need
to act with transparency in combating terrorism, with a
view to to maintaining international peace and security.

