Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): First and
foremost, my delegation would like to welcome you,
Madam President, to New York and to say how pleased
we are to see you preside over the Council's meeting
today in such a charming manner. We commend you
and your delegation for the convening of this important
meeting on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. We also
view this meeting as an extension of the very useful
thematic debate in the Council that your delegation
cleverly initiated on the item entitled "No exit without
strategy". Hence, we find this meeting very relevant,
appropriate and timely.

We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and update on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau.

We wish to warmly welcome Mr. Faustino Fudut
Imbali, Vice-Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau, to this
meeting and to thank him most sincerely for his
important statement. The Council's continued
engagement in the situation in Guinea-Bissau is
pertinent given the efforts of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to put in place democratic reforms and
to rebuild the country following years of civil strife.

My delegation notes that for quite some time
now, particularly following the successful holding of
both the legislative and presidential elections in
Guinea-Bissau, the Council has viewed Guinea-Bissau
as a test case, so to speak, of how a post-conflict
situation could be handled, and handled successfully,
by the parties concerned, with the support of the
international community. However, the disturbing
events of last week clearly underline that the Security
Council must continue to monitor closely the fragile
democracy that is still taking root in that impoverished
West African nation.

It has been especially worrying that members of
the former military junta have continued to resist
taking concrete actions to honour previous
commitments to withdraw from the political process
and to accept the authority of the democratically
elected institutions. Their continued interference and
maintenance of a high public profile more than nine
months after the inauguration of the new President is
simply unacceptable.

The chaotic situation last week following General
Mane's rebellion is regrettable, and the irresponsible
act only served to plunge the democratic institutions,
still in their infancy, into political turmoil. Although
General Mane is still at large, we are nevertheless
hopeful that the Government and the people of Guinea-
Bissau can quickly put the episode behind them and
focus fully on enhanced efforts for national
reconciliation, the consolidation of peace and the
rebuilding of the country.

Many had considered Mr. Yala's victory a vote
for change, one that would complete the process
towards the return of civil rule in that country. If
democratization is to be fully consolidated, all those
concerned must work together to strengthen democratic
values, protect the rule of law, depoliticize the army
and safeguard human rights.

We cannot underestimate the continued
importance of the role that the international community
could play to support the Government of Guinea-
Bissau in the consolidation of the progress achieved
thus far, and in this regard we commend sincerely, as
others have done, the key roles of both the Economic
Community of West African States and the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries during the
transitional process. In addition, the ability of this
Organization to fulfil its critical facilitation role in
Guinea-Bissau is also very dependent on the continued
and additional support of the international community.

We note in particular that the Government's
administration continues to be severely hampered by
the lack of resources and expertise available, on top of
the already poor infrastructure. In this regard, we call
on the donor community, including the international
financial institutions, to do its utmost for Guinea-
Bissau. Endemic poverty remains the single most
debilitating social and economic problem threatening
the full evolution of democracy and the consolidation
of constitutional order. The massive return of refugees
and internally displaced persons into the country has
also placed considerable demands on the country's
social services. In this regard, the upcoming round
table scheduled for February 2001 in Geneva will be an
important development for Guinea-Bissau.

We firmly believe that the success of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is particularly crucial to the continuing peace process
and the well-being of the country. Likewise, the
Government's priority of restructuring the armed forces
as part of the democratization process must be
supported. Any factors that might lead to instability
and backsliding to the chaotic conditions of the past
must be averted at all costs.

We wish to reiterate the continued relevance of
the regional dimension to Guinea-Bissau's successful
rehabilitation. Lasting security and stability in the
subregion depend to a large extent on peaceful
cooperation between neighbours. In this regard,
Malaysia encourages and welcomes the continued close
cooperation between Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, as
well as other States members of the Economic
Community of West African States in the subregion.
Border tensions must be curbed and the parties should
be encouraged to find means of de-escalating tensions
and to discuss cooperative strategies to secure the
common border.

In conclusion, Malaysia wishes to pay a tribute to
Representative Nana-Sinkam, the staff of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau and the whole United Nations country team for
their tireless and commendable contributions to the
peace-building efforts of the Government and people of
Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, Malaysia fully supports the draft
presidential statement on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau that is before us.

