Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his briefing. China welcomes the presence and
statement of Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia. China listened carefully to the
statement of Ms. Vlora Citaku.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands Serbia's legitimate
concerns on the question of Kosovo. Resolution 1244
(1999) constitutes an important legal basis for a
solution to the question of Kosovo. A proper solution,
acceptable to the parties concerned, must be reached
through dialogue and negotiations, pursuant to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and within the framework of relevant Security
Council resolutions.
China appreciates the rigorous efforts undertaken
by the Government of Serbia in seeking a political
solution to the Kosovo question. We hope that both sides
will continue with their high-level political dialogue,
seek a lasting solution to the question of Kosovo and
strive to maintain peace and security in the Balkans
and the entire European region.

The current security situation in Kosovo is generally
stable, but it faces a number of complex and uncertain
factors. The parties concerned must effectively protect
the legitimate rights of all ethnic communities of
Kosovo, promote ethnic reconciliation, persevere
in efforts to solve differences through dialogue and
avoid taking any action that may further complicate
the situation.

China appreciates the work undertaken by UNMIK
under the leadership of Special Representative Tanin.
We support UNMIK's continued implementation of
Security Council mandates. We hope that UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force will enhance their coordination
and play an active and constructive role for a proper
solution to the Kosovo question.

