Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like first of all
to point out that my delegation aligns itself fully with
the statement to be made later on behalf of the
presidency of the European Union.

Germany endorses the excellent report of the
Secretary-General and the recommendations contained
therein. We would like to thank the Secretary-General,
as well as the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Mr. Egeland, for their efforts.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
remains extremely important to the international
community. However, while we used to be concerned
about civilian casualties as collateral damage in
traditional warfare, our focus must now change. Armed
conflicts in the twenty-first century are characterized
by targeted attacks against civilians, forced
displacement, sexual violence and indiscriminate
killings. The battlefields of today are to be found in
cities and villages. Combatants terrorize the civilian
population. Internal strife, civil war and terrorist
attacks bring untold hardship to the civilian population.

As a member of the Security Council in 2003 and
2004, Germany repeatedly called for a new resolution
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Complex crises, such as those in Darfur, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and elsewhere,
tragically demonstrate the need to fill the gaps in our
current system for protecting civilians. We therefore
wholeheartedly welcome the new draft text, and we
appreciate the United Kingdom's efforts to reinforce
and refocus our discussion of this matter.

We appreciate in particular that the draft
resolution recalls in no uncertain terms the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilian populations
from war crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. It is also clear, however, that
the international community has an obligation to help,
through all means available under the Charter, in
rendering such protection effective. Germany therefore
strongly supports the inclusion of a reference in the
text to that important concept, as recently outlined in
the Summit Outcome document.

One of the tools that the international community
has at its disposal is the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The ICC can deter perpetrators and hold them
responsible. It is important that the international
community make use of the ICC as an effective
instrument for the protection of civilian populations.

We welcome the fact that several countries have,
over the past five years, adopted policies or legislation
concerning internal displacement, and we call upon
them to now implement that legislation. At the same
time, the United Nations must do its utmost to ensure
that civilians are fully protected. In that regard,
Germany commends the United Nations for
incorporating the protection of vulnerable groups into
its peacekeeping missions.

In order to provide the best protection for
civilians in armed conflict, a holistic approach is
needed. Humanitarian relief, as well as development
strategies, can ease the suffering of many people. In
post-conflict periods, the United Nations must focus on
capacity-building for administrative functions at the
national, regional and local levels; the reintroduction
of the rule of law and a functioning justice system; the
training of potential candidates for police functions;
the provision of quick-impact employment measures in
cooperation with the private sector; and the rebuilding
of infrastructure in order to reach the people in need.

The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
will allow the United Nations to better pursue that
approach. However, post-conflict peacebuilding cannot
be achieved by the United Nations alone; regional
organizations and countries neighbouring the affected
areas should also be involved.

The need to protect civilians in today's conflicts,
and the difficulties that we are facing in that
endeavour, constitute one of the many challenges of
our time. In order to meet those challenges and address
new threats, we must reform the current system. The
adoption of the new draft resolution on civilians in
armed conflict will be an important step towards the
achievement of that goal.

