Mr. Skau (Sweden): Iwould like to begin by thanking
Bolivia for putting mine action on the Council's agenda
today. I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Alexander Zuev for his useful briefing and,
especially, Ms. Nathalie Ochoa Nifio for her passionate
and inspiring statement this morning.

The terrible legacy of landmines and explosive
remnants of war in the communities where they are
found cannot be overstated. Families returning from the
displacement caused by conflict find that the land that
once sustained them has now turned against them. The
presence of landmines undermines returnees' ability to
grow and harvest crops for food or sale, undermining
health and livelihoods, and holds an even worse threat,
that of death or injury.

In the 20 years since the Ottawa Convention was
drawn up, impressive progress has been made in
the fight to end the use of landmines. It is a positive
development that casualties from landmines have fallen
in the past few years, in a reflection of the almost total
elimination of the use of anti-personnel mines, thanks
to the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention, as well
as progress in efforts to make previously mined areas
safe for use. However, that work is far from finished.
The number of casualties of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) has risen sharply, a development that
is largely attributable to the use of IEDs in conflict
and post-conflict areas, particularly by non-State
actors. Every effort must be made to mitigate the threat
that IEDs pose to individuals and communities. We
welcome the ongoing work within the framework of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons and its
Amended Protocol 11 that is designed to enable us to
share experiences regarding the humanitarian problems
posed by IEDs and to learn about national, regional and
international efforts to prevent their use.

Sweden fully shares the concerns that have been
expressed about the serious humanitarian problems
caused by landmines and explosive remnants of war
in post-conflict areas. We must step up our efforts
to minimize the occurrence, effects and risks of this
threat. Children are particularly vulnerable. The
landmark Graca Machel report (A/51/306), which led
ultimately to the United Nations mandate on children
in armed conflict, noted that landmines represent an
insidious and persistent danger to children. Children,
who are naturally curious, are likely to pick up strange
objects and, deplorably, some landmines have even
been designed to be toy-like. Children are also far
more likely than adults to die from mine injuries.
Their needs should therefore always be at the forefront
when mine-awareness and physical-rehabilitation
programmes are being designed.

The task of clearing the explosive remnants of war
is often dangerous and painfully slow, but the effects
of humanitarian mine clearance on communities can
be transformative, as we heard this morning from
Ms. Ochoa Nifio. It is therefore important to ensure
that support for mine action, including through funding
and expertise, is maintained. Sweden has contributed
more than $100 million to mine action worldwide over
the past decade. In addition to financing, technical
assistance is also an important aspect of mine action.
Sweden's Civil Contingencies Agency is a partner
of UNMAS and the International Committee of the
Red Cross and conducts humanitarian mine action
worldwide. Through UNMAS, for example, we recently
supported mine-action activities in Somalia aimed at
minimizing the impact of explosive hazards, building
national explosive management capacity and enabling
the African Union Mission in Somalia to fulfil its
mandate with greater safety and freedom of movement.

More broadly, Sweden believes in an approach
to disarmament and international security that puts
human beings at the centre of our policy. Sweden is a
State party to all conventions relevant to the banning
or regulation of the use of non-controllable mines,
anti-personnel landmines, cluster munitions and the
handling of explosive remnants of war. We believe that
continuing to work to universalize those conventions is
the most effective way to counter the risks associated
with the use of such weapons.

In conclusion, a commitment to international
frameworks, as well as well-resourced and effective
mine-action programmes, will not only save lives but
will also enable those who have survived the ravages of
war to begin rebuilding their lives.

