Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): At the outset, we
wish to join other speakers in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the Security
Council presidency this month. We also thank you for
convening this important debate.

We agree with most speakers that triangular
cooperation remains key to the success ofpeacekeeping
operations. Anything short of that will bring failure, as
we will have failed to cooperate on an important task.
We also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, the Force Commander of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and Ms. Alexandra Novosseloff for
their very useful briefings.

First of all, allow me to recall that the Security
Council adopted resolution 1353 (2001), which
set out a statement of principles underlining that
consultations between the Council, the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries should enhance the
ability of the Security Council to take appropriate,
effective and timely decisions in fulfilling mandates
and responsibilities. This means that peacekeeping
is a partnership. All partners must make efforts
towards better coherence and efficiency. Without that
cooperation among those three pillars of peacekeeping,
we are all bound to fail.

From what we see, there are those who establish
a mandate and those who implement it. This kind of
approach to peacekeeping operations is damaging their
effectiveness. It is hurting the authority and credibility
of the principal organ dealing with peace and security,
which is the Council, and it is hindering the tools it
creates to mitigate some of the most complex crises in
the world.

In that regard, all partners need to be on the same
page on issues affecting peacekeeping operations. As
most speakers have mentioned, sustained, meaningful
consultations with troop-contributing countries at all
levels and stages of planning and decision-making
processes are critical to the success of any United
Nations peacekeeping operation. This means that
the Security Council cannot work on these issues in
isolation from the implementers of its resolutions and
mandates.

What we are seeing is that United Nations
responses to conflicts have become very complicated

due to the political and social dynamics surrounding
conflicts across the world. The bottom line for
the accomplishment of a successful peacekeeping
intervention requires a high level of cooperation,
coordination and coherence. In a situation where
cooperation, coordination and coherence are weak,
strategic outcomes become much harder to accomplish.
This means that triangular partnership allows a
common understanding of the situation, which informs
the development of peacekeeping mandates.

Once again, resolution 1353 (2001), among other
documents regarding triangular cooperation, stresses
the need for the Secretariat to be given sufficient human
and financial resources to fulfil its peacekeeping tasks.
It is unfortunate that, recently, financial resources have
been diminishing to the detriment of peacekeepers and
at the expense of contributing countries. This reaffirms
the need for structured cooperation that will address
existing gaps between mandated tasks and resources
with a view to having mandates that are achievable.

Strengthening triangular cooperation is to the
benefit of the Council, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries. Accordingly, I would like to
make the following points.

There should be regular meaningful consultations
between the Council, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries. Meetings should be informal in
the sense that they promote a frank, transparent and
constructive dialogue. Such meetings should be held in
a format that allows the discussion of both operational
and political matters and in a manner that will facilitate
informed political decisions based on the reality on the
ground. This kind of regular and informal meetings
should be convened with a spirit and sense of common
concern among all peacekeeping stakeholders. In the
end, that should enable them to arrive at a common
foresight on how to best implement specific tasks as
they are presented in a specific peacekeeping mandate.

