Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for having organized this open debate on children and
armed conflict, taking into account the ongoing efforts
in the campaign to end child recruitment by the end of
2016, launched yesterday with the participation of our
delegation.

Issues related to protection of the rights of children
constitute a major priority for the Government of
the Sudan, as evidenced by a number of efforts and
achievements by the Government. To give a few
examles only, first, concerning its international
commitments, my country has ratified the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. It has also ratified International Labour
Organization Organization (ILO) Convention No. 138,
on the minimum age for admission to employment and
work, and IL0 Convention No. 182, on the worst forms
of child labour.

Secondly, at the national level, the laws governing
the armed forces, police and security services
categorically prohibit the recruitment of children under
the age of 18 in their ranks. My country has established
an integrated system of justice and corrections for
minors, including the 2010 law on child protection, and
the creation of a competent prosecutor's office to that
end.

Thirdly, with respect to child protection
mechanisms, the Government has established units for
the protection of children and and the family within
the military forces and the Ministry of the Interior.
It has also established a national council for children
and appointed a prosecutor for crimes perpetrated in
Darfur in order to investigate all allegations since the
onset ofthe conflict in 2003, particularly claims related
to violations of the rights of children. The Government
has also established a fact-finding committee on the
abduction and recruitment of children in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. In July 2013, it launched
a lO-year comprehensive national plan to promote
human rights in the Sudan.

Fourthly, with respect to the engagement with the
relevant United Nations bodies, through its Permanent
Mission to the United Nations, the Government of
the Sudan has remained in constant contact with the
Office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, with a view to
addressing all child-related concerns.

The Government of the Sudan is also making
ongoing efforts to improve the situation of children.
In that regard, over the past few weeks, the Sudanese
national child-care council has set up a national
coordinating task force on children in emergency
situations, including all the relevant actors and bodies
working on this important question. One of the most
important mandates of the task force is to ensure child
protection, deal with cases of children in emergency
situations and coordinate with UNICEF and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Similarly, in June 2013, the national child-
care council organized a symposium on local cultures
focused on protecting children, including when it
comes to recruitment. The symposium was aimed at the
following objectives.

The first aim was to enhance awareness of
international principles and standards on the protection
of children; bring into play the role of the media with
regard to local cultures that favour the recruitment of
children, as well as underscore the role of civil society
and scientific institutions in this connection; and prepare
the launch of an information campaign to promote the
goals of the symposium, which will be coordinated
with the UNICEF office in Khartoum. The campaign
will send outreach messages with the participation of
the local community leadership and women's groups.
Work is under way with various relevant agencies for
the completion of the action plan on children and armed
conflict.

Given the policies that I have mentioned and the
practical steps we have taken in that regard, we call
for removing the Sudan from the list of countries
annexed to the annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict.

My delegation would like to draw attention to the
following points that need to be taken into account if
we want the debate on children and armed conflict to
be inclusive comprehensive.

First, Governments suffering from conflict must
be assisted in their efforts to end them, by persuading
and compelling armed rebel groups to put down their
arms and turn to negotiation as a means to settle their
differences.

Secondly, the root causes of the presence of
children in the military must be addressed, alongside
the root causes of conflicts, by eradicating poverty,
dealing with the impacts of climate change, lifting
the unfair unilateral economic sanctions imposed on
certain States, including the Sudan, and cancelling the
debts of developing countries and proving them with
technical support and capacity-bulding , particularly in
the areas of education and post-conflict reconstruction.

Thirdly, the fact that rebel movements are
signing on to action plans to end child recruitment is
not enough. Such measures must be backed up with
condemnation of the behaviour of rebel groups, which
must also be forced to lay down their arms and pursue
negotiations. Fourthly, Governments must take part in
any efforts relating to the issue of children in conflict,
transparently and on a basis of national sovereignty.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to continuing to cooperate with all United
Nations bodies dealing with children, and calls for
the Secretary-General's reports to include correct and
verifiable information based on objective and impartial
sources, about which Governments must be consulted
before that information is incorporated into official
reports.

