Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I deliver this statement on behalf of the three African members of the Security Council: the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia. We would like to extend a special and warm welcome to His Majesty King Philippe, King of the Belgians, and Queen Mathilde, who have graced us with their presence today. We would like to pay tribute to the sterling work that they have done in the area of children and armed conflict. I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome and thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador Smail Chergui; and Ms. Becker, Chair of the Advisory Board of the non-governmental network Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, for their insightful briefings this morning. We would also like to welcome the presence of the Deputy Ministers in the Chamber. We welcome the development of the practical guidance for mediators to better protect children in situations of armed conflict, and commend the Kingdom of Belgium for convening this meeting and for the important work it is doing in its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We believe that the protection of children should be addressed at all levels, including in preventive diplomacy, the mediation of peace processes and with regard to peacekeeping as an important part of the mandate of the protection of civilians. It is imperative that all concerned parties ensure that the protection, rights and well-being of children are integrated into peace processes, peace agreements and post conflict- recovery and reconstruction phases. That realization on the part of warring parties and mediators can be instrumental in fostering dialogue, building confidence among parties and assisting in bringing immediate and long-term benefits to children. We believe that ending and preventing conflict-related violations against children in armed conflict is not only a moral imperative, but that it also contributes to building sustainable peace. We would like to underscore the important role played by local communities in the integration of children who have been affected one way or another by armed conflict. Communities remain the first point of contact for those children and therefore play a critical role in contributing to and paving the way for a better future for them. In that regard, it is imperative for such communities to be equipped with the requisite resources to ensure that all aspects, including child protection, counselling and skills to handle such cases, are made possible. We have observed that not all resolutions regarding the issue include the perspectives of parents and their role as primary caregivers. In that regard, we, as the Security Council, should consider including the concept of the role of parents in the outcomes of the Council in the future. We believe that the development of integration programmes for children who are affected by armed conflict should take into account the perspectives of the children themselves. It is within that context that national and local programmes should not disregard the experiences and voices of children; instead, those should be used to design and develop suitable programmes for affected children. We recognize that in addressing grave violations against children in armed conflict, general approaches are often applied. It is imperative that Member Statesalso take into account country-specific situations, which may require tailored measures to address the issues. The three African members of the Council are pleased with the efforts of the AU and subregional groups in advocating for increased focus on issues related to children and armed conflict and prioritizing the implementation of relevant continental protocols and charters. The inclusion of the protection of children against grave violations in political and peace agreements, such as in the case of the Central African Republic, is a significant development. Its implementation should demonstrate the benefits of such initiatives and will also serve as a model to be replicated in other conflict situations. As we continue to strengthen our efforts to silence the guns in Africa, we acknowledge that achieving Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want, a prosperous Africa and a better life for African children will not be possible if wars and conflicts are not brought to an end and if the rights of the child are not protected. We welcome the call for regional organizations to increase their capacity to address the multiple challenges brought about by the issues of children and armed conflict. We will continue to support all efforts throughout the conflict spectrum to address the plight of children, who are the most vulnerable in such situations. The three African members of the Council would like to conclude with a quotation by former President Nelson Mandela, who said: "Our children are our greatest treasure. They are our future. Those who abuse them tear at the fabric of our society and weaken our nation." That is true for all nations, because protecting the rights of children secures a better future for them. Every effort should be made at the national, regional and international levels to prevent and resolve conflicts through peaceful negotiations and mediation in order to secure our children's future. The three African members of the Council welcome and support the presidential statement presented by Belgium (S/PRST/2020/3).
