China congratulates Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of November. We welcome the initiative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to convene today's meeting. We also welcome Prime Minister Gonsalves, who is presiding over today's meeting. I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed; Ambassador Akram, President of the Economic and Social Council; Mr. Mayaki, Chief Executive Officer of the African Union Development Agency; and Sir Hilary Beckles, Vice-Chancellor of the University of the West Indies, for their briefings. Humankind will always expect peace and tranquillity but conflicts and insecurity persist. Since the dawn of the twenty-first century, from the attacks on 11 September 2001 to the global economic and financial crisis to the new coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, humankind has repeatedly endured the impact of global challenges and is now at another important historic juncture. When confronted with myriad conflicts and security risks, identifying their drivers and adopting targeted measures will contribute to the effective maintenance of international peace and stability and ensure security and tranquillity for people in all countries. We must fully acknowledge that development is the key to solving all problems. Increasing investment in development and eliminating the deficit are paramount in conflict prevention and are the most cost-effective in peace efforts. Today, there are considerable obstacles to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the North-South divide may further widen. The international community should address development issues with a heightened sense of urgency and promote the comprehensive, rigorous and balanced implementation of the 2030 Agenda. We should focus on poverty eradication and prevent a major reversal of the gains achieved in global poverty reduction. The prevention and control of COVID-19 remain the top priority for the international community. We must remain committed to prioritizing people and life, through the coordination efforts of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, by implementing international joint prevention and control measures and accelerating vaccine research and development and the production and distribution of vaccines. The States Members of the United Nations should implement resolution 2532 (2020) and actively respond to the challenge posed by the pandemic to international peace and security. Ultimately, climate change is a development issue. We must continue to uphold the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and build a fair and reasonable global climate governance system that facilitates win-win cooperation. During the general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, President Xi Jinping announced that China would endeavour to achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2030 and carbon neutrality by 2060 (see A/75/PV.4). This demonstrates China's resolve and responsible posture in addressing climate change. We hope that all countries, including all members of the Security Council, in particular the developed countries, will take concrete steps to jointly promote the implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. For post-conflict countries, building a solid foundation for sustainable development is key. If development remains at a standstill for too long after a conflict has ended, it will be challenging to truly build peace. The international community should support post-conflict countries in strengthening Government authority, improving governance capabilities, building social consensus and following a development path suitable for their national contexts. We must fully acknowledge that strengthening collective security is essential for achieving our own security. In today's world, security issues are increasingly interlinked, transnational and diverse. Given the complex and interconnected nature of international security challenges, no country can act in isolation or be preoccupied with the use of force. Embracing the concept of collective, common and general security is the right choice. Disputes and differences in State-to-State relations are inevitable. The key is being committed to solving problems through dialogue and consultation. No country can benefit from the difficulties faced by other countries or create stability from turmoil elsewhere. The peaceful settlement of disputes is a cardinal principle enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and constitutes the right way for countries to engage with one another. We must oppose the relentless penchant for or threat of force in international relations. We must reject the Cold War mentality and exclusive cliques. We must be alert to any attempt to provoke confrontation among groups of countries or start another Cold War. Relentless militarism only exacerbates the security dilemma and advanced weapons cannot guarantee absolute security. The countries with the largest nuclear arsenals have an obligation to shoulder their special high-priority responsibility in nuclear disarmament. The recent terrorist attacks have again demonstrated that terrorism remains a latent threat and global counter-terrorism cooperation must be strengthened, not weakened. We must be resolute in combating acts of terrorism perpetrated whenever, wherever and by whomever. At the same time, We should not link terrorism to any specific country, ethnicity or religion or practice double standards on counter- terrorism issues. We must adopt deradicalization measures to curb the threat of extremist ideology and eliminate the breeding grounds for terrorism. Cybersecurity risks are a new challenge to all countries. There is an urgent need to strengthen communication and coordination at the international level to jointly formulate countermeasures. No country can abuse the notion of national security to restrict routine information and communication technology development and cooperation. China recently launched the Global Initiative on Data Security to build a peaceful, safe, open, cooperative and orderly cyberspace. The international community should operate on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, strengthen dialogue and cooperation and make cyberspace a driver for economic and social development, international peace and stability and human welfare. We must fully recognize that solidarity and cooperation are the most powerful weapons for meeting all challenges. We live in an interconnected global village. The close ties that bind our countries together dictate that humankind shares a common destiny. We must appreciate our converging interests, develop a sense of community with a shared future for humankind, move beyond factions and zero-sum thinking, build a world that is akin to a large family and strive for win-win cooperation. Global threats and challenges call for robust global responses. The role of the United Nations must be strengthened and multilateralism preserved. China believes that all countries, large or small, have equal rights, equal opportunities and equal rules. All countries should uphold the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter, safeguard the international system, with the United Nations at its core, and maintain international order based on international law. The Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and other bodies should fulfil their respective mandates and complement each other. The United Nations should strengthen its cooperation with regional and subregional organizations and form synergies so as to jointly address the risks of conflict and instability. Major Powers have a special responsibility for the maintenance of international stability and the permanent members of the Security Council should lead by example. Atthis critical time, as the world faces major risks and challenges, the Security Council should remain united and avoid division. In particular, large countries should play their part and take the lead in promoting international solidarity and cooperation, providing global public goods and helping to cope with global challenges. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. Secretary-General Guterres has called for a global ceasefire before the end of the year. It is impossible to achieve peace simply by waiting for it; we need to take concrete action. At this critical juncture, the States Members of the United Nations should recommit to lasting peace and security for all and embark on a new journey to a better common future.
