Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We appreciate today's
update by Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and
his committed efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
situation globally and in the Middle East and Africa,
in particular. My delegation would like to make the
following observations.

With regard to Yemen, an escalation of the military
offensive has resulted in a further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Yemen, leading to food
shortages, rising food and fuel prices, disruption
to agricultural production and other catastrophic
consequences. Nearly 19 million people or more
than two-thirds of the population need humanitarian
assistance and protection. It is obvious that action
must be launched so that lifesaving humanitarian
programmes can alleviate the gravity of the crisis. To
that end, the commercial air service to Sana'a should
be resumed, together with strong control over imported
goods, in accordance with resolution 2216 (2015)
to facilitate the rapid delivery of medicine, food and
other necessities.

The deterioration of the humanitarian situation
can be mitigated only by ending the violence through a
cessation ofhostilities and an inclusive political process
as solutions for durable peace. We urge all parties to
ensure the unhindered movement of commercial and
humanitarian supplies, without which millions of human
beings are at risk of famine and death. All parties in
conflict must come to the negotiating table to facilitate
timely, full and unimpeded humanitarian access.

With regard to Somalia, we express great
concern about the humanitarian situation and urge
the international community to respond with urgent
action to help families and individuals recover from the
drought. We must, at all costs, avoid a humanitarian
tragedy right now so that Somalia does not experience
a situation similar to that of 201 1. When the famine was
declared at that time, half of those who needed help had
already died. At this stage, it is crucial to strengthen the
security sector through well-planned reform, whereby
the international community could assist the new
Government in fighting terrorist organizations.

On South Sudan, we express deep concern that
famine was declared in February in parts of that
country. Hunger and malnutrition, which have reached
critical levels, could be aggravated further by the
summer months if not addressed urgently with timely
action. In that regard, we commend Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien for being vocal with officials in
Juba about the dire humanitarian situation in the
country. It is clear that the present crisis is also a direct
consequence of the conflict and the obstruction of
humanitarian access. Kazakhstan underscores the need
for a cessation of hostilities in South Sudan in order
to end the suffering of the South Sudanese people.
We call on the Government of South Sudan to provide
access for humanitarian agencies to those parts of the
country that were seriously affected by famine, given
the fact that hundreds of thousands of people in South
Sudan will starve unless relief workers gain access to
populations in need.

