The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Fiji, India, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Norway, Peru, the Republic of Korea and
Venezuela in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/434, which contains the text of a
letter dated 6 July 2005 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
It is my particular pleasure to acknowledge the
presence of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
who, as we all know, attaches great importance to the
subject of today's debate.

Allow me to open the debate by making a
statement in my national capacity.

Since the early 19905, of all the challenges that
can affect peace and stability in today's globalized
world, humanitarian crises have been those that have
captured most of our minds and souls. We cannot forget
Somalia, Rwanda or the Balkans, to cite just three.

Those crises, beyond being a threat to stability and
peace, are the source of a lot of despair and suffering to
human beings around the globe and thus a direct and
powerful challenge to our collective consciousness - a
challenge to the set of values and principles the United
Nations is based upon. They are also a challenge to our
ability to act in a coherent and effective manner, first to
prevent, secondly to settle, and thirdly to heal the
wounds in the post-conflict phase.

Today's discussion takes place in the midst of the
reform of the United Nations, in which efforts are
being made towards more effective international
action. I hope that it will be a substantial contribution
in that direction.

The Security Council has witnessed the
expansion of issues brought before it as threats to
international peace and security. In some of those
cases, the Security Council has taken action to avert a
major humanitarian crisis; in some others, it has not.

The early prevention of humanitarian crises has
become a political and moral imperative for the
Security Council. The United Nations should
strengthen its capacity to move from reaction to
prevention of crises before they reach critical mass.

The duty and responsibility for the protection of
civilian populations rests, of course, primarily with the
States concerned. However, in cases of extreme
violations and atrocities against human beings, the
international community has an obligation to the
victims of such violence. The United Nations, and
particularly the Security Council, must take effective
action to alleviate the suffering of civilians and to avert
the occurrence of a humanitarian disaster.

In recent years, the Council has tried hard to meet
that challenge, guided by the new comprehensive
concept of human security. That concept engulfs issues
such as human rights, the protection of civilians -
particularly women and children - in armed conflicts,
internally displaced persons and refugees, and
combating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

The Secretary-General, in his report "In larger
freedom", has pointed out that

"A war-weary population infused with new hope
after the signing of a peace agreement quickly
reverts to despair when, instead of seeing tangible
progress towards a Government under the rule of
law, it sees war lords and gang leaders take power
and become laws unto themselves." (A/59/2005, para. 130)

We fully share that view, and we note with satisfaction
that recent United Nations peace operations integrate,
among other things, elements of good governance, the
rule of law, election monitoring, and respect for human
rights.

To prevent the re-emergence of humanitarian
suffering itself and the potential recurrence of the
conflict, in our view the following three key fields of
post-conflict security have to be adequately addressed:
the promotion of the rule of law; the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants; and
security sector reform.

The planning and incorporation of rule of law
components in peace operations are an extremely
sensitive and complex task. They require the
involvement of various actors, both international and
national. Of great importance in that respect is
legislative and justice system reform incorporating
international human rights and criminal law standards,
the enforcement of domestic law, the monitoring of
elections, and so on. The transition to a just, human
and democratic order cannot be achieved unless
impunity comes to an end. The role of the International
Criminal Court in advancing the principles of
international justice and national reconciliation is of
vital importance, as recently reaffirmed by the decision
of the Security Council to recognize its jurisdiction in
the Darfur crisis.

The importance of the disarmament and
demobilization process in peacebuilding has been
rightly emphasized in previous discussions before the
Security Council. The reintegration of ex-combatants
into civilian life should be given special attention,
since, without it, lasting peace cannot be achieved.

Security sector reform is the third important area
in achieving long-term stability, complementing the
previous two areas of action. Security sector reform,
despite its importance, seems to have gained little
attention in Security Council resolutions. It is
important, I think, that our future actions focus on that
key area, as well as on its operational complementarity
to the other two areas.

Last but not least, let us remember that, to ensure
the success of any measure adopted, the maximum
consent of local societies to the international
community's efforts is of paramount importance, even
if not always easy to acquire.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that effective
post-conflict peacebuilding requires the full
incorporation and support of humanitarian components
in peace agreements and peace operations. Those three
areas are critical to ensuring and enhancing both
conflict prevention and conflict resolution, as well as
for the implementation of any peace agreement and its
sustainability.

We believe that the prevention of future
humanitarian crises requires the timely consideration
of the aforementioned issues and the concerted action
of the Security Council, other United Nations agencies,
and regional bodies, as well as the cooperation of the
Member States.

The effective and timely response of the Security
Council to the challenges posed by humanitarian crises
is of critical importance. I think that our peoples and
international public opinion will settle for nothing less
than success.

I once again welcome the presence of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan at this meeting and invite him to
take the floor.


