Mr. Roet (Israel): In just the last two weeks we
have witnessed outrageous acts of terror around
the world. Terror is terror and should be condemned
loudly wherever it happens and whoever the victims
are. I would like to express my sincere condolences
and deepest sympathy to the French Republic and to
the French people in the wake of the horrific attacks
on Paris, the City of Light, this past weekend. Israel
understands the pain and devastation of terrorism first
hand. We know the people of France are strong and
resilient. They should know that the people and the
State of Israel stand by them in friendship and solidarity
at all times, and especially at these difficult moments.

The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)
marks a new era of unprecedented global partnership
to combat the greatest global challenge, namely, the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions.
However, as events in Syria, Beirut, the Sinai and Iraq
make painfully clear, such noble goals will remain
beyond reach unless the challenges of national and
international peace and security are met head on.

The growing interdependence of security and
development is evident from the conditions of instability
and underdevelopment across the globe today. Countries
in situations ofprolonged conflict suffer from decreased
economic productivity, dramatically increased levels
of poverty and declining health outcomes. Without the
stability of enduring peace, the promise of sustainable
development will remain unfulfilled. Moreover, due to
the increasingly brutal nature of some ofthose conflicts,
it has become ever more difficult for the international
community to support the peacebuilding initiatives and
institutions so desperately needed.

The rules of the game have changed, but the
international community has yet to respond adequately
to the new reality. We must develop up-to-date
mechanisms that will enable us to help the victims of
conflict in the short-term, and to improve the conflict
prevention capacities of those States in the long-term.
Unless the community of nations takes action, the
decline of political institutions and civil society in war-
torn States will undermine the possibility of future
development for generations to come. Only an inclusive
approach, in which all stakeholders collaborate to
address the challenges, can succeed.

Stability and security are key to unlocking the
full potential of developing States. However, without a
comprehensive commitment to the goal of an inclusive
society, the benefits of peace and the promise of
sustainable development will remain elusive.

In the twenty-first century, no nation can prosper
if it neglects the building blocks of progress, namely,
accountable institutions, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and the empowerment of women. That
lesson is particularly relevant for many in Israel's
region of the world, the Middle East. The disintegration
of nation States and national borders that we have
witnessed did not happen over night, nor where they
uncontrollable. It is a direct result of decades of
neglect, corrupt leadership and mistaken priorities in
our region. Throughout these lost years, some in the
international community stood silent, turning a blind
eye to dangerous ideologies and at times collaborating
with leaders responsible for harming their own people.

When children are indoctrinated instead of
educated, it breeds fundamentalism. When women
are segregated from the rest of society, instead of
being integrated into decision-making positions,
important voices of moderation are being silenced.
When leaders ignore desperate cries for more freedom
and more opportunity, the result is a people without
hope and a future without progress. When dangerous
fundamentalist ideologies masquerade as legitimate
religious views and are exported throughout the world,
it leads to terror. And when we go out of our way to
find ajustification for some acts of terror, we lose our
moral compass.

The only sure path to both security and development
is the promotion of free and open societies. However,
we must not take that easy way out. We must not allow
the failure to achieve developmental success become an
excuse for violence, and we must not delude ourselves
that the root causes of conflict are limited to weak
institutions and slow economic growth.

Over the past two months, hundreds of innocent
Israeli men, women, and children have been brutally
stabbed in the streets, intentionally run over at bus
stops and deliberately shot at on their way to work - all
for the crime of being Jews living in Israel. In many
meetings in the Security Council, we have heard about
the root causes of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and much blame has been placed on Israel for lack
of progress, all the while downplaying, and at times
ignoring, Palestinian reluctance to negotiate, as well as
Palestinian terror and incitement. The wave of terror
that Israel faces is not about lack of development. It is
about the culture of hatred that pervades Palestinian
educational institutions and the Palestinian media
and incitement by Palestinian leaders. While each
conflict is different, no discussion of the root causes
of terror anywhere in the word can be complete unless
it addresses the dehumanization of the other, which all
too often lies at its heart.

The road to a peaceful, prosperous and secure planet

is long and winding but well worth the journey. Let us
commit to work together in the spirit of friendship and
in the name of humankind to make that dream a reality.

