Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Sima Samar, of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for their informative briefings today. They have given
us useful insights into the situation in Afghanistan
today and how the international community might
assist the Afghan people. We are working with the
other members of the Council to prepare a new draft
resolution extending the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which
we expect to adopt next week.
As the Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2017/189) makes clear, there is little good news
coming from Afghanistan. Civilian casualties are at a
record high, an alarming trend that has continued since
2013. Some 30,000 people have now died in the course
of the conflict. Nearly 1,000 children were killed
in 2016 alone. That is an appalling waste of life and
potential for Afghanistan's future. The numbers are
particularly tragic because human resources and human
development must be the foundation of Afghanistan's
future economic development and self-reliance. This
year will continue to present grave challenges for
security in Afghanistan. The Council has already issued
four press statements condemning terrorist attacks.
While there are many initiatives and ongoing efforts
regarding security in Afghanistan, what we need most
are concrete results that counter the negative trends we
are seeing.

We should continue to insist on seeing progress
made with Afghanistan's anti-corruption and reform
agenda, while also exploring mid-term and long-term
engagement that can strengthen the country's basis
for socioeconomic development. Employment is key.
Japan's approach in that regard is not as visible as the
various regional cooperation projects highlighted in the
related documents on Afghanistan. We believe that the
emphasis should be on strengthening the resilience of
society. That includes supporting core industries such
as agriculture through market rehabilitation and access,
and backing the Government's comprehensive national
agricultural development priority programme, which
will help to increase employment.

We must address the imminent security threats.
We appreciated the outcome of the NATO Warsaw
Summit last year and its steady implementation. The
Resolute Support Mission's role is essential. Regional
cooperation also contributes to security, and we ask
UNAMA to coordinate the various efforts for maximum
impact. Improving capacity and human resources in
the security sector is especially important. Afghanistan
requires a combination of short-term efforts and
mid-to-long-term engagement. Japan would like to
once again emphasize the importance of a results-
based approach that goes beyond mere commitments.
Only actual implementation and outcomes will bring
hope to the Afghan people, through fewer casualties,
higher employment, more training and more land for
better agricultural production.

As the lead country in the Council on this dossier,
Japan will strive to create greater opportunities for
better understanding the actual situation on the ground
and how the Council can do a better job of supporting
concrete improvements in security and development.
We hope that will link to reinvigorated discussion in
New York and a better future for Afghanistan.

