Mr. Moriko (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the African members of the Security Council: South
Africa, Equatorial Guinea and C6te d'Ivoire.

The three African members of the Council
welcome Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Central Africa (MINUSCA), and thank
him for his briefing on the sociopolitical, security and
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic
and on the activities of MINUSCA. Our thanks also go
to Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, and Mr. Stefano Tomat, Director
for Integrated Approach for Security and Peace of the
European Union External Action Service.

The three African members of the Council welcome
the tangible progress made by the Central African
authorities in the implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation, signed on
6 February between the Central African Government
and armed groups, including the operationalization
of several mechanisms for its implementation and
monitoring the agreement. The fulfilment of this
essential requirement for the gradual restoration of State
authority throughout the national territory, as well as
for the provision of basic social services and improved
living conditions for the population, constitutes a
genuine source of hope for the return of lasting peace,
security and stability in the Central African Republic.

While welcoming the constructive engagement of
the signatories, in particular President Faustin-Archange
Touadera and his Government, the three African
members of the Council welcome the decisive support
of the agreement's guarantors and facilitators, the
African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS). We also acknowledge
the important role played by the United Nations through
MINUSCA and the support of bilateral and multilateral
partners, without which the encouraging progress we
have seen so far would not have been possible.
Despite this progress, the Central African Republic
is still facing numerous challenges, particularly
Violence against civilians and clashes between armed
groups that are signatories to the peace agreement for
control over natural resources. The events that took
place in Paoua on 21 May and in Birao on 1 September
are a clear example of this. Moreover, the feeling of
mistrust surrounding the peace agreement, particularly
among the political opposition, is a source of concern in
the light of preparations for the presidential, legislative
and local elections scheduled for 2020 and 2021. These
elections are crucial and indispensable in achieving
peace and political stability in the country.

Furthermore, there is an urgent need to strengthen
the protection of civilians, find appropriate responses
to humanitarian challenges and strengthen peace and
development initiatives, with a particular focus on the
major projects currently being implemented. These
include support for the process of restoring State
authority through joint security operations conducted by
MINUSCA and the Forces armees centrafricaines and
the operationalization of special mixed security units
with a View to protecting civilians, which is urgently
required. We welcome the launch of activities in Bouar
on 16 October in that regard. The implementation of
the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme for ex-combatants and reform
of the security sector also require special attention.

The three African members of the Council believe
that all stakeholders must work together to make up for
the delays in implementing some of the key political
and security provisions of the peace agreement. In this
respect, we welcome the meeting ofthe signatories ofthe
peace agreement held in Bangui on 23 and 24 August,
in the presence of the guarantors and facilitators,
notably the African Union and MINUSCA, in order
to take stock of progress made and develop common
approaches to overcome the challenges to implementing
the agreement.

Local peace and reconciliation initiatives across
the country that support the peace agreement should
also be commended and encouraged. Supporting these
initiatives with the appropriate means will contribute
to creating and maintaining an environment conducive
to reconciliation and lasting peace. To this end, the
three African members of the Council encourage the
involvement of civil society, particularly women and
youth, in accordance with the report of the Secretary-
General contained in document S/2019/822. We hope that
the outcome of the consultations among the population
launched in June will lead to the establishment of an
effective truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation
commission that responds to the needs of victims of the
violence, in the spirit of the peace agreement.

The unwavering commitment of the international
community to the security dimension will undoubtedly
contribute to the stabilization of the situation on the
ground. Resolution 2488 (2019), which we welcome
and support, reflects that commitment perfectly. It
authorizes the casing of the arms embargo on the Central
African Government, thereby enabling it to acquire the
resources necessary to accelerate the restoration of
State authority throughout the national territory. The
three African members of the Council therefore intend
to play an active role in the implementation of the
resolution and the mechanisms to resolve the conflict in
order to accompany the Central African people on their
quest for peace and stability. We take this opportunity
to recall that the support of the countries of the region
is essential. That is why we welcome the fact that the
Central African authorities have relaunched the bilateral
commissions with Chad, Cameroon, the Congo and the
Sudan, with a view to addressing cross-border issues.

Preserving the gains made in the context of the
peace agreement depends without a doubt on the
successful holding of the upcoming elections in 2020
and 2021 in a peaceful social climate. All Central
African sociopolitical actors must contribute to creating
that atmosphere.

MINUSCA's contribution to peace efforts in the
Central African Republic should be commended, but
it must continue to play its full part in this endeavour
and utilize the range of tools at its disposal. In this
regard, the three African members of the Council
share the recommendations contained in the report of
the Secretary-General on the scope of MINUSCA's
electoral support mandate. We hope that this issue will
be taken into account when MINUSCA'S mandate is
renewed next month.

In conclusion, South Africa, Equatorial Guinea and
C6te d'Ivoire call once again on subregional, regional
and international organizations, particularly ECCAS,
the African Union and the United Nations, as well as
partners of the Central African Republic, to maintain
their support for the country so that it can return to peace
and stability. We reiterate our support for MINUSCA
and the efforts of President Faustin-Archange Touadera,
whose commitment and leadership will undoubtedly
contribute to the return of lasting peace and stability in
the Central African Republic.
