Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would
like to thank you in particular, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. I also
want to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings today.

Transnational organized crime is a scourge
everywhere, but West Africa and the Sahel region are
plagued by a particularly insidious version. Criminal
networks corrupt societies that face pressing
developmental challenges in a region emerging from
years of conflict. The Security Council must address
the situation using a holistic approach, in tandem with
the African Union, subregional organizations and other
actors. Governments in West Africa and the Sahel
region have made significant efforts to fight organized
crime through the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the West Africa Coast
Initiative and numerous other bilateral and subregional
partnerships.
However, the dangers continue to grow. West
Africa and the Sahel region face increasingly complex
and sophisticated criminal activities, including
terrorism, the embezzlement of public funds and the
illicit trafficking of drugs, arms, oil, people and
counterfeit goods, which threaten regional stability by
inflaming conflicts and undermining development.

Drug trafficking remains a principal threat. As we
have heard, according to the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the United Nations Office
for West Africa and reports provided to the Security
Council, drug trafficking is increasingly intertwined
with other forms of trafficking in the region. The
United States continues to support the West Africa
Coast Initiative through UNODC in order to address
border and corruption issues in an area of the world
where an estimated $1 billion in cocaine is trafficked
annually, a number more than twice the gross domestic
product of many West African nations.

Criminals that conduct kidnap-for-ransom
operations have substantially supported terrorist
networks in the Sahel region. Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb has demonstrated its ability to carry out
criminal activities and attacks against soft targets
across significant distances.

Illicit arms trafficking is another serious aspect of
transnational crime in West Africa and the Sahel
region. Poorly secured stockpiles of conventional
weapons and ordnance are a potential source for arms
smugglers in the region. In October 2011, the United
States completed a project in Guinea-Bissau that
destroyed over 80 metric tons of obsolete military
ordnance at the request of the host nation. We
encourage States to assist, where possible,
Governments in North and West Africa to destroy
surplus, obsolete or poorly secured weapons and
ammunition stockpiles.

The Libyan crisis has introduced a new set of
cross-border challenges. We remain concerned about
the risk of weapons, including man-portable air defence
systems, or MANPADS, moving across borders. As
Secretary of State Clinton announced in Tripoli last
October, the United States is providing $40 million to
assist Libya in securing and recovering its weapons
stockpiles. So far, we have scoured over 1,500 bunkers
and have helped to identify, recover and secure
approximately five thousand MANPADS and
components.

We appreciate the financial and technical
assistance provided, including by the United Kingdom,
Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, France and Italy.
We support the work of the United Nations Sanctions
Committee panel of experts with respect to the
assessment of MANPADS and other proliferation
threats, and we encourage States that have exported
MANPADS to Libya in the past to share information
with the Libyan authorities to assist them in accounting
for unsecured missiles.

Finally, we note with appreciation the decision by
this presidency to hold a separate meeting on piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea, since piracy and armed robbery at
sea also increasingly threaten the peace, security and
stability of West Africa and the Sahel. We look forward
to the discussion on this topic on 27 February.

