Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Spanish delegation
for organizing today's important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the President ofthe General
Assembly for his briefing and to commend Ambassador
Gaspar Martins of Angola for his leadership in his
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

Brazil has long advocated that the Security Council
should be more transparent, more accessible to the
other Member States of the United Nations and more
accountable to the broader membership on whose behalf
it acts. The Council should carry out its work in an open
and public manner as often as possible. In line with the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, Brazil has
also been calling for countries with a special interest in
a substantive matter under consideration by the Council
to have their views fully taken into account and to be
allowed to participate in its consultations. That applies
particularly to those countries on the Council's agenda,
but also to troop- and police-contributing countries. We
understand that this is an important topic that should

addressed as the review process for peacekeeping
operations and special political missions progresses.

In the context of discussions on the review, the
consultations among the Security Council, the troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat
should become more institutionalized. In this regard,
the positive experience of the Group of Friends of Haiti
could be replicated. This body should also consider
new ways to improve the participation of regional
and subregional organizations in its decision-making
process. We have also long advocated that the Security
Council should spend more of its time and effort on
prevention. In this context, allow me to welcome once
again the strong emphasis given by the High-level
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, chaired
by President Jose Ramos-Horta, to the primacy of
politics and to preventive diplomacy, and underline the
importance of translating the Panel's recommendations
into concrete strategies.

There is wide recognition that voting in the
Security Council should be carried out in ways that
favour our Charter responsibilities with respect to
collective security. There are currently two initiatives
under discussion by member States that touch upon
this issue - one by France and the other by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group. We welcome the French proposal on the veto,
as that initiative reflects the widespread perception
that the Council has not been able to adequately fulfil
its Charter responsibilities in certain particularly
problematic situations. The ACT code of conduct also
points to the necessity and urgency of updating the
working methods of the Council. The code can be seen
as a constructive contribution to the debate on voting
patterns to the extent that it highlights the fact that the
international community's response to mass atrocities
should not lie at the sole discretion of permanent
members. We believe, however, that such a code should
also address certain other aspects relating to prevention
and accountability.

The twenty-first century provides us with abundant
and tragic evidence that the resort to military force
more often than not increases civilian suffering and
vulnerability. Therefore, it would have been important
for ACT's code to emphasize two notions in particular.
The first is that military action is a measure of last
resort that can take place only in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and after a judicious
analysis of its possible consequences. The second is
that decisions authorizing the use of force should rely
on enhanced procedures for monitoring and assessing
their implementation in order to ensure compliance
with the original mandate and with international law.

Apart from the United Nations membership, many
civil society actors are expressing a strong interest in
the process of selecting the next Secretary-General.
Important initiatives outside the United Nations - such
as, the "l for 7 Billion" campaign and a proposal by
the group known as The Elders - have been launched,
calling for more transparency and inclusiveness in
the selection process. This is a topic closely related to
the working methods of this organ and, in particular,
to its relationship with the General Assembly. Brazil
supports a more active role for the General Assembly
in nominating the Secretary-General, in accordance
with article 97 of the Charter and in line with our
commitment to democratic and transparent procedural
practices.

Regarding the relationship between the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies, closer
cooperation is needed not only with the General
Assembly - particularly concerning the issue of
Security Council encroachment on the Assembly's
prerogatives - but also with the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Brazil believes that the Council should make better use
of the advisory function of the PBC. As I can testify
from my own experience, there is scope for additional
value added to the Council's deliberations when Chairs
of PBC configurations are invited to informally meet
Council members, before a situation they follow closely
is up for consideration.

One of the most easily implemented recommendations
of the Advisory Group of Experts for the 2015 Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture, contained in its
report "The challenges of sustaining peace", is for the
Security Council to regularly request and draw upon the
advisory, early-warning and preventive roles that the
PBC can play to enrich the peacebuilding dimensions
of mandates. We take this opportunity to encourage all
Member States, not least the members of the Council,
to fully engage in the intergovernmental phase of the
peacebuilding architecture review, which was recently
launched by the two co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia.

When discussing the working methods ofthe Security
Council, one cannot help but note that the permanent
five (P-5) have a significant edge in mastering the
procedures and legal intricacies of the Council's work.
The so-called penholders for resolutions are almost
invariably permanent members. To a great extent, this
happens because newly elected members, for obvious
reasons, take some time to adjust to the complexity ofthe
Security Council's working methods. However, under
improved working methods, non-permanent members
should not only take part in the negotiations from the
early stages of the process onwards, but also take on
greater drafting responsibilities. The contribution of
non-permanent members can be of great relevance to
overcoming impasses. Let us not forget that one of the
most constructive initiatives regarding the situation
in Syria, which led to the adoption of resolution 2139
(2014) on humanitarian access to the country, was
conducted by three non-permanent members. Let us
also recall that resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, came about through the persistence
of elected members, under the leadership of Namibia,
15 years ago.

It is difficult to see how we will be able to
significantly improve the working methods of this
organ without tackling the need to expand it. In the
view of a majority of United Nations Member States,
the best way to enhance the Council's dynamics with
a view to ensuring that its decisions become more
effective and legitimate is through the creation of
new permanent and non-permanent seats. That would
allow for countries committed to a more transparent,
efficient, accessible and accountable Security Council
to acquire the expertise and ability required to help
modernize the Council from within. The improvement
of the working methods of the Security Council will
depend to a great extent on a comprehensive reform that
brings the Council closer to the contemporary world.
That is why the working methods cluster is one of the
five key interrelated issues of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform, as established
by General Assembly decision 62/557.

In conclusion, in the same vein as the intervention
made by my colleague from Sierra Leone, I would
like to stress that the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations and the current session of the General
Assembly represent an invaluable opportunity to
achieve a concrete outcome regarding this long overdue
task of Security Council reform.

