Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Aware of the danger that the mere existence of weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons, poses
to all humankind, Cuba remains firmly in favour
of their prohibition and elimination. For Cuba, the
prohibition and total elimination of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons is the only way to ensure their
non-proliferation and to prevent them from falling into
the hands of terrorists or from being used by accident
or mistake.

Cuba does not possess or intends to possess any
weapons ofmass destruction ofany kind, and possessing
them has never formed part of our national defence
strategy. In Cuba, all programmes related to the nuclear,
chemical and biological fields have always been strictly
peaceful in nature and their benefits have been used
solely for the welfare of the Cuban people and their
socioeconomic development. All such programmes are
continually and rigorously monitored by the relevant
national authorities and subject to supervision by the
competent international entities.

Cuba rejects the selective focus and double
standards that some countries attempt to impose
in addressing issues related to disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control and their connection
to the threat of terrorism. This focus promotes measures
against horizontal proliferation while ignoring vertical
proliferation - that is, the improvement of nuclear
weapons by States that possess nuclear weapons.
It also ignores the goal of the total elimination of
weapons of mass destruction. For its part, Cuba has
an impeccable record in the fight against terrorism
and has never allowed, and never will allow, terrorist
acts against any country to be conducted, planned or
financed on Cuban territory. Cuba is a party to 16 ofthe
existing international conventions on terrorism and has
complied strictly with its obligations under resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and other
related Security Council resolutions.

We reiterate our absolute rejection of all terrorist
actions, methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations by anybody, against anybody and
wherever they are committed, whatever their motives
may be, including those actions in which States are
directly or indirectly involved. We also condemn any
action aimed at encouraging, supporting, financing or
concealing any terrorist actions, methods or practices.

We believe that the international community
should not accept that, under the banner of an alleged
fight against terrorism, certain States commit acts of
aggression and interfere in the internal affairs of other
States, execute or permit gross violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law or commit
unilateral actions that are contrary to the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles and norms of
international law.

We vehemently reject the arbitrary and
unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba on the annual list of
the State Department of the United States on so-called
State sponsors of international terrorism, which was
issued on 30 April. That absurd designation reflects
the manipulation of the highly sensitive issue of
international terrorism to make it an instrument of the
policy against Cuba. We demand that our country be
permanently excluded from that spurious, unilateral
and illegitimate list, which violates the principles of
international law, is an offense to the Cuban people and
discredits the United States Government.

International cooperation by all States in the
framework of the United Nations and the relevant
international treaties is the way to deal with the use of
weapons ofmass destruction by terrorists. In particular,
the General Assembly, as the most democratic
and representative organ of the Organization, is
the appropriate body to comprehensively address
that threat, without double standards and with true
international cooperation in that area on the basis of
mutual respect, sovereign equality and the principles
and norms of international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations.

We reiterate the position of the Cuban Government
against weapons of mass destruction and with regard
to the prevention and confrontation of international
terrorism. As a demonstration of our Government's
commitment to that issue, Cuba will soon submit to the
Security Council a new compliance report on resolution
1540 (2004).

I conclude by urging all delegations to actively
celebrate the International Day for the Total Elimination
of Nuclear Weapons on 26 September.

