Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to express our gratitude
to President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative briefings and for the
comprehensive and exhaustive report on the work of
the International Residual Mechanism of the Criminal
Tribunals. We also thank the Permanent Representative
of Peru, Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, for continuing to
chair the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals in a transparent, efficient and dynamic
manner, as well as the Office of Legal Affairs.

Before delving into the issue at hand, and given
that it will be the last time we receive a report from
Mr. Theodor Meron in his capacity as President of
the Mechanism, we would like to commend and
acknowledge him for the leadership, effectiveness
and professionalism with which he has helmed the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals from 2012 to date, and for his ongoing
commitment to fighting for accountability by ensuring
that justice is served for the victims of the worst crimes
against humanity.

We once again have a valuable opportunity to
assess the work of one of the international criminal
justice institutions created by the Security Council to
uphold accountability and combat impunity, which are
essential elements for effective conflict prevention. In
that regard, we would like to make three observations
relating to judicial activities, the regulatory framework
and cooperation with States.

First, as was to be expected following the closure
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in 2017 and that of Rwanda in 2015, the
International Residual Mechanism has become a fully
autonomous body. In the light of the challenges facing
it, such as the increase in the volume of its judicial
work, access to confidential information, requests for
sentence reviews, allegations of contempt of court and
the considerable reduction of its budget by the General
Assembly in December 2017, the Mechanism has proved
to be an entity capable of effectively discharging the
mandate conferred upon it by the Security Council in
resolution 1966 (2010). We note that during the reporting
period, the Mechanism handled a challenging workload
that led to the issuance of 244 decisions and orders,
continuity in the ongoing case Prosecutor v. Jovica
Stanisic' and Fran/co Simatovic', appeals proceedings in
the case Prosecutor v. KaradZic' and the case Prosecutor
v. Ratko Mladic', referral and pre-trial proceedings
in the case Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al.
and a series of other judicial matters, including orders
pertaining to sentence reviews, access to confidential
information and allegations of contempt of court, as
indicated in the report. We welcome and commend
all such endeavours and encourage the Mechanism to
resolutely continue its noble work.

Secondly, Equatorial Guinea welcomes the
Mechanism's continued efforts to improve the
harmonized rules, procedures and policies that guide
its work. In that regard, we have taken note of the
President's review of several draft policies, including
the review of the Practice Direction on the Procedure
for the Determination of Applications for Pardon,
Commutation of Sentence and Early Release of Persons
Convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the Mechanism, in response
to the concerns raised by some States, including our
own, regarding the early-release regime. We hope
that tangible measures, such as consultations with
judges and conditions for early release, will be the
genuine result of admitting to and showing remorse
for committing heinous crimes. In that regard, while
we deem it relevant to take account of the views of the
Governments concerned and those of associations of
victims and survivors, we also welcome the adoption
and recent entry into force of the Rules Governing
the Detention of Persons Awaiting Trial or Appeal
before the Mechanism or Otherwise Detained on the
Authority of the Mechanism, which is clear evidence
of the fact that the Mechanism is continuing to work
to improve its effectiveness and streamline its internal
working methods.

We recognize that there is gender parity among
the technical staff, although there are still no women
in the Mechanism's leadership positions. For that
reason, we want to encourage States first to strengthen
their cooperation with the Mechanism and the States
concerned on the arrest and surrender of fugitives at
large; secondly, to accept the relocation of people who
have been acquitted and released to their countries;
and thirdly, to cooperate in enforcing sentences. In that
regard, we commend Mali, Benin, Senegal, Austria,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy,
Norway, Poland and Sweden for accepting prisoners
in their countries. With regard to this last issue, we
believe that in addition to such cooperation, in order
to truly strengthen accountability and an international
order based on the rule of law, and so that the
Mechanism can fulfil its mandate, we must continue
to build the capacity of the national institutions of the
countries concerned. That has been done in the Great
Lakes region, East Africa and the former Yugoslavia,
ensuring not only support for the principles of
complementarity and national ownership of post-
conflict accountability, but also the referral of cases
to more appropriate judicial bodies that can potentially
lessen the Mechanism's workload.

My Government commends the Mechanism's
efforts to implement the recommendations of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services and the progress it has
made in managing its own archives and those ofthe two
Tribunals, including preserving and ensuring access
to them. We nevertheless believe that the Mechanism,
specifically the Office of the Prosecutor, continues to
face a major challenge in the apprehension of fugitives.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea affirms its firm
commitment to strengthening the rule of law and
promoting justice by supporting the Mechanism in
every aspect of its work as an instrument of the Security
Council for administering justice and ending impunity,
thereby achieving the international peace and security
we desire. As President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Justice Meron can
take satisfaction in a job well done.

