Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2319 (2016) by
the Council, which extends the mandate of the Joint
Investigate Mechanism by an additional year. We
pay tribute to the professionalism shown by those
responsible for the Mechanism.

On many occasions we have reiterated the

importance ofmaintaining a high level ofobjectivity and
neutrality in order to hold accountable those responsible
for the alleged use of chemical weapons against
innocent civilians in Syria. It is important to determine
the facts concerning the perpetrators who have carried
out such crimes in recent years. Our commitment to
that path arises from the concern felt in Egypt and other
countries in the Middle East regarding the increase in
the capabilities of terrorists and non-State actors with
foreign support with respect to the manufacture and
use of chemical weapons. We are especially concerned
about those actors who have not been identified by
the Council within the framework of terrorist groups
working in Syria despite their well-known terrorist
background and records of odious crimes committed
against innocent Syrian people. In that framework, we
hope to strengthen the role of the Security Council and
the Joint Investigative Mechanism.

With respect to the fight against non-State actors
who take part in activities related to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, the Security Council must be in a
position to determine how those activities are carried
out in order to halt the activities of such groups and
prevent their participation in future chemical weapons-
related activities. The implementation of resolution
2319 (2016) regarding Da'esh, Jabhat al-Nusrah and
other terrorist groups, in the context of the issue of
chemical weapons in Syria, can be considered an
essential development within the framework of the
mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism.

We hope that the unity showed by the Council
in adopting resolution 2319 (2016) can serve as a
new impetus to resolve the crisis in Syria in all of its
aspects - military, political and humanitarian.

The meeting rose at 9.30pm.
