Mr. Bin Mubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month and to wish the United
States delegation every success. We also thank you for
this opportunity to address the Council.

On this sad day for the friendly American people,
we express our condolences to the American people and
Government, as well as to the families of the victims of
11 September 2001 terrorist attack.

We would also like to commend the representative
of the United Kingdom, Ambassador Karen Pierce, for
her wise stewardship of the Council's work last month.

The delegation of Yemen went to the Geneva
consultations in good faith on the date and place
indicated, bringing with it the pain and hope of the
Yemeni people for concrete progress that would reflect
positively on their lives. At the invitation extended to
us by Mr. Martin Griffiths to attend the consultations,
His Excellency President Hadi Mansour was personally
committed to ensuring that they were successful. He
was in constant coordination with our team and with
the Yemeni people with a view to reviving hopes for
achieving the long-awaited peace.

The Government of Yemen has demonstrated and
will continue to demonstrate its full support for the
Special Envoy. We commend his efforts to ensure the
progress of the peace process and his sincere attempts
to bring together the Government's delegation with
the party involved in the coup d'etat after more than
two years. We will be involved in all efforts aimed at
reviving peace, restoring the State and putting an end
to the coup d'etat.

The Security Council has overseen that process with
great care and attention. On the eve of the negotiations,
the Council issued a press statement (SC/13484) in
which it reiterated its call for the full implementation
of its resolutions and statements, including resolution
2216 (2015). The Council also called on the parties to
take advantage of this opportunity to ease tensions and
participate fully, constructively and in good faith to
build confidence and take the first step towards putting
an end to the conflict, which has caused so much
suffering for the Yemeni people.

The Houthis, on their side and with their well-
known irresponsibility, did not attend to the talks. In
fact, with a great deal of arrogance they exploited the
interest and efforts of the international community to
achieve peace in Yemen and avoid a military solution.
That militia has an erroneous interpretation of some
reports issued by certain international organizations.

I recall our letter to the Council dated 24 August,
just a few days before the start of those negotiations,
regarding the meeting of the Head of the coup delegation
with Hassan Nasrallah. We said that this would have
a negative impact on the consultations and would
demonstrate the extent to which the Houthis are linked
to Iran and its proxies in the region. In fact, they are
trying to establish an Iranian model in Yemen, which
the Yemeni people and its leadership will never accept.

Before its delegation went to Geneva, the
Government of my country underscored that it was
necessary to prioritize confidence-building measures
agreed upon during the Biel peace negotiations in 2015.
Emphasis needed to be placed on the humanitarian
aspects, including the release ofprisoners and hostages,
and on ensuring access to humanitarian aid without
interference or obstacles. It was necessary to focus
on measures that would strengthen the capacity of the
Yemeni Central Bank in order to ease the suffering
of the people and resume the payment of salaries. In
fact, the Government made efforts and worked with the
Office of the Special Envoy on all those points.

The Houthis have tried to impose preconditions to
their participation at all stages of peace negotiations.
They have tried to undermine the efforts of the
Special Envoy by creating obstacles, in spite of all
the flexibility and logistical support provided by the
Office of the Special Envoy, as well as the coalition
to restore legitimacy in Yemen. The coalition showed
maximum restraint. In spite of that, missiles continue
to be launched against populated Yemeni cities and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

It is regrettable that certain words are used to justify
that kind of behaviour, which represents an evident
challenge to the international community. Failure to
describe what is happening accurately in Yemen will not
help to resolve that crisis. What is happening, in fact,
is not a dispute between parties to a conflict, as some
have described, but a coup against a constitutionally
legitimate Government elected by an overwhelming
majority of Yemenis after a comprehensive political
settlement followed by national dialogue. It is a coup
d'etat conducted by an ideological armed group that
has nothing but arrogance and disdain for Yemenis and
believes that it has a God-given right to govern. From
the very first day of the coup d'etat, that group has
tried not only to overthrow the Government and even
the whole State, but to undermine the very foundation
of our country and change its national characteristics.
It has been implementing ideology-driven sectarian
programmes to change the common denominator that
unites Yemenis and to destroy their social fabric and
national pillars.

On behalf of my country's Government and the
suffering mothers, children and the injured, and in the
name of those who have been killed and the prisoners
and detainees, I reiterate my call on the United Nations
and the Security Council to assume direct responsibility
and to implement their resolutions. It is essential to force
that coup group to respect the will of the Yemeni people
and the international community in order to achieve a
lasting peace based on the three terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the national dialogue and
the resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

This month marks the anniversary of the
26 September revolution, which the Yemenis supported
in order to put an end to the sectarianism that dominated
the country during the ruling of former imams. That
rebel group is trying to revive the past, but I can assure
members of the Council that this will never happen
because we believe in the September and October
revolutions and are ready to defend them, along with
their ultimate goals that were written with the blood of
Yemeni people.

Before concluding, I want to show those present
a picture, which I believe to be more eloquent than
a thousand words. The picture is of Abdel-Rahman
Akram Atran, a 10-year old Yemeni child, who died
two days ago after he was shot in the head. While he
was playing, his football touched the leg of a Houthi
leader by mistake. That Houthi leader simply took out
his pistol and shot the child in the head. The incident
happened in the city of Ibb in Yemen. The child is the
son of a professor at Sana'a University. How long will
the suffering continue to be inflicted on the children
and women by the coup group, which defies the whole
world and tries to impose the law of the jungle?

