Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I congratulate
you, Mr. President - Ramlan - and your team for
everything you have done in the successful month of
August. I think we have done a lot under your leadership.
We have reacted to a lot going on in the world, and so
I am glad that you have found time for this wrap-up
session. I will keep my remarks short and focused on
a couple of issues, as, you Sir, suggested in the helpful
concept note.

First, with regard to conflict prevention and,
secondly, the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, the link between
the two issues is transparency. I therefore very much
agree with what Gerard just said about that and, indeed,
with his other point about the flow of information from
the Secretariat. Just to take one example of conflict
prevention where we have failed as a Council, I would
mentin Syria. I thought we had a good meeting yesterday
on chemical weapons in Syria. But when we look at
the five-year history of the conflict, the Council has
failed to have any real impact on politically resolving
the conflict, and still less in preventing it in the first
place. A lot of the effort to try to do that has to take
place, inevitably, in private, but there are risks when we
do too much in private. Again, I very much agree with
what Gerard was saying about confidentiality about
things that need to remain confidential - but equally,
I think some things can be more transparent. I think we
would benefit from more confidentiality on some issues
and more transparency on others. Trying to hide the
scale and nature of the Syrian conflict from the wider
world is not something that benefits conflict prevention
or the search for peace.

If we take the situation in Aleppo as the most
extreme example, where the suffering of the Syrian
people is at its most extreme, it is a telling example
of a reality that, however bad we think it might be,
can always get worse. Our job here is to try to shine a
spotlight publicly on the situation there in order to try
to bring pressure to bear to encourage those responsible
for the situation to reform their ways and to bring peace
where there is currently war and tragedy and suffering.
Shedding light on issues on our agenda is therefore
extremely important, and is the flip side of the coin of
being confidential where we need to be confidential.

I am not talking about shedding light on an issue in
order to shock or horrify people, or to still less to score
political points. What is mean is that by focusing on a
deteriorating situation, we should show the world that
we are watching and that there is at least something
that we can do to try to prevent a bad situation from
getting even worse. If we do all of that in private, then
we are giving a free pass to those who are trying to
prosecute the savage, mindless war - by which I mean
the Syrian regime against its own people. Transparency
is therefore an important part of our toolkit when it
comes to trying to do a betterjob at conflict prevention
and conflict resolution.

The second, completely different, issue that I want
to focus on where there is the same tension between
confidentiality and transparency is the selection
process for the next Secretary-General. We have now
held three straw polls. Unsurprisingly, the full results
were available on Twitter within a few minutes of the
polling. I think that we are getting the worst of both
worlds. What we should be aiming for is confidentiality
as it relates to the candidates. Anything that we talk
to them about in the privacy of the Security Council
should remain absolutely confidential.

But then there are some other issues, including
the results, where I feel as though we could afford
to be much more transparent without damaging the
candidates' dignity in any way. I would favour having
another look at what we do with the results of the straw
polls, while trying to be more transparent and building
up the relationship between the Security Council and
the General Assembly in the meantime. To refuse to
go in that direction reminds me of the English King
Canute, who tried to hold back the incoming tide.
We are not going to do so; we will just look foolish
by trying to keep those results private. I would be in
favour of more confidentiality on some issues but much
more transparency on others in order to maximize the
impact of our work.

