Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Special Representative Zerrougui for her very comprehensive and relevant briefing at a time when we are preparing to renew the mandate of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I also thank Ms. Zerrougui for her tireless efforts to implement the important mandate entrusted to her in the service of the Congolese people. I would also like to welcome the presence of the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United Nations, our friend and colleague Paul Empole, here among us at the Security Council today. Since Belgium is a multicultural country, like South Africa moreover, I will deliver my statement in English today. (spoke in English) I will make three points. First of all, Belgium welcomes the joint strategy of the Secretary-General and the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the progressive and phased drawdown. Its vision needs to be adequately integrated into MONUSCO's new mandate. We strongly support the proposal for the protection of civilians to remain at the core of the Mission. That requires a comprehensive approach, well beyond military operations, including civil society engagement, community reconciliation and continued monitoring and reporting on human rights issues. Such an approach also includes the further stabilization of State institutions through an increased focus on security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. As such, MONUSCO's new mandate should fully reflect President Tshilombo Tshisekedi's new priorities in that regard, and the gradual reconfiguration is beginning to unfold in the Kasais and in Tanganyika. We cannot stress the importance of the benchmarks enough. The desired end state, not an end date, should determine the drawdown. My second point, which is related, is that I want to emphasize the intrinsic link among peace, security, development and human rights, as the joint strategy does. A sustainable transition is viable only if the root causes of conflict and humanitarian challenges are addressed within the framework of the so-called triple humanitarian-development-peace nexus. That requires true partnership between the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities and the international community. The success of our joint efforts to ensure the capacity of the country's authorities to ensure that end state is key. The European Union's backing of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in its determination to continue the security, defence and justice reforms is but one example. Belgium and its European partners welcome even greater involvement by the international financial institutions, not only in the context of peacebuilding but also in terms of their sharing of expertise in terms of governance and transparency. Belgium will also play its role bilaterally. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has remained, since 1960, the largest bilateral beneficiary of Belgium's public development assistance. If the conditions are right, a new bilateral governmental development cooperation programme could be negotiated with our Congolese partners starting in 2021. The nexus requires also a shared vision, reflected in clear benchmarks. Belgium therefore welcomes the Democratic Republic of the Congo's leadership in the transition process and encourages further progress. The quicker joint benchmarks are elaborated, the sooner new partnerships in terms of capacity-building might be concluded. Moreover, adequate Democratic Republic of the Congo absorption capacity and governance remain absolutely key. The nexus will also require full commitment to the One United Nations approach. A clear delineation between the future roles and competencies of MONUSCO and the United Nations country team in the transition process should therefore be sought. That is a process that we could already initiate now. In that regard, I also want to underline the autonomy of the United Nations country team when it benefits from core funding. Belgium is proud to support the United Nations development agencies, funds and programmes mostly through multi-year core funding, as commended in a recent Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development peer review of Belgium's development policy by the Development Assistance Committee. We are particularly interested in the potential synergy of the United Nations Development Programme with the MONUSCO drawdown strategy. Finally, I would like to underscore once more the importance of the regional context. Many of the problems that MONUSCO is dealing with are regional in nature. Those include the presence of foreign proxies on Democratic Republic of the Congo soil, the illegal exploitation of, and trafficking in, natural resources and several humanitarian problems. It is encouraging that the new United Nations Great Lakes region strategy prioritizes preventive diplomacy initiatives, including, when necessary, joint action between the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The action plan for the implementation of the strategy will need to consider relevant aspects of the MONUSCO review processes to ensure unity of purpose and alignment of action by the United Nations in the region.
