Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Mr. President, since this
is the first time my delegation has taken the floor to
address the Council under your presidency, I would like
to congratulate you on your leadership of the Council
this month and to pledge our full cooperation. I would
also like to acknowledge the role of your predecessor in
leading the Council last month. I would be remiss ifI
did not thank you and the members of the Council for
giving me the opportunity to address the Council on
this issue of vital importance to my country.

First and foremost, I would also like to take
this opportunity, on behalf of my Government, to
welcome the appointment of Mr. David Shearer by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as his next Special
Representative for South Sudan and Head of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
I would like to assure him of the full cooperation of
my Government in his endeavours for the entire time
that he will be leading UNMISS in South Sudan. In
addition, we highly appreciate the positive role played
by the former Special Representative for South Sudan
and Head of UNMISS, Ms. Ellen Margrethe Laj, and
we want to tell her that she ran a good race during her
tenure with UNMISS in South Sudan. We wish her all
the best in her future endeavours.

We welcome today's renewal and extension of the
mandate of UNMISS for 12 months, during which
the Mission will be called upon to undertake the core
functions of protecting civilians, monitoring and
investigating human rights, creating the conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
and lastly, supporting the implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, signed on 26 August 2015.
That is a good approach.

Our consistent support for the extension of the
UNMISS mandate is an indication of our appreciation
for the contribution the Mission is making in our country.
We consider that to be a good symbol of improvement
of our situation and our relations with the United
Nations and the Security Council, following the recent
agreement of the Republic of South Sudan to implement
the Joint Communique signed by the Transitional
Government of National Unity and the Security
Council on 4 September, concerning the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force without conditions.

However, I must express my delegation's
disappointment that our concerns and those of some
members of the Security Council were not taken
into consideration, which goes against the spirit of
cooperation. The Council continues to deliberate on
the important issues of peace and security in South
Sudan without adequate consultation with the African
region. Recently, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development Assembly of Heads of State and
Government held its twenty-ninth Extraordinary
Summit on 9 December in Addis Ababa, at which it
underscored in its communique that:

"an arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan will
not provide the solution being sought for permanent
peace and stability in the country and stresses
that what is required is dialogue, reconciliation
and commitment by all South Sudanese parties
to faithfully implement the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan and
for the region and the international community to
support them".

The Government of South Sudan continues
to oppose the negative threats of sanctions and
punishment, which can only undermine cooperation.
The call for the imposition of an arms embargo and
targeted sanctions on senior Government officials in
South Sudan will only weaken the Government's ability
to execute its constitutional mandate and give the upper
hand to armed groups, given the long history of war in
the country, which left small arms and light weapons in
the hands of civilians.
Despite the international community's skepticism
about the will of South Sudanese leaders to bring an
end to the conflict that is devastating their country
and inflicting death and suffering on their people,
we have always recognized that we share the same
objective of consolidating peace, security and stability
in our country. These elements are fundamental for
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and socioeconomic
development of a country that has been at war for
far too long. President Salva Kiir Mayardit, in his
statement on 14 December to the National Legislative
Assembly, reiterated his commitment to implementing
the Peace Agreement in letter and spirit. He announced
intentions to launch a national dialogue that will include
all stakeholders in the country. This dialogue will be
led by eminent statesmen who are trusted, genuine
and credible.

As the President, it is understandable that much of
the responsibility for the state of affairs in the country
would fall on Salva Kiir Mayardit, but it is obvious that
he has been very accommodating and compromising.
This has not been adequately acknowledged, let alone
appreciated. Contrary to what most presidents would
do, President Salva Kiir has demonstrated leadership
and conceded a great deal for the cause of peace.

Republican orders issued by President Salva Kiir
Mayardit should leave no doubt about his determination
to do all he can to end this senseless tragedy for his
country. He has recently declared a unilateral ceasefire,
with instructions to the National Army to fight only
in self-defence. He has granted amnesty to those who
have taken up arms against the State. He has created a
ministerial committee of the Transitional Government
of National Unity charged with implementing the
Joint Communique and resolution 2304 (2016), and
established a national planning committee and a
humanitarian high-level committee.

All these steps are intended to address the relevant
aspects of the crises faced by the country. Their active
coordinating role should be recognized and respected
by our international partners to ensure more effective
partnership in providing assistance to the country. Close
cooperation and partnership between the international
community and South Sudan are essential, not only in
addressing the many problems faced by the country
and achieving positive results but also in enhancing
the capacity of the Government to be more effective
in the delivery of essential services to the people of
South Sudan.

To conclude, the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan reaffirms its commitment to working
with UNMISS and the international community at
large. What the Republic of South Sudan needs is a
positive and constructive agenda that includes restoring
complete security and stability; nationwide peace and
reconciliation efforts; the strengthening of the security
and judicial sectors; and support for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts to help
clear guns from the hands of civilians and bring the
perpetrators of crimes to justice.

What we do not need is the negative threat of
sanctions and punishment, which can only undermine
the spirit of cooperation.

The meeting rose at 4.55pm.
