Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The delegation of cote d'Ivoire would
like to thank Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty
Soliz, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Bolivia and Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his
briefing on the activities of the Committee charged with
following up on the implementation of resolutions on
weapons of mass destruction. The subject at hand today
is particularly important and poignant given the recent
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

By adopting unanimously, on 28 April 2004,
resolution 1540 (2004), the Council addressed the
challenge of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, thus making the resolution an important part
of the global security architecture. However, 14 years
later, our world continues to live under the persistent
threat of weapons of mass destruction, which represent
a clear and present challenge to the non-proliferation
regime. This very real and constantly evolving threat is
of concern to the entire international community.

Of course, we welcome the significant progress
made in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and
subsequent resolutions, but we must admit that a
great deal remains to be done given the threat of the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by non-State
actors, particularly terrorist organizations.

cote d'Ivoire remains extremely concerned by
the risk of seeing such non-State actors develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical and biological weapons or their
means of delivery. That is why we strongly support
efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery,
and to put in place appropriate oversight mechanisms
in order to prevent their trafficking.

My delegation reaffirms the importance of
international cooperation and coordination to the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
with a View to putting an end to this genuine threat
to international peace and security. Moreover, it is
important to ensure the effective application of and
strict respect for international legal norms relating to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
In this regard, strengthening cooperation in the areas
of border controls, the monitoring of financial flows
and Internet networks, and legal assistance is more
necessary than ever before.

The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire would also like to
draw the attention of the Council and the international
community to the issue of the security of the numerous
stockpiles of fissile material that are not covered by
any international regulation and that could be used
to manufacture weapons of mass destruction. The
existence of such stockpiles increases the likelihood of
such substances falling into the hands of terrorist groups.

Here Cote d'Ivoire calls on Member States, with the
help of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, to meet their international obligations under
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on their Destruction.

In this regard, the strengthening of national
capacities, assistance and awareness-raising are
important aspects of the implementation of the various
international legal instruments. My delegation is of the
View that the implementation of the various resolutions
is a long-term goal that requires that all stakeholders
involved, particularly Member States, international
and regional organizations, the private sector and
civil society, be vigilant and actively cooperate. States
must work together in order to establish good practices
that can prevent chemical agents from falling into the
wrong hands.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) plays a key role in
the implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions on non-proliferation - something that
must constantly be stressed. My delegation welcomes
the work done in that respect, which has enabled
several Member States to submit their initial reports.
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the improved cooperation
between the 1540 Committee and United Nations
and non-United Nations bodies aimed at addressing
non-proliferation challenges.

In that light, we call on the Committee, based
on its mandate, to step up dialogue with the relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations
so as to share experiences and lessons learned and to
identify areas of synergy that could be leveraged in
order to implement resolution 1540 (2004) to the benefit
of their respective member States.

Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes the second in-depth
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), conducted in 2016 and which gave rise to
important recommendations. We hope that the next
review, planned for 2021, will make possible significant
progress in the area of the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption
of the 2018 programme of work by the members of the
Committee, which had been a priority. For its part,
C6te d'Ivoire, in its capacity as a Vice-Chair of the
1540 Committee, remains firmly committed to the
strengthening of the multilateral disarmament and
non-proliferation regimes and is prepared to make a
constructive contribution to achieving the goals of the
Committee, to which it once again reiterates its support.

