Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, as it is the first time that Senegal takes the floor
in a public meeting of the Security Council since we
received the trust of the General Assembly and became
a non-permanent member of the Council, I would like
to reaffirm that the Government of Senegal is wedded
to the ideals of peace, security and justice throughout
the world.

It is in that spirit that my delegation would like
to welcome the joint initiative taken by the United
Kingdom and France to put this briefing on the agenda
of the Security Council in the form of an emergency
meeting given the very difficult situation experienced
by millions of Syrians, especially in besieged areas. The
fact that the Security Council decided to address the
issue for a second time in less than a week clearly shows
that the international community is greatly concerned
about the indescribable suffering experienced by the
Syrian people. The situation tugs at our collective
conscience. We must act promptly as a result of the
special responsibility borne by the Council to maintain
international peace and security.

I would like to commend Ms. Kyung-wha Kang,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for the
clarity of her briefing. That clarity has enabled us to
better understand the realities on the ground. I would
also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
outstanding work carried out by all of the humanitarian
personnel active in this very difficult region and
working for such a noble cause, sometimes placing
their very lives at risk.

While recognizing the progress that was achieved
in providing humanitarian assistance to the city of
Madaya, where over 40,000 individuals face the threat
of starvation, as well as in Fu'ah and Kafraya, Senegal
remains deeply concerned regarding the fate of 400,000
other individuals in other besieged areas and in places
that are difficult to access. It is for that reason that we
call for the implementation of resolution 2258 (2015),
adopted on 22 December 2015, which urges all parties to
immediately implement the international humanitarian
law and human rights law obligations incumbent upon
them, especially by taking the necessary steps to
facilitate humanitarian aid access to the population,
especially the many people in need of emergency
assistance.

To achieve that, all players must take all the
necessary measures to lift restrictions on the provision
of humanitarian assistance, while remaining mindful
of the fact that certain practices, such as the use of
hunger as a weapon of war, can be interpreted as being
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The situation
is so dire that, in a joint statement on 12 January,
three United Nations agencies - the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations
Development Programme - launched an urgent appeal
to raise $8 billion over this year to assist 22.5 million
people in Syria and the wider region. The World Health
Organization is concerned that there is a serious health
risk in Syria, where 57 per cent of health facilities
and 51 per cent of medical centres have been partially
or completely destroyed. In that regard, the appeal
launched by the agency, which already faces a very
serious shortage of funding, for the mobilization of
$45 million to provide assistance to 11 million Syrians
in the country in 2016 is worthy of our full attention.

Finally, our common challenge is to ensure that
tackling the humanitarian situation of refugees and
displaced Syrians takes place in complement to the
political process - perhaps even before it. Substantial
progress was achieved in 2015, including the unanimous
adoption by the Security Council, on 18 December
2015, of resolution 2254 (2015), within the context of
the ministerial session, with a crucial agreement on the
terms of the negotiations of the political process of a
future ceasefire and the fight against terrorism.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without
paying tribute to the initiative of the United Kingdom
to convene, in London on 4 Februry, a donor conference
on the provision of assistance to the civilian population
of Syria, a population affected by a war in its sixth
year. The results are ghastly: 250,000 dead, 4.5 million
refugees and 13 million displaced persons.

