Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the initiative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, as President of the Security Council,
in organizing this open debate and expresses its
appreciation for the leadership of that delegation as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Spain on behalf of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Addressing today's theme on ways to prevent the
catastrophic humanitarian, political, economic and
environmental consequences of the use of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons by non-State actors,
in particular terrorists, is not an easy task. It involves
both topical and complex issues, in particular the nexus
of weapons of mass destruction and terrorism, which
generates its particular relevance.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to international peace and security. But
the dramatic proliferation of terrorist actors and their
expanding activities represent an even greater threat.
Unfortunately, we are helplessly witnessing an endless
spiral of terrorist attacks striking everywhere and in
various forms. Those attacks increasingly demonstrate
that terrorists are not holding back and are ready to
spread terror by any means, including by using weapons
of mass destruction, so as to generate the maximum
number of victims and create chaos.

Terrorist groups are assisted in the execution
of their macabre plans by the rapid development of
new information technologies and various industrial
advances that enable them to recruit from a distance,
train remotely and even carry out remote attacks. If
terrorists are determined to carry out their macabre
plans, we must also be determined to preserve peace, to
save lives, to fight against the terrorists and to prevent
their access to new information and technologies. We
must prevent them from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery and from
developing, trafficking or using them.

The United Nations has addressed the challenges
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
several ways, including through the process initiated
by the Security Council in resolution 1540 (2004),
adopted unanimously on 28 April 2004. Located at the
intersection ofthe fight against proliferation and the fight
against terrorism, resolution 1540 (2004) complements
the international non-proliferation and counter-
terrorism measures adopted by States in addressing the
specific threats posed by non-State actors.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is original in that it is the
first international law provision to take into account the
collusion between the two main threats to world peace
and security, namely, weapons of mass destruction and
non-State actors. However, its originality concerns not
only its content, but also its goal, ambition, strength
and scope. Unlike other multilateral disarmament
instruments, resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and
is, therefore, binding on all States Members of the
United Nations. It must be acknowledged that since
its adoption, Governments around the world have
endeavoured to implement its main provisions by
adopting many laws and implementing a wide range of
appropriate measures.

In addition, several States have provided additional
information on a voluntary basis or at the request of the
1540 Committee. Furthermore, a matrix common to all
States to facilitate the collection of information relevant
to assessing the implementation of the resolution has
also helped to maintain a link with States.

Nevertheless, the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) remains a major challenge for many States,
especially in Africa, owing to the precise nature of
its requirements and the complex measures needed
to address them. However, it is true that the 1540
Committee is making commendable efforts through
the assistance mechanism to effectively assist States,
which are, in most cases, not fully aware of their
shortcomings and have difficulty identifying their
needs in implementing the resolution.

The 1540 Committee also encourages States to
report on legal systems and authorities, as well as
civil and criminal measures adopted to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
However, there is little information for the
assessment of the true effectiveness of the official
measures. The submission ofa report does not guarantee
the correct implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
as some reports are more a statement of intent than a
detailed account of genuine State action. Consequently,
accurate accounting of the number of national reports
submitted is not a reliable criterion for assessing the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
States and the outcomes of their engagement. Hence
the need for further efforts to improve the evaluation
of State action in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

The 1540 Committee would, therefore, benefit
from a greater focus on assisting States in identifying
their shortcomings, without relying on the necessary
but insufficient counting of the number of legal norms
adopted, by analysing in depth the extent to which the
standards were applied and their real impact on the
sensitive areas identified in the resolution, such as
the storage, transport and export of weapons of mass
destruction and related materials, and their means
of delivery.

Convinced that coordination through the exchange
of information, especially at the subregional level, is
dictated by the importance of proximity and shared
borders in the fight against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their use by non-State actors,
the Kingdom of Morocco will organize an information
workshop in November aimed at African national
contact points, in the framework of seeking effective
universal application of the provisions of the resolution.

The meeting will facilitate confidence-building
among African States, thereby facilitating possible
partnerships in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). It will also provide an opportunity to take
stock of the regional situation, including the status
of threats and persistent gaps in the mechanisms
available to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction,particularly to non-State groups. The
development of contacts and a deeper knowledge of
the situation as a result of regional conferences are far
from negligible.

I cannot conclude without reiterating that the
international community must accelerate efforts to
achieve the total elimination of weapons of mass
destruction as the ultimate guarantee against their use
and acquisition by non-State actors. In that context,
Morocco will continue to fulfil its obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004) and pursue fruitful cooperation
with the 1540 Committee.

