Let me first take this opportunity to congratulate Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for convening this high-level open debate on such an important topic as addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. We wish Indonesia a successful and productive second presidency of the Council. Allow me also to extend my appreciation to the delegation of Germany for its excellent leadership of the Security Council for the month of July. I thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for their informative briefings. Resolution 2482 (2019), adopted a year ago, has been instrumental in highlighting the linkages between organized crime and terrorism. The international community expressed its growing concern regarding the use of criminal activities to finance terrorist acts, and identified the commonalities between the illicit and violent behaviours of terrorists and those of organized criminal groups as a means to conduct and support their activities. The nexus between terrorist and criminal groups is extremely opportunistic and has become increasingly clear. They share several similarities. First, terrorism and organized crime are transnational phenomena that engage in cross-border criminal activities. Secondly, terrorism can benefit from the provision of information and services by criminal groups, including counterfeit travel documents and firearms. Thirdly, terrorists can mimic criminal tactics and activities that constitute an attractive source of revenue for terrorism financing, such as drug and human trafficking and illicit trade in arms, natural resources and artefacts. Both groups share the same routes for trafficking, smuggling and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters. Finally and most importantly, both terrorist and criminal groups exploit local grievances about public services and security. Both groups thrive in negative local, national or regional circumstances, such as political instability, armed conflict, corruption, poor economic conditions and social unrest, as well as in areas where Government authority is limited and borders are porous. They share the same hostility towards State authorities and make use of barbaric force against populations. Both terrorism and organized crime can have global ramifications for international peace and security, as they threaten human rights and the rule of law and undermine the foundations of peaceful and prosperous societies. It is therefore important that States adopt and implement comprehensive and integrated measures that enable them to efficiently prevent and combat terrorism and organized crime in a manner that allows the detection and assessment of potential links between them as well as the provision of unified and coordinated responses, in full respect of domestic law and international obligations and commitments. This can be done mainly through the enhancement of interagency coordination and the development of rapid information-sharing tools between national authorities in charge of monitoring, investigating and prosecuting organized crime and terrorism in order to detect potential links. This can be a complicated and challenging task, particularly with the increasing abuse by terrorists and criminal groups of such new technologies as digital wallets and cryptocurrencies. For this reason, we need to ensure robust capacity-building programmes and sharing of experiences and best practices for police forces, prosecutors and judicial authorities, and financial- and economic-intelligence authorities, in order to enable them to analyse financial flows used to prepare or carry out terrorist attacks. The cooperation with other relevant actors can also contribute to an efficient monitoring and risk assessment of potential links between terrorism and other criminal activities. Effective communication with the private sector and not-for-profit organizations can lead to more accurate mechanisms for prevention and management of terrorism financing. Furthermore, considering the frequently transnational nature of terrorism and organized crime networks, regional and international cooperation is essential through the establishment of bilateral and multilateral tools and frameworks for information-sharing, border security and mutual legal assistance. Without proper mitigation measures, prisons can also exacerbate the nexus between terrorism and organized crime. They provide opportunities for criminal and terrorist groups to interact, cooperate and facilitate the transfer of knowledge, skills and contacts. It is therefore essential to prevent the exploitation of prisons as incubators for the development of links between terrorism and organized crime through, inter alia, the separation of prisoners and the implementation of education, rehabilitation and reintegration programmes as well as mental-health programmes in prisons. It is also important to emphasize in this context that armed conflicts attract terrorists and mercenaries of all stripes. It is therefore essential that any search for peaceful solutions to armed conflicts should include States and international and regional organizations contributing to efforts to counter any possible voluntary or sponsored use of terrorists or mercenaries and to control the flow of weapons that could reach them. Resolution 2532 (2020), introduced by Tunisia and France, specifies in this context that the humanitarian truce in armed conflicts referred to in the resolution's paragraph 2 does not apply to terrorist groups designated as such. As mentioned earlier, terrorism and organized crime find commonalities in their underlying drivers. It is therefore important to increase prevention efforts, address root causes and empower local communities to build resilience against transnational organized crime and terrorism. We need to bolster sustainable development, ensure the peaceful settlement of conflict, tackle inequalities, protect human rights, ensure women and youth participation, crack down on corruption and promote good governance. Finally, it is important to highlight that, while efforts aimed at detection of and response to the nexus between terrorism and transnational organized crime are important, Member States need to ensure that all measures taken to counter terrorism comply with their obligations under international law. Addressing the nexus between the two phenomena should not lead to a systematic conflation of their distinct legal regimes. Terrorism is a serious offence that usually requires more restrictive legal measures than other criminal law provisions. It is essential that counter-terrorism legislation is not broadly and systematically applied to other criminal acts to ensure the legality and the legitimacy of counter-terrorism efforts. A comprehensive approach to prevent and combat terrorism and organized crime has been placed at the centre of Tunisia's national efforts since we adopted a comprehensive law and national strategy to counter terrorism and money laundering in 2015. The Tunisian National Counter-Terrorism Commission was recently able to roll out its first set of domestic financial sanctions on individuals and entities based on their ties to terrorist organizations. A national guide on frozen assets is currently being developed in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism in order to ensure the coordinated dissemination of information to all relevant public and private entities and to guarantee human rights and access to remedies. Several other pieces of legislation - on access to information, combating illicit enrichment and the protection of whistleblowers - have also been enacted. In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to sparing no efforts in combating terrorism and organized crime and to renewing our will to do so, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and while respecting our obligations under international law, including human rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law. We stand ready to cooperate with our partners and all relevant stakeholders to achieve our common objective of a world free of terrorism and organized crime.
