Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. It is a historic presidency by
all measures, as proved by the personal presence of the
President of Kazakhstan and his participation in the
work of the Council. I would also like to congratulate
the delegations of Kuwait, Equatorial Guinea, Cote
d'Ivoire, Peru, Poland and the Netherlands on joining
the Security Council. I wish them every success in this
critical task.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Jerusalem is the Flower ofthe Cities. It is the cradle
of the three heavenly religions. It is, and should be, an
oasis for peace, coexistence and love. It is the twin city
of the two Holy Cities of Mecca and Medina. It was in
Jerusalem that the Prophet undertook his famous Night
Journey. For more than 1,400 years, Jerusalem has been
an Arab and Muslim city, a city open to the world and
to all religions and civilizations - a source of thought
and spirituality.

Jerusalem is the eternal historical capital of
Palestine. It has been and will always be like that.
Despite the clouds, the sun will definitely rise again.

Jerusalem has been an item on the Council's
agenda for the past 50 years, during which it has fallen
prey to the Israeli occupation. The Council has adopted
a number of resolutions, including, for example,
resolutions 465 (1980), 476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 2334
(2016). All of those resolutions stress that all unilateral
decisions that aim to change the historical and legal
status of Jerusalem and to impose a fait accompli are
null and void. They will never establish a right and will
never be binding, but rather will be a violation of all
agreed conventions. Those adopted resolutions cannot
be ignored, unilateral measures notwithstanding.

All international instruments since the 1993 Oslo
Accords to date have recognized Jerusalem as one of
the final status issues in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Israel has taken many measures against Jerusalem,
including its decision to annex it to Israel, to control
its fate and its future, to evict Palestinian citizens, to
build settlements and to confiscate the properties of its
people, to impose restrictions on its people, to declare
it as the capital of Israel and to seek recognition of such
a decision. All of those measures are null and void and
have no basis in law, norms, customs and even ethics.

In 2002, my country launched the Arab Peace
Initiative, which reflected Arab and Muslim readiness
to make peace in accordance with international
resolutions, by ending the Israeli occupation of all
occupied Arab territories, with the Syrian Arab Golan
and occupied Palestinian and Lebanese territories,
including the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would like to stress
that any measure taken by the occupying Power on
Jerusalem is null and void. Any recognition ofJerusalem
as the capital and any relocation of the embassy of any
country to Jerusalem are null and void. They will only
fuel tension in the Middle East, undermine trust in the
peace process and jeopardize any chances of reaching
a comprehensive, lasting and just settlement based
on the two-State solution, which would lead to the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State along
the borders of4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital.

Iran continues its flagrant interference in the
internal affairs of Arab States, including Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon, Yemen and others. Iran continues to spread,
support and sponsor terrorism. It is the main supporter
of the terrorist group Hizbullah, which continues to
control Lebanon, to fuel the war in Syria and to commit
the worst forms of killing, siege and ethnic cleansing.
Iran continues to support insurgency and coup masters,
including the Houthi militias in Yemen, providing
them with weapons, including rockets that are used
to launch attacks against my own country. There have
been nearly 90 rocket attacks against Saudi Arabia, as
proved by a number of independent reports issued by
the United Nations. Those reports have concluded that
the rockets are of Iranian origin, in a flagrant violation
of resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015).

It is high time for the Security Council to take
a firm position against Iran and to prove that the
international community will not stand idly by and
will not overlook those aggressive terrorist practices,
which undermine international and regional peace and
security. It is time to seriously address the problem
of Hizbullah, and to expose its terrorist activities in
Syria, Lebanon and other parts of the world, to stop
its arming and its practices, which run counter to the
Lebanese Constitution.

The Syrian crisis, now in its seventh year, is at
a critical crossroads. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
underscores that the only solution is through a Syrian
consensus that meets the aspirations of the people
and end their suffering, based on the first Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015).

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has sought to
unify the factions of the Syrian opposition and to
encourage them to speak in one voice and to form one
delegation. Saudi Arabia hosted the second Syrian
opposition conference in Riyadh in November 2017,
which helped bring the opposition together under
unified leadership. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
emphasizes the need to deal with this leadership as it
is considered representative of the Syrian people and
tasked with negotiating with the ruling authorities in
Syria. Humanitarian suffering continues in Syria.
Ruling authorities in Syria, supported by their allies,
including the Iranian military, the Hizbullah terrorist
group and sectarian mercenaries, continue to destroy
the Syrian people and use chemical weapons against
them, as proved by independent United Nations reports.

We would like to remind those present that there
are more than 3 million people currently stranded
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. Therefore, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia once again calls for immediate
access for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
people in need across Syria, regardless of their racial,
religious, sectarian or political affiliations. We call for
the urgent release of detainees and kidnapped people,
as well as for the determination of the whereabouts of
the disappeared people. We further call for assuring
the dignified return ofinternally displaced persons and
refugees to their homes and places of choice.

