Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): We thank
Ms. Bensouda for her report and her briefing today. In
December last year, we expressed our concern at the
lack of progress since she last addressed the Council
(see S/PV.7080). It is extremely depressing that we must
do so once again now.

First and foremost, that lack ofprogress is evidenced
in the continued non-cooperation of the Government of
the Sudan with the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and by its non-implementation of its obligations under
resolution 1593 (2005) and subsequent resolutions on
the situation in Darfur. That is of serious concern, and
we call once again on the Government of the Sudan to
meet its obligations in that regard in full.

The Prosecutor's report refers to the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Darfur and the continuing
perpetration of serious crimes against civilians. We are
deeply concerned by the increased violence this year,
including a resurgence of activities by rebel groups
and the activities of the Government's Rapid Support
Forces, as well as the continuing intercommunal
violence.

Civilians continue to pay the highest price, with
hundreds of thousands of people newly displaced this
year. The reports of sexual and gender-based violence
are deeply disturbing, both in terms of the high number
and of the particular brutality of the violence. We are
also concerned by alleged crimes against human rights
defenders, civil society members and community
leaders, as well as humanitarian workers and United
Nations peacekeepers. The authorities' suspension of
the activities of several humanitarian organizations will
have an impact on civilians in dire need of assistance.
We hope that the situation can be improved as quickly
as possible.

We are deeply concerned by the active role that the
Government's Rapid Support Forces are alleged to have
played in the increased violence, including the looting
and burning ofvillages. In addition, allegations of aerial
bombardments by the Sudanese Armed Forces in rebel-
held areas, harming civilian life and infrastructure,
are extremely troubling. We also note with concern
that the rebel forces have allegedly been involved in
attacks on civilians. All parties must stop such actions
immediately, take steps to ensure the protection of
civilians in Darfur and grant unfettered and timely
access to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian
workers.

We welcome the ICC's continued monitoring of
actions that could constitute crimes under the Rome
Statute, and reiterate our firm wish to work with partners
to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes face
justice. The ICC States parties must play their part, too,
by fully implementing their obligations under the Rome
Statute. We urge States to implement essential contact
policies in support of the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor. We note with concern that the Prosecutor's
report raises questions over the implementation of the
United Nations policy on non-essential contact and
urge the Secretariat to ensure full compliance with it.

We are also concerned by the allegations referred
to in the Prosecutor's report regarding UNAMID's
handling of information about crimes committed
against civilians and peacekeepers. It is of pivotal
importance that the Mission keep the Council fully
informed, and in detail, about developments on the
ground. Only with that, can the Council do its work
most effectively. We encourage the Secretariat to look
carefully into the allegations made.

We welcomed the strategic review of UNAMID
in February this year and look forward to its full
implementation. We urge the Mission, the Secretariat
and UNAMID's troop- and police-contributing
countries to continue to work together towards that
goal.

Finally, we must do more to follow up on the
referral to the ICC. It is a poor reflection on the Council
that we have not been able to respond in substance to
the many letters received from the Court notifying us of
instances of non-cooperation.

