Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Wane, for his briefing, which is, as usual, very
useful, balanced and insightful. We are also very
grateful to President Mogae, the very wise man of our
region, in whom we take great pride, for his remarks
and for his dedicated efforts to carry out difficult
responsibilities in challenging circumstances. We in the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
remain indebted to him.

The worsening security situation in South Sudan
is deeply worrying for us in the region. Despite the
declaration by His Excellency President Salva Kiir of
a unilateral ceasefire, which we appreciate, fighting
has continued unabated across several parts of the
country, with devastating consequences for the civilian
population. The recent escalation of the conflict in
Upper Nile state and the declaration of a state of
emergency in four states show the deterioration of
the situation.

The cessation of all hostilities and violence in the
country is indeed a matter of urgent priority if we are
to alleviate the suffering of the South Sudanese people,
who have endured so much for far too long. That would
create an environment in which it would be possible to
address the dire humanitarian situation, including by
facilitating humanitarian access. The high number of
incidents and obstacles faced by humanitarian agencies,
including the killing of humanitarian personnel and
the denial of access for the delivery of humanitarian
supplies, continue to pose serious challenges and should
be of serious concern. We call upon all the parties to
take urgent measures to facilitate unhindered access to
the affected population.

We also call upon the international community
to urgently step up efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to save lives and support the suffering
people of South Sudan. There have been reported
incidents affecting the ceasefire and transitional
security arrangements that have prevented Monitoring
Mechanism teams from carrying out their duties by
both parties.

As much as we appreciate the effort, it is extremely
difficult to talk about joint and inclusive political
dialogue while there is ongoing fighting throughout
the country. That is why all parties must immediately
renounce violence and urgently takejoint steps to cease
all hostilities.

As IGAD has reiterated, the full implementation of
the 2015 peace Agreement remains the only viable way
forward to bring an end to the conflict and restore peace
and stability in South Sudan. The lack of meaningful
progress in the implementation of the Agreement has
indeed been a source of great concern, necessitating the
reinvigoration of the peace process so as to ensure the
full implementation of the Agreement through greater
inclusivity, forgiveness and reconciliation.

It is in that context that the IGAD Summit decided
to urgently convene a high-level revitilization forum
of the parties to the Agreement, including estranged
groups, to discuss concrete measures to restore a
permanent ceasefire, to fully implement the peace
agreement and to develop a revised and realistic
timeline and implementation schedule leading towards
a democratic election at the end of the transition period.

A clear guideline and implementation matrix for
the high-level forum has been approved by the fifty-
seventh extraordinary session of the IGAD Council of
Ministers. The IGAD Council of Ministers and Chiefs
of Staff will soon meet in Juba as per the approved
matrix and guideline. The Council of Ministers will be
travelling to Juba next Monday, and it would be proper
for the Security Council to strongly support that effort.
The Council should lend its unreserved support to such
regional efforts and send a strong and unified message
to all the parties in South Sudan to encourage them
to seriously and constructively engage in the peace
process. We reiterate the importance of maintaining the
unity of purpose among IGAD, the African Union (AU)
and the United Nations, including the Security Council,
in the search for lasting peace, security and stability in
South Sudan.

President Mogae has been urging for some time, as
he did a while ago, that the principle of one voice - all
of us the speaking with one voice - should be our guide.
That might in fact be the silver bullet that we need to
make serious progress in South Sudan for peace: one
voice, one action. Sometimes the answer might lie in
the simple, in the manifestly least complicated.

In that regard, I should add that there is no viable
alternative to the efforts being carried out by IGAD
in coordination with the AU and the United Nations.
We in the IGAD region remain as steadfast as ever in
our resolve to cooperate with the African Union and
the United Nations in bringing about lasting peace
in South Sudan. That was reflected in the recent
decision of the IGAD Summit and the Council of
Ministers, which reaffirmed the region's firm resolve
to work closely with the AU and the United Nations
in its reinvigoration effort. The African Union, at
its twenty-ninth ordinary session of the Assembly,
also endorsed those regional efforts, including the
convening of the high-level revitalization forum of the
peace Agreement. We encourage such coordination and
collaboration efforts on the part of IGAD, the AU and
the United Nations and urge that such efforts continue
to be further strengthened. I am reiterating again the
one-voice principle.

Finally, no matter what we in the region and the rest
of the international community may do, the success of
the reinvigoration process, as we work to address the
enormous challenge that South Sudan is facing, will
depend to a great degree on the willingness of all the
parties. We hope that all South Sudanese parties will
rise to the challenge and work towards the restoration
of peace through genuine dialogue and reconciliation.

