Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour to deliver this statement to the Security
Council on behalf of the States members of the Arab
Group. First, however, let me express our support for
the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement by the representative of Egypt, as well as
for the statement to be made by the representative of
Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

The meeting is a demonstration of the importance
that the international community attaches to the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, who have
suffered for more than 60 years under the occupation
and practices of Israel and its refusal to abide by its
international commitments and its flouting of all
international resolutions.

The peoples and States of the region place great
hopes in the ability of the international community to
assume its political, legal and moral responsibility vis-
a-vis the return of occupied Arab territories, putting an
end to Israeli intransigence and arrogance and
compelling Israel to comply with and fully implement
the resolutions of international legitimacy, particularly
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Israel
persists in ignoring those resolutions as it continues to
pursue illegal and aggressive measures and practices in
the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly East
Jerusalem and its environs, with a view to altering their

demographic status, character and composition. That is
in addition to continuing violations by Israel, the
occupying Power, of international law and the rules
and regulations relating to human rights.

Such practices make a mere fantasy of any talk of
the existence of an Israeli partner having sincere
intentions about achieving peace. They also
demonstrate beyond any doubt that, through its
practices and policies and the declarations of its
officials, Israel is working as hard as it can to
undermine every international effort to resume peace
talks based on the solution of two States within the
framework of the borders of4 June 1967.

Furthermore, all practices such as Israel's
continued and intensified campaigns to rapidly
construct thousands of settlement units and its
persistent demolition of Palestinian properties and
buildings affirm its expansionist intentions and
contradict the claims of the Israeli Government that it
wishes to resume the peace process and move towards
a two-State solution.

The existing situation in the Gaza Strip represents
yet another manifestation of Israel's violations of
resolution 1860 (2009) and its disregard of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. As the oppressive Israeli
blockade enters its fifth year, Palestinian civilians
continue to be subjected to collective punishment,
leading to increased poverty in Gaza and to severe
deterioration of the economic, social and humanitarian
situation there.

It is not strange, therefore, that the blockade has
resulted in terrifying statistics - for example, a rise in
the unemployment rate to 65 per cent. Also, the air
raids that the Israeli air force conducts from time to
time - despite the fact that such raids contravene the
most basic rules of international law, which prohibit
such attacks on areas populated by civilians - are
tantamount to terrorist actions against unarmed
Palestinian people.

The international community must send a clear,
unequivocal message to Israel that it must lift the
blockade and open the crossing points immediately,
permanently and without conditions, in order to allow
access for humanitarian assistance, construction
materials and goods, and the movement of people.
Israel must also be punished for its persistence in
violating international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law. It must be held
accountable for the war crimes it has committed so far,
for its practice of State terrorism, and for the
systematic violations of human rights it has committed
against unarmed Palestinians, the perpetrators of which
must be prosecuted.

The Arab Group demands that the Security
Council take all measures to pressure Israel to
implement Council resolution 497 (1981), which calls
for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the lines of 4 June 1967. It also reaffirms that the
measures taken by Israel aimed at changing the legal,
physical and demographic situation there are
considered null and void and having no legal basis, as
well as violating international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

The Arab Group also demands that Israel cease its
continued violations of Lebanese sovereignty and
infringement on Lebanon's territories, air space and
territorial waters. The Group also demands Israel's
complete withdrawal from the northern part of the
town of Al-Ghajar, the Shebaa farms and the hills of
Kfar Shouba.

A comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict- a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution - can be reached only by implementing the
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy,
particularly Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008). It
must also be based on the principles of the Madrid
Peace Conference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, and the Road Map as
endorsed by the Quartet.

The Arab Group affirms its full support for the
efforts by the Palestinian Authority to obtain
membership in the United Nations at the upcoming
session of the General Assembly, in accordance with
what has already been confirmed at the meeting of the
Ministerial Committee of the Arab Peace Initiative held
in Doha on 14 July.

More than six decades have passed while Israel
has persisted in defying the international community. It
has gone too far in carrying out its illegal and
unilateral policies, while the Palestinian people have
deferred their dreams and aspirations year after year,
for more than six decades, waiting and hoping to build
a national home that will embrace them all.

For six decades the demands of the Palestinian
people, and our demands, have been very clear. What
we need most is implementation of United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Security Council,
and the exercise by the Palestinians of their right to
self determination and to live a free, independent and
dignified life within an independent, sovereign State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

