Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): My delegation commends
Ambassador Chowdhury and the other mission members
on their balanced mission report. The Netherlands fully
associates itself with the praise contained in their report
for the work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR).

 

The report echoes Mr. Kouchner's call for the
appointment of a special envoy for detainees and missing
persons. My delegation has repeatedly expressed its grave
concerns regarding this continuing tragedy, and has called
for an end to the indifference to the fate of thousands of
missing persons and their families. For these reasons we
welcome the strong support of the different ethnic
communities in Kosovo for the appointment of a special
envoy to address this problem. Of course, the mandate will
require some very careful drafting. Meanwhile, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
others should be encouraged to give this pressing issue their
particular attention. Obviously, the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia also has an important
role to play.

As for the present situation in Kosovo, we remain
concerned at the continuing violence. Recent incidents have
included violence against Russian KFOR soldiers and
against moderate Kosovar Albanians. The mission was
particularly useful and important in urging all communities
to reject such violence and in encouraging peaceful
coexistence and cooperation among them.

We are concerned also at the ongoing provocations of
the Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac
(UCPNB) in the Presevo Valley area. We have noted that
Mr. Thaci has called for an end to those activities, but we
also note that his call has not so far had the desired effect.

Other recent developments, however, raise hopes that
a break with the destructive past may be possible. The
mission's report notes that all ethnic communities express
the desire to live in peace together even if, due to the
recent violent conflict, they are still deeply divided. There
is now Serbian participation in the interim structures, even
if it is so far limited to observers. And the leader of the
Serbian community in Orahovac and representatives of the
Roma community have apologized to the Kosovar Albanian
community. The Kosovar Albanian reaction to those
apologies has been constructive, as noted in the report.

Let us not underestimate the importance of these and
other modest initial steps on the road to improved inter-
ethnic relations in Kosovo. It is facile, and not very
constructive, to note only the problems that still exist. After
a decade of death and destruction wrought by Belgrade, it
is in fact a small miracle that there are still people left in
Kosovo who are ready to break out of this vicious circle
and move forward. Those people need encouragement; they
are everyday heroes; they show courage and a moral vision
that deserves our undivided support.

Another hopeful development lies in the fact that
preparations for elections are well under way. We can
only hope that the Serbs will realize in time that it is in
their own best interest to register. Elections and elected
representative institutions will mean an end to
undemocratic parallel structures.
Meanwhile, there are indications that public opinion
is shifting in favour of moderate elements in all
communities, and there is cause for optimism that the
United Nations will be able to provide for adequate
security. It is all the more regrettable, therefore, that Serb
hard-liners and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
continue to place obstacles in the way of the successful
conduct of these elections. Successful elections form an
integral part of the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999), and those who want to see that resolution
successfully implemented should not stand in the way of
registration and participation by all ethnic groups,
including Serbs displaced outside Kosovo.

