Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to start by
returning the expression of gratitude to the United
Kingdom in agreeing to co-penholdership on this
and to work together on resolution 2479 (2019), and I
would like to thank all delegations for their cooperation
during the negotiations and for their support for the
resolution submitted today. The fact that we adopted
this resolution on the peacekeeping operation in Darfur
unanimously demonstrates that the Council is living
up to its responsibility. We have to use the following
image: we have turned off our autopilot and are not
sleepwalking into a drawdown and eventual exit from
peacekeeping, oblivious to the changing situation in
Khartoum; instead, we have pressed "pause".

With this approach, the Council is taking into
consideration the recent developments in the Sudan,
in Khartoum, which, of course, have repercussions
on Darfur. The pause in the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) that was decided today allows time for
the Sudanese actors to come together to agree on a
transition that has been and is demanded by the people
of the Sudan, the African Union (AU) and many
international actors, including Germany.

A civilian-led transitional Government is of
paramount importance to peace and stability in the
Sudan, the sooner the better. A civilian-led Government
will be needed, from our perspective also, to normalize
relations with the African Union. Again, that is very
relevant to UNAMID, which, as members know, is
the only, and a very successful, joint peacekeeping
operation of the United Nations and the African Union.
Germany is committed to that partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union and the
close cooperation with our African partners here in
the Council.

The pause in the drawdown of UNAMID does not
imply that there should also be a pause in the mission
fulfilling its mandate. On the contrary, the mission
is mandated to continue its operations, including
with regard to protecting civilians in Darfur. We also
expect concrete actions by the Sudanese authorities,
as the cooperation of the host Government is key in
any peacekeeping setting, in particular with a view
to a potential exit. Rescinding decree 102, which
stipulated the handover of UNAMID team sites to the
Rapid Support Forces, is a necessary step. It is really
important that there now be concrete changes on the
ground that allow the Darfuri people to have trust in
their authorities and to enjoy security, protection and
the rule of law.

The United Nations camps that have been handed
over to the Sudanese authorities and are currently
occupied by the Rapid Support Forces must be placed
under civilian control in a responsible manner. That
is consistent with the relevant agreements. To be very
clear, for Germany, it would be inconceivable that the
forces that triggered the international peacekeeping
efforts in the first place should benefit from AU and
United Nations assets once the mission leaves because
we all know that the Rapid Support Forces is a follow-
up operation of the infamous Janjaweed.

Looking ahead, we need a reliable and realistic
road map that ensures that all UNAMID camps will
be handed over to civilian users permanently and that
civilians are protected once UNAMID leaves. That is
a responsibility of the Sudanese Government. Today
the Security Council paused the drawdown but we
also sent a clear signal that we are looking beyond the
lifespan of UNAMID. By requesting the development
of a political strategy for engagement in Darfur and
options for a follow-on mechanism once UNAMID
leaves, we recognize that sustainable peace in Darfur
requires continued international engagement and
support - support for mediation, for capacity-building
in the areas of the rule of law and human rights, for
finding durable solutions for the internally displaced
people and for creating socioeconomic development
perspectives. Therefore, once the situation on the
ground allows for that, the focus should shift from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

Germany remains committed to accompanying
UNAMID in the current phase, including through
individual police officers and staff officers. We
remain committed to supporting a peace process with
the Darfuri rebel groups, as well as peacebuilding in
Darfur. We look forward to continuing to work with
all members of the Security Council to ensure that we
contribute to peace and security in the Sudan through a
responsible approach with regard to UNAMID.

