Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution 2292 (2016). We wish
to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for all
its efforts leading to the adoption of this important
resolution. In addition, my delegation wishes to
highlight the following points.

First, we reiterate our full support for the Presidency
Council of the Government of National Accord in
Libya and its efforts to restore stability in that fellow
Arab State.

Secondly, enforcing the arms embargo in Libya
and preventing illicit arms from reaching extremists
and terrorists there are indeed vital goals. In fact, they
are central to efforts to eradicate the terrorist threat in
Libya. In that context, we again we wish to commend
the United Kingdom and the other European Union
members of the Security Council for their initiative in
proposing this resolution.

Thirdly, achieving success in countering terrorism
in Libya requires a comprehensive approach in
addressing the threat. Therefore, no form of support
for terrorists, including weapons, must be allowed to
reach Libya. At the forefront of this effort should be
the halting of the flow of terrorists to the country, as
well as curbing their flow from the country through the
Mediterranean to Europe.

It is noteworthy that today's resolution requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on
the threat posed to Libya and its neighbours by Da'esh
and other terrorist groups. Accordingly, Egypt, acting
in close cooperation with its partners on the Security
Council, intends to strive to meet this challenge with
a view to strengthening the international anti-terror
system/regime as it pertains to Libya and making it
more comprehensive.

Fourthly, we reiterate our call on the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
to extend its support to Libyan national security
institutions, at the head of which is the Libyan National
Army, in their efforts to combat and eradicate terrorism.
The Army, as the sole professional military force in
existence in Libya today, should form the core of any
future Libyan armed forces. We also wish to warn
against the extreme danger of relying on any elements
in Libya that have or have had ties to extremism or
terrorism when it comes to setting up the national armed
forces or to providing security to the Government of
National Accord.

