Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I deliver this statement
on behalf of the co-penholders - Belgium, Kuwait
and Germany.

At the outset, let me thank Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller for her comprehensive briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We once again reiterate
our appreciation for all the efforts of humanitarian and
medical personnel to alleviate human suffering in Syria.

We heard again from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs about the dire situation in
north-western Syria and the fragility of the unilateral
ceasefire. The number ofpeople in need ofhumanitarian
assistance is staggering. There are almost 3 million
people in Idlib, the vast majority of whom are women
and children. Over half a million people have fled the
violence over the past few months, some of them having
to flee more than once. Over 1,000 civilians have been
killed. Hospitals, schools, and locations of internally
displaced persons have been targeted and destroyed
by bombardments. If this situation does not move the
Council to take action, what will?

That is why today we will be voting on a draft
resolution proposed by the Syria humanitarian
co-penholders - Kuwait, Belgium and Germany.
We have been negotiating this text in an inclusive,
transparent and thorough manner for the past few
weeks with all Council members. The aim of the text is
purely humanitarian - it intends to protect the civilian
population of Idlib from the ongoing offensive. It also
emphasizes that counter-terrorism operations must be
in compliance with international humanitarian law;
respect the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution; and distinguish between the civilian
population and combatants.

Civilians must never be the victims of a fight
against terrorism. We hope that our draft resolution
will gain the support ofthe entire Council, especially as
its objective is purely humanitarian. The Council must
speak up in a united manner to address the immense
human suffering faced by the civilian population of
Idlib. We call for the Council to urgently take a unified
stance in support of our humanitarian draft resolution.

We are also extremely concerned by the situation in
other areas of Syria, which was also highlighted by the
Assistant Secretary-General. In the south, 2.8 million
people require humanitarian assistance. In Rukban,
we continue to call for a sustainable solution for the
thousands of people there. In Al-Hol camp, where over

70,000 people still receive humanitarian assistance, the
situation remains of deep concern, especially as women
and children 4 who make up more than 90 per cent
of the camp's population - are highly vulnerable and
need specific protection.

We welcome the composition and the start of work
of the Board of Inquiry. It is important to conduct a
quick and thorough investigation of the incidents
that took place, in particular the attacks on facilities
identified under the de-confliction mechanism.

The cross-border mechanism, renewed under
resolution 2449 (2018), remains a critical lifeline for
millions of Syrians, particularly in the north-west. The
United Nations has repeatedly stated that there is no
other way to provide support for those civilians. The
continuation ofthe mechanism is essential to alleviating
human suffering, as the Assistant Secretary-General
indicated this morning.

