Mr. Thapa (Nepal): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish to express my sincere appreciation to you for
holding this open debate on the report of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2004/431). The
Secretary-General deserves our sincere appreciation for
preparing that comprehensive report. My delegation
would also like to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
presenting the report this morning.

His Majesty's Government of Nepal attaches
great importance to the humanitarian work that the
United Nations has been doing for years. Millions of
people around the world have benefited from the
humanitarian assistance that has been provided to the
victims of both man-made and natural disasters.
Nepalese people who have been affected by natural
calamities have also received humanitarian assistance
from the United Nations and from other donor
communities at various times.

A violent attack on innocent civilians by illegal
armed groups, with an easy escape from the arms of the
law, is a common phenomenon of armed conflict in the
contemporary world. The situation is compounded by
the fact that, more often than not, these groups - for a
variety of reasons - do not come under scrutiny.
Innocent civilians very often must lend their support to
such groups at gunpoint, and those who stand in the
way are subjected to mutilation, killing, rape or torture
in full view of the public. In most cases, these groups
also resort to such inhuman methods as forcing the kith
and kin of the victim to be fed the victim's flesh. We
are also concerned about the use and exploitation of
refugee status by illegal armed groups in various parts
of the world, as a result of which socio-economic and
peace and security situations have been further
aggravated.

The international community could significantly
reduce the number of armed conflicts if it engaged in
preventive diplomacy to address the issues of poverty
and exclusion well before they escalate into conflict.
Nepal has consistently supported the view that the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
should play a much more effective and enhanced role for
the protection of civilians in internal conflicts.

With regard to the 10-point platform for action,
my delegation appreciates the efforts of the Secretary-
General in preparing that proposal. We also subscribe
to the view that, in humanitarian assistance, priority
must be accorded to the work of protecting the civilian
population, especially women, children and other
vulnerable groups.

The delegation of Nepal shares the View that any
humanitarian assistance provided by the international
community to a particular country to address suffering
- be it occasioned by natural disaster or by man-made
disaster - should be provided only with the consent of
the State concerned and in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. Efforts to gain access to illegal
armed groups should in no way infringe on the
principle of State sovereignty.

Nepal is concerned over the increased attacks
against United Nations humanitarian personnel in the
field, and we strongly support efforts to ensure their
safety and security. Nepal is a party to the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, and is actively taking part in the
ongoing efforts in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly to broaden the scope of that Convention.

His Majesty's Government of Nepal is committed to
protecting the lives and property of civilians. We would
like to assure the Council that, for our part, we will spare
no effort to bring to justice the perpetrators of crimes.

