Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation
finds it most unfortunate that the Council has to meet again
today to deal with the issue at hand less than a month after
the adoption of resolution 1134 (1997) on 23 October and
the presidential statement of 29 October, following the Iraqi
decision to seek to impose conditions on its cooperation
with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM).
In the view of my delegation, it is particularly regrettable
that another window of opportunity - provided by the
Secretary-General through the dispatch of his three-envoy
mission to Baghdad last week - was missed by Iraq as
well.

The Republic of Korea has consistently hoped that
Iraq, a country with a long history and old civilization,
should be allowed to rejoin the international community as
a normal and responsible member at an early date, so that
the humanitarian sufferings of the Iraqi people could be
brought to an end and Iraq could make its due share of
contributions to world peace and prosperity. As we all
know, the fundamental condition for normalizing Iraq's
relationship with the international community through the
lifting of sanctions lies in the faithful implementation of
relevant Council resolutions by Iraq.

In that regard, although the latest report of UN SCOM
noted some positive progress in the missile and nuclear
areas, there still remain some ambiguities in other areas,
including the biological area. Furthermore, by seeking to
impose certain conditions on the manner UNSCOM
discharges its responsibilities under relevant Council
resolutions, Iraq has regrettably narrowed the path toward
the normalization of its relationship with the international
community.

Under these circumstances, my delegation demands
that Iraq cooperate fully and unconditionally with
UNSCOM, in accordance with the relevant resolutions, so
that UNSCOM. can, in turn, inform the Council of Iraq's
full implementation of its obligations under the relevant
Council resolutions as early as possible.
Although the draft resolution before the Council
contains certain additional measures, such as travel
restrictions, we rather wish to draw attention to paragraphs
6 and 7, which clearly delineate the exit out of the present
deadlock. In a nutshell, my delegation strongly hopes that
this draft resolution will be able to convey the unambiguous
and united message of the Security Council to Iraq that it
must rescind its decision of 29 October and cooperate fully
and unconditionally with UNSCOM. This was the very
same message that our esteemed Secretary-General tried
to deliver to the Iraqi leader through his own intervention.

For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.

