Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico thanks Senegal for convening today's
important debate on a subject that presents one of
the most pressing challenges for some peacekeeping
operations. In recent years, we have seen how the
constant changes in the challenges to peace and security
compel such operations to discharge their missions in
unstable environments and volatile security conditions
that hinder them from fulfilling their missions, and,
in particular, when they do not possess the logistical
capacity and means to do so. To guarantee their
efficiency, effectiveness and safety on the ground,
such operations must have a clear, specific mandate
from the Security Council in order to be duly equipped
with clear and Viable strategies to perform their tasks.
To that end, Mexico believes that the United Nations
should be given all of the tools it needs, such as the
ability to gather further intelligence as needed, in order
to be able to mitigate the challenges posed by the new
international peace and security landscape.

Despite what has just been said and as we have
stated in the competent General Assembly forums, we
reiterate our opposition to peacekeeping operations
becoming counter-terrorism tools. Given their
composition and nature, such operations do have neither
the specific equipment or training needed to conduct
logistics or intelligence operations, nor the specialized
military training for counter-terrorism operations. Any
attempt to drastically modify their mandates would
not only damage the core of their operations but also
put their staff and the civilian population that they are
tasked with protecting at risk. In that regard, we agree
with the recommendations contained in the Report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
which states that "[e]xtreme caution should guide the
mandating of enforcement tasks to degrade, neutralize
or defeat a designated enemy" (S/2015/446, p.]2),
including terrorist groups or other forms of non-State
actors in the mandates of such operations.

Mexico acknowledges that asymmetrical threats,
including those from terrorist groups jeopardize
the effective use of the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and the safety of United Nations staff.
Improving the interaction between the Security Council
and its relevant sanctions committees, the Secretariat
and countries that contribute personnel to peacekeeping
operations, is of critical importance so as to enable
the Council to have clear, accurate information on the
situation on the ground in the countries in which those
operations are deployed. In that regard, we believe that
particular attention should be paid to capacity-building
in peace operations deployed in complex environments
in order to assist with the preventive efforts made by the
host country to address such threats, particularly in the
area of lending support to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes for former combatants,
the reform of the security sector and the building and
strengthening of national justice and correctional
facilities.

Similarly, we call for the efforts of the international
community to be focused on developing integrated
responses and initiatives that seek to address the
structural causes of conflicts - which in many
instances, foster the spread of extremist ideologies that
could also lead terrorism - and, in so doing, achieve
sustainable peace. Finally, Mexico takes advantage of
today's meeting to reiterate the importance of effectively
implementing the results of the peace operations review
processes that took place during the previous sessions
of the General Assembly and of the Council with a view
to having countries plagued by Violent, armed conflict
transition to sustainable peace.

