Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi for their comprehensive briefings.

I would like to focus my statement on three
issues: the political process, security aspects and the
socioeconomic situation.

First, with regard to the political process, Poland
welcomes positive developments in the political
transformation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in recent months. We appreciate the progress
achieved by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, such as
the opening of political space, the release of political
detainees, the return of political actors and the
upholding of fundamental rights, for example, freedom
of speech. Poland supports the further stabilization and
strengthening of State institutions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In that spirit, we emphasize that the immediate
formation of the Government and the deployment of
State institutions throughout the country are necessary
for the full implementation of the essential reforms.
Poland appreciates the constructive attitude presented
by the majority of political actors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo so far, and we hope that this
approach will be maintained. We also encourage
the authorities to further enhance cooperation with
civil society actors, in particular with women's
representatives and young people.

Secondly, with regard to security aspects, despite
efforts made so far, the activities of foreign and
domestic armed groups, especially in the eastern part
of the country, continue to have a serious impact on
the security situation. We welcome the encouraging
decisions by several armed groups to join the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme. Opportunities to neutralize the destructive
activities of the groups, without military intervention,
should not be missed. The DDR programme should
therefore be at the centre of the stabilization of the
security situation in the country.

At the same time, Poland is worried at the persistence
of the risk of a further escalation of violence and ethnic
tensions. The relevant State institutions are responsible
for ensuring the security of its citizens. The fact that
most human rights violations and acts of sexual abuse
are committed by State agents continues to be one of
the major problems. Therefore, the immediate reform
of the security forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo so as to increase their professionalization should
be considered a matter of priority. We once again
emphasize the imperative need to hold accountable
those accused of crimes against humanity, war crimes
and other grave violations of international law.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should be seen in a wider regional context. We
welcome all efforts to give new impetus to the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region. We encourage the signatories
of this agreement to increase their engagement in order
to overcome the causes ofinstability in the region.

Thirdly, with regard to the socioeconomic situation,
political and security volatility has significantly
hampered the humanitarian situation and development
of the country. We encourage the authorities to attain
critical momentum and implement reforms that are
necessary preconditions for creating an attractive
investment climate and economic growth. Accordingly,
Poland welcomes the recent resumption of cooperation
between the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and the
International Monetary Fund.

We remain concerned about the persistent Ebola
outbreak in the east of the country, especially in
terms of the latest declaration by the World Health
Organization, namely, that it is a public health
emergency of international concern. We strongly
condemn the continuous attacks on humanitarian
workers and medical personnel, as well as hospitals
and other medical facilities, and call on all parties on
the ground to enable the safe delivery of humanitarian
assistance for Ebola-affected areas. Let me reiterate our
full appreciation for efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
and other international partners to combat the Ebola
virus disease.

In conclusion, Poland praises the important work
carried out by the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo (MONUSCO).
We hope for the further constructive cooperation of
the authorities with the Mission to consolidate the
considerable achievements made to date. We encourage
the Secretary-General to provide the Security Council
with the comprehensive strategic review of the Mission,
which will allow for a reliable and responsible decision
to be taken concerning the future engagement of the
United Nations on the ground.

Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and the whole
MONUSCO team for their tireless efforts to support
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

