Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): My delegation deems it
a distinct pleasure to see you, Sir, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ireland, presiding over today's
deliberations of the Security Council. At the same time,
I should like to say how pleased we are to have the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello, as well as Mr. Mari Alkatiri
and his entourage, in our midst.

The significance of this meeting today is not lost
on us: this is the first open debate of the Security
Council on the situation in East Timor to be held since
the historic elections for East Timor's Constituent
Assembly, on 30 August this year, and the formation of
the second interim government.

Indeed, we are bearing witness to the opening of
a new chapter in East Timor's transition to
independence. In this context, Indonesia, as a country
that shares a border with East Timor, has consistently
demonstrated, in word and in deed, its strong
commitment to working with the international
community in a spirit of consensus, amity and
cooperation, to create an atmosphere conducive to the
establishment of a free, democratic and prosperous
East Timorese society. It is therefore imperative that all
concerned parties not indulge in negative perceptions
and divisive practices, which could hamper attainment
of the objectives we are all attempting to achieve for
the people of East Timor. Within this context, there can
be no better way of extending assistance and support to
the people of East Timor than by working with them in
partnership and focusing on the future development of
the country and, indeed, the region as a whole. We
believe that there is great potential in paving the way
for such a mutually beneficial bilateral relationship.
The remarks that President Megawati
Soekarnoputri made during her State address before the
Indonesian parliament, on 16 August, the eve of the
anniversary of Indonesia's independence day, reflected
Indonesia's commitment. The President unequivocally
stated,

"We have disentangled the question of East Timor
in 1999 and honestly respected the choice of our
brothers and sisters in the region to have their
own state".

The strengthening of bilateral relations between
our two countries is viewed as a matter of priority in
the realization of the vision of East Timor as a viable,
peaceful and democratic country. Thus, my
Government extended an invitation to the East
Timorese leaders, including Mr. Xanana Gusmao, Mr.
Mari Alkatiri and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and to Mr.
Vieira de Mello, who visited Indonesia on 12 October
2001. The cordial discussions at the meeting that
resulted were a further step towards this new chapter of
bilateral relations for Indonesia and East Timor.

As a result of an initiative by my Government, we
are looking forward to holding a high-level bilateral
meeting in the near future to work on ways to resolve
outstanding issues and, at the same time, to establish a
sound and solid basis for future relations. It is in that
same spirit that regional partnerships should be forged
to achieve those noble objectives.

Yet another development in the relationship
between Indonesia and the emerging independent State
of East Timor was the conclusion of a bilateral
agreement between the officials of the two sides last
weekend in Atambua, concerning the demilitarization
of their respective borders, thereby facilitating free and
open visits by the Indonesian and East Timorese
peoples. We believe that this will entail the withdrawal
of foreign troops currently deployed at the borders as
part of the United Nations peacekeeping force.

We are fully cognizant of the undeniable reality
that political independence is closely linked with the
promotion of sustainable development. Bearing this in
mind, the international community should become truly
engaged in this process to ensure that the people of a
nascent nation can reap the benefits of development by
enjoying a higher standard of living. This can be
realized only through the sustained assistance of the
international community, through forging various
forms of cooperation.

The role of the United Nations on the eve of East
Timor's independence must be viewed not only within
the framework of the larger picture of assisting the East
Timorese as they move towards peace, security and
sustainable development, but also within the context of
resolving the outstanding issues. The useful role of the
Organization notwithstanding, it will ultimately be the
East Timorese people themselves who should decide
their own future.

As far as Indonesia is concerned, it has left no
stone unturned in fulfilling its commitments. This has
included working with the relevant international
humanitarian agencies to repatriate refugees and
amending the law to expand the jurisdiction of the ad
hoc human rights tribunal, as well as other relevant
issues, such as pensions, education and security at
borders.

Especially on the issue of pensions, members of
the Council will no doubt be aware of the Indonesian
Government's long-standing readiness to disburse
payments to pensioners who are former Indonesian
civil servants, military and police from East Timor
during the transition period. Technical arrangements
for the disbursement have been agreed between
Indonesia and the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and their
implementation awaits follow-up from UNTAET. In
addition, in a major policy development, my
Government has decided to contribute to a special fund
established to provide payments in lieu of Indonesian
Government pensions to eligible former civil servants,
military personnel, police and pensioners after
independence. This special fund is one of the main
components of the consolidated joint Government of
Indonesia/United Nations appeal and global plan for
the handling of the East Timorese refugees in
Indonesia.

Although the recommendations of the Office of
the United Nations Security Coordinator assessment
team failed to reflect the prevailing realities on the
ground, my Government is continuing negotiations
with the Office of the Resident Coordinator of the
United Nations system's operational activities for
development in Indonesia - in its capacity as the
designated official for security in Indonesia for all
United Nations agencies - on technical arrangements
in Jakarta as a basis for the return of United Nations
agencies to East Nusa Tenggara. It is hoped that the
refugees can return at the earliest possible time,
particularly as we owe it to them as a people to uphold
their human rights and dignity. We urge the
international community to provide encouragement and
support to the ongoing process of organized and ad hoc
repatriation of refugees to East Timor.
No one organization can claim complete credit
for a humanitarian undertaking of this magnitude; and
if credit is to be rightly accorded, it should go to the
tireless efforts of those individuals on the ground,
including the officials of the provincial Government of
East Nusa Tenggara and the Regional Military
Commander, for doing their utmost to bring closure to
the refugee issue, since this is a priority of my
Government. We were therefore pleased at the recent
repatriation of 600 refugees on 27 October 2001, which
was witnessed by Indonesian Government officials,
East Timorese leaders and the representatives of
UNTAET. The spirit of harmony and amity was evident
in the remarks of Mr. Ramos-Horta, who upon
welcoming them said, "This is your country. The door
is open to all of you who two years ago took refuge
from East Timor and are now willing to return"; while
the Indonesian Coordinating Minister for People's
Welfare, Mr. Yusuf Kalla, stated, "We wish that all
refugees who return home will have better lives and
continue to keep good relations as our brothers and
sisters."

In conclusion, as East Timor grows into a full-
fledged sovereign and independent nation, the
international community has a solemn responsibility to
support measures including building bridges of
understanding towards achieving reconciliation,
strengthening the foundations of government based on
democratic and transparent practices, and promoting
capacity-building programmes. No doubt the road that
lies ahead abounds with challenges and obstacles. But
we must be vigilant and ensure that our assistance does
not overshadow the true efforts of the East Timorese to
fulfil their legitimate needs and the goals that they have
set for themselves as they realize their full potential as
a people to carry out this nation-building process. It is
to this end that we should extend our unstinting
support.

