Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): As a regular visitor to the Security Council
over the past two years, and as my tenure as Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic to the
United Nations is coming to an end, I would like to
thank each and every member for their unwavering
support, care and understanding to me and my
colleagues. Members have been friends to me and to my
battered country, which is struggling to heal its wounds
and once again take its place within the community of
nations.

Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
Council presidency for the month of August, as well
as to assure you of the full support of my delegation
as you steer the Council. We also welcome the new
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, Ms. Samantha Power, and wish her every
success. We would also like to pay tribute to the United
States of America for its presidency in July and thank
it for nominating Mr. David Brown as United Nations
Special Adviser on the Central African Republic. We
also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
commitment to my country.

With respect to Mr. Babacar Gaye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, his team and the United Nations
agencies on the ground assisting my people, I should
like to thank all of them and call upon them to continue
their efforts despite the numerous obstacles to peace,
stability and development of the Central African
Republic.

Finally, I would like to thank Ms. Margaret Vogt,
who, during her term and despite the various difficulties,
has spared no effort in carrying out her mission as
best she could. I would also like to thank my friend
Ambassador Jan Grauls who, as Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, has done much for my country.

Allow me to begin by thanking the Secretary-
General for the briefing on the situation in the
Central African Republic, which has provided us with
information on the tragedy experienced by the Central
African people. I take the floor today on behalf of
my suffering people, which has daily been subject to
killings, sexual attacks and inhuman and degrading
treatment of all sorts.

Yesterday, on 13 August, the Central African
Republic marked the fifty-third anniversary of
regaining its sovereignty, but also 53 years that have
seen the progressive erosion of the State. On 24 March,
the final blow was delivered to what remained of
an already fragile State. All institutions of power
disappeared. Today, the Central African Republic no
longer has an army, courts outside of Bangui, national
archives or civil records. The Government is no longer
able to pay its officials, nor can it keep hospitals stocked
with medication. The country has been delivered as a
war trophy to those who have passed themselves off as
administrators, tax collectors or local commanders.

There is a dramatic situation within the country,
where four-fifths of the people live. The situation in
the Central African Republic is very similar to that in
a brotherly country where the crisis is being resolved,
that is, the people are being held hostage and the social
fabric being torn by foreign traditions being imposed
from the outside. In addition, the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) continues to be a scourge to be eradicated.
We are pleased with the intention of all stakeholders on
that track and we would like to thank them for their
commitment to continue the fight against the LRA, to
put an end to its rebellion. Let us remain vigilant until
the chaotic situation has been resolved and justice is
served for all victims.

Today, we are pleased with the different meetings
and summits in Libreville, N'Djamena, Brazzaville
and Addis Ababa on the fate of the country. However,
my people continue to live in distress and look to
the Council at this time. My people await peace and
security so they can return home to their country, to
emerge from the bush and go home to their villages
and send their children to school. My people no longer
wish to fear for the future of their children and today
hope justice will be served because crimes have been
perpetrated. Justice should be served for the women
and children who have been victims of sexual attacks,
for houses burned and property looted and carted off.
The Central African people await the Council's help in
order to rebuild their country and finally leave behind
coups d'etat and rebellions, to freely elect their leaders,
and build political and economic institutions in an
inclusive manner. The Central African people would
like to take their destiny in their own hands and live
in a stable state of peace and enjoy good relations with
their neighbours.

As duly noted by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/20l3/470), the Central African State has
totally collapsed - and I am very sad to say that after
53 years of independence. The international community
must recognize all the consequences and shoulder its
responsibilities. I would therefore like to commend the
activities undertaken by all friendly countries, namely,
all of the countries that are represented around the
table here today, and all of our friends in the contact
group - the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
the Central African Republic, the African Union,
the European Union, the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie - all
of whom have somewhat alleviated the suffering of
the people in Bangui and, recently, throughout the rest
of the country. I would also like to welcome the work
of non-governmental organizations, which, in spite of
insufficient security, have been providing help to those
in need.

The seriousness of the situation in the Central
African Republic requires greater mobilization and
the involvement of the entire international community.
Specifically, the Central African people expect
the international community to facilitate the swift
deployment of the forces of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic, with
a clear mandate and significant resources from the
Security Council, so as to bring peace to the country
as a whole. We also urge that the mandate of the force
be broadened to the rebuilding of new defence and
security forces that are genuinely owned by the Central
African Republic and able to take up the task. The
Central African people expect the Security Council to
adopt sanctions targeting the perpetrators of the serious
violations of human rights described and condemned
in the briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General. The
Central African people request the United Nations to
work in concert with other bilateral and multilateral
partners to head the necessary economic and social
reconstruction of the country.
In order to render them adequate to this task, the
human and financial resources of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic must be strengthened. The human and
financial resources of the relevant United Nations
agencies should also be strengthened. And, finally,
we hope that the Security Council will appoint, or at
least consider appointing, a penholder for the Central
African Republic, because we do not wish this crisis to
continue to be a forgotten one.

Today, here and now, I ask that the Council
give hope back to the people of the Central African
Republic. I ask this on behalf of the young, defenceless
girl, brutally raped in Ouandago; of the mother who
gave birth to a child under inhuman conditions in
the hospital of Kanga-Bandoro, as Under-Secretary-
General Amos just described; of the widow whose
husband was murdered in cold blood in Galafondo
because he protested when his meagre possessions
were looted; of the families in Batangafo and Bangui
expelled from their houses so they could be occupied
by warlords; of the young student in Bangui, dragged
from a classroom and gratuitously killed; of the young
travellers who, because T-shirts with political slogans
were found in their suitcases, were arrested, tied up,
tortured, murdered and their bodies thrown into a
river; of the defenceless peasants in Markounda and
Kabo whose cattle were seized on their way to their
plantations, which were then destroyed by farmers
from elsewhere protected by armed men; and of the boy
whose school in Ndele was closed and who was forced
to become a child soldier.

Considering our leadership's inability to meet the
aspirations of our bewildered, helpless people, I ask
that the Council help us bring a new Central African
Republic into the world, to rebuild a State in the heart
of Africa, a modern State, based on peace, security and
stability; one where, simply, it is good to live.

