Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): A few
hours ago the armed forces of the United Kingdom, along
with those of the United States, took military action in
Iraq. This was not a hasty decision.

There has been a long road to this crisis. At any
point on that road, Iraq could have chosen to cooperate
fully and freely, thereby avoiding the action which we
have been forced to take. It is worth looking back down
that road to see why we have reached this point.

Security Council resolution 687 (1991), bringing to
an end the Gulf War, made it a condition of the ceasefire
that Iraq both destroy its weapons of mass destruction and
agree to the monitoring of its obligation to destroy such
weapons.

Why was this assurance so vital? Because Iraq had,
unprovoked, invaded Kuwait. Because in the course of
that conflict, Iraq had launched indiscriminate ballistic

 

missile attacks on neighbouring countries. Because Iraq had
already shown it was ready and willing to use the most
deadly weapons. It used chemical weapons extensively
against Iran, and against its own civilians in Halabja in
1988, using mustard gas and the nerve agent tabun, killing
thousands of civilians. Saddam Hussein is the only leader
ever to have authorized the use of nerve agents. Chemical
weapons casualties from the Iran-Iraq war number more
than twenty thousand. As was slowly revealed after the
Gulf War, Iraq had developed huge quantities of weapons
of the most deadly kind.

The United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
was set up to remove Iraq's extensive weapons of mass
destruction capabilities and to provide a full and verifiable
account of what Iraq had produced and used in the past. To
complete this task UNSCOM. was, in 1991, given
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to all the
areas, facilities, equipment and records it wished to inspect.

But Iraq has never given UN SCOM. the cooperation it
needed to complete its tasks. Instead, it has concealed the
evidence of its past and current programmes and has
engaged in a policy of harassment and deceit to thwart
UNSCOM. in its tasks. Iraq has blocked inspections
whenever it feared that anything incriminating would be
found. It has failed to produce documents UNSCOM. knows
to exist, documents that are demonstrably relevant to Iraq's
programmes of weapons of mass destruction. Even the
infamous "air force" document has yet not been handed
over.

Over the past 14 months, Iraq has deliberately
provoked a series of crises in an attempt to wear down the
will of the international community: in October 1997,
February 1998, August 1998 and at the end of October
1998. Each time, they used the withdrawal of cooperation
both for further prevarication and for the dispersal of their
military capability.

On 14 November, at the last moment and in the
knowledge that they were about to be attacked, the Iraqis
offered full, unconditional and unrestricted cooperation with
UNSCOM. The attack was called off. We willingly made
that last extra effort to avert the use of force. But we said
at the time that we would hold Saddam Hussein to his word
and that, should he break his word once more, there would
be no second chances. The Secretary-General added his
own words of warning, as did others with channels to
Baghdad. Those words were not heeded.

UNSCOM's report makes clear that Iraq has yet
again failed to keep its promises. The report details not
merely the obstruction but the fact that it relates directly
to documents, sites and personnel that would give a clue
as to the whereabouts of weapons of mass destruction and
the capabilities to make them. It is not obstruction simply
for the sake of it, but a plan of deceit to prevent those
weapons of mass destruction from being located and
destroyed.

UNSCOM. has made clear time and again that it can
only make progress in clearing up the outstanding
questions and establish an effective system of monitoring
and verification if Iraq offers real cooperation. Tragically,
that cooperation has not been forthcoming. The whole
continuing history of concealment and deceit is the reason
why we have reached the point of military action.

In this, our objectives are clear: to degrade Iraq's
capability to build and use weapons of mass destruction,
and to diminish the military threat Iraq poses to its
neighbours. The targets chosen, therefore, are targets
connected with his military capability, his weapons of
mass destruction and his ability to threaten his
neighbours.

There is a clear legal basis for military action in the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. Resolution
1154 (1998) made it clear that any violation by Iraq of its
obligations to allow the Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency unrestricted access
would have the severest consequences. That was three
resolutions and nine months ago. Resolution 1205 (1998)
established that Iraq's decision of 31 October 1998 to
cease cooperation with the Special Commission was a
flagrant violation of resolution 687 (1991), which laid
down the conditions for the 1991 ceasefire. By that
resolution, therefore, the Council implicitly revived the
authorization to use force given in resolution 678 (1990).
And Ambassador Butler's report makes clear that, despite
its undertakings to rescind the decision of 31 October,
Iraq has not only failed to resume full cooperation with
the Special Commission but has imposed new restrictions
on its work.

The British Prime Minister said in his statement
earlier this evening,

"This action could have been avoided. Since
the Gulf war, the entire international community has
worked to stop Saddam Hussein from keeping and
developing nuclear, chemical and biological weapons

 

and from continuing to threaten his neighbours. For
the safety and stability of the region and the wider
world, he cannot be allowed to do so. If he will not,
through reason and diplomacy, abandon his weapons
of mass destruction programme, it must be degraded
and diminished by military force. Having exhausted all
other avenues, there is no realistic alternative".

