I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, representative of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritania, for their insightful briefings. Viet Nam is very concerned about the security situation in the Sahel region. There has been an increase in the number of terrorist attacks on civilians, peacekeepers and security forces in the Sahel countries. Viet Nam would like to extend its deepest condolences to the Governments and the families of those who lost their lives due to recent attacks in Mali, Burkina Faso, the Niger and Chad. The perpetrators of those barbaric acts must be brought to justice. Viet Nam is also concerned about the withdrawal of State presence in the areas concerned and the further deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the region. In Burkina Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Guinea, Mali, the Niger and Senegal, 14.7 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been putting the Sahel region at risk of further instability and insecurity. Viet Nam welcomes the initiatives on capacity-building for the region, which include workshops on the role of women, national surveys on gender and human rights capacity-building for security-sector actors of the G-5 Sahel countries in Mali, and a regional workshop on human rights monitoring and the protection of sources, victims and witnesses in the Niger. Viet Nam welcomes the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in response to requests by the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. We call on the international community to support MINUSMA and other organizations in accomplishing their tasks and mandates in support of the operations of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. Against that backdrop, my _ delegation wishes to make _ the following observations. First, we urge all concerned parties to continue the fight against terrorism and violent extremism across West Africa and the Sahel. Without collective efforts, strong will and collaboration, the region cannot win this fight. Secondly, we also call on the Governments in the Sahel, regional and international organizations and other partners to strengthen their cooperation to tackle the root causes of terrorism. We join the Secretary-General in welcoming the adoption of the action plan to eradicate terrorism for the period 2020-2024 by the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States, on 21 December 2019. We also welcome the outcomes of the sixth annual summit of the G-5 Sahel Heads of State, held on 25 February 2020; the Pau summit, in January; and the high-level video-teleconference between the European Union and the G-5 Sahel Heads of State, held on 28 April 2019. Thirdly, we urge Governments and other concerned parties to uphold their obligations and responsibilities to implement international humanitarian law and ensure that humanitarian aid reaches those who most need it, without hindrance. Moreover, it is urgent to have a comprehensive plan and coordination among Governments in the Sahel, international organizations and other partners in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. Fourthly, we call for a coherent and integrated approach to security, humanitarian, climate-change and development challenges in the region. It is necessary for the various forces to enhance coordination, the exchange of information, transparency and mutual support through the establishment of the Coalition for the Sahel. There should also be more workshops, seminars on capacity-building and training courses for women and youth on sustainable development in the region. In conclusion, we commend the tireless efforts of MINUSMA, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the Coalition for the Sahel's joint command mechanism. We call for closer cooperation among and further efforts on the part of the United Nations, international partners and all parties in West Africa and the Sahel to fight terrorism and violent extremism, ensure unimpeded access to humanitarian aid and join hands to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
