Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for its initiative to organize this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The topic is extremely important, not only for the
Security Council, but also for the United Nations
system as a whole.

My delegation wishes to acknowledge the
valuable report submitted by the Secretary-General
(S/2007/643), as well as the briefing made by Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, whose information and proposed measures will
help to strengthen our collective ability within the
United Nations to protect civilians in armed conflict -
people who are vulnerable and deserve our immediate
attention. We must bear in mind that the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians rests with States,
which must, in turn, request international aid if they
cannot provide such protection.

Having taken note of the conclusions and key
actions identified in the Secretary-General's report, my
delegation wishes to comment on their possible
implementation and importance.

First, regarding the conduct of hostilities, it
remains imperative that we raise awareness about the
fact that full respect for civilians and international
humanitarian law must prevail among armed groups,
other non-State actors and civil society. It is very
advisable to include that essential premise in
resolutions authorizing United Nations peacekeeping
missions; it is a message that should be widely
disseminated. All our efforts must focus on
strengthening existing norms and on applying them
more effectively. In that connection, we also support
the recommendation that reports be requested from
peacekeeping missions and other relevant missions on

measures and modalities adopted to ensure the
protection of civilians during hostilities within their
areas of operation.

Secondly, the issue of sexual violence has been a
high priority for the Organization. In recent years,
there has been significant progress in the areas of
standards of conduct, investigations and the
accountability of personnel serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. However, sexual exploitation
and abuse continue to be perpetrated primarily by
irregular armed groups, and these acts claim thousands
of victims. Women, children and other vulnerable
groups are particularly victimized by armed conflicts.

We believe that this is a multidimensional issue,
and we have identified three main areas in which we
can work to put an end to this type of violence. Those
three areas, in which active work is being carried out
within the Organization, are prevention, the
implementation of measures and recovery, including
assistance to victims.

With respect to the measure calling for the
inclusion of complete information concerning sexual
violence in a specific annex to all reports submitted to
the Security Council, we recommend that such
information be submitted after due process has been
carried out and completed. That would enable us to
consider and assess the Organization's actions at every
stage of the mission, including the steps taken up to the
completion of a trial that would show whether the
accused was guilty or not. Furthermore, we believe that
such information should also be considered by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and its
open-ended working group. Another suggestion would
be for the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to submit regular reports to the Security
Council every time a mission's mandate is renewed.

Regarding the recommendation that serious cases
of rape and other forms of sexual violence be referred
to the International Criminal Court, we wish to point
out that we must be mindful of the principle of legality.
We must recall that the Security Council is not a legal
entity, but a political entity responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
although it could, as a result of information received,
denounce extreme violence. Similarly, we would
caution against the imposition of selective sanctions,
which could jeopardize the progress made by the
Council last December with regard to the imposition of

just and transparent sanctions in accordance with due
process.

Thirdly, we should like to comment briefly on the
topic of the right to housing, land and property. There
is no doubt that we must create conditions conducive to
the voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. If what is
proposed here will help Governments to develop a
registry system, we consider it a useful measure. What
we cannot support is that mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions include the authority to issue
ownership documents, or that they interfere in rating
situations of illicit confiscation and appropriation of
land and property abandoned by refugees and displaced
persons. Even though that certainly is a critical
problem, it should be resolved jointly with the local
authorities and in accordance with the legal system of
the country in question.

Fourthly and lastly, we refer to the humanitarian
consequences of cluster munitions. Civilians, in
particular women and children, are the primary Victims
of gunfire and indiscriminate violence in populated
areas. That happens mainly in cities, where the
belligerents do not manage to distinguish - or are not
interested in distinguishing - between combatants and
the civilian population, or where they use methods of
combat or types of weapons such as cluster munitions,
which are completely disproportionate with respect to
their military objectives.

We fully concur with the report of the Secretary-
General on the need to put an end to the terrible
humanitarian consequences of cluster munitions and
the need for concerted international action for that
purpose. Guatemala, which places a priority on the
framework of the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW), will continue to participate
constructively in debates on this matter in different
international forums in order to ban those weapons'
excessive lethal effects.

Thus country has played an active role in the
recent Latin American conferences on cluster
munitions, which took place in Peru and Costa Rica
this year. In those conferences we reiterated that cluster
munitions cause unacceptable harm to the civilian
population, in particular the most vulnerable groups.
We also acknowledged the enormous damage to the
comprehensive development of populations. Also, the
international community was called upon to join -
aware of the importance of the Oslo process, which my
country resolutely supports - that initiative, which is
a complementary undertaking that does not ignore the
efforts made in the context of the CCW Convention.

We hope that the results of the international
conference on cluster munitions, which will be held in
Vienna in December, will see substantial progress to
reach consensus on an action plan to develop and
implement a new instrument of international
humanitarian law that could resolve all of the
unacceptable aspects of cluster munitions.

We must ensure collectively that populations at
risk have access at all times to the best protection
possible, that those who continue their abuses be
responsible for their actions and that the promotion,
supervision and building of capacity yield tangible
results and make a true difference in the lives of
people. The Security Council and the entire
international community will be judged according to
their ability to protect the most vulnerable. That is a
challenge to which we must respond immediately.

