Mr. Cardi (Italy): Allow me to begin by thanking
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Korea for organizing and presiding over this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and today's speakers for
their important contributions to the discussion.

Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and wishes to make
several remarks in its national capacity.

The adoption, 10 years ago, of resolution 1540 (2004)
marked an important step forward in strengthening
global efforts to prevent the acquisition and use by
terrorists of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons and
materials, as well as their means ofdelivery. Since then,
Italy has adopted legislation, regulations and policies to
comply with the provisions of the resolution. Recently,
at the third Nuclear Security Summit, held in The
Hague, several States and international organizations
gathered to move a step forward in strengthening
nuclear security. On that occasion, a joint statement
on promoting the full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) was presented by a large number
of States, including Italy. It was a valuable opportunity
to reiterate the importance of resolution 1540 (2004)
and its comprehensive and cross-cutting scope, which
goes beyond the nuclear domain.
At The Hague we also submitted a gift basket: a
joint statement on nuclear security training and support
centres of excellence, which serves to reaffirm that
education and training are crucial to the exchange of
information and best practices among States, to the
strengthening of capacity-building and security culture
and to the maintenance of national high-level and well
trained technical experts.

Over the past few years, Italy has paid special
attention to education, training and institutional
capacity-building as essential elements of an effective
safety and security infrastructure. The International
School on Nuclear Security, established in 2010
by the International Atomic Energy Agency at the
International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste,
will hold its fourth annual training course in 2014. We
believe that such educational efforts should lie at the
heart of any strategy that seeks to strengthen a global
response to threats from weapons of mass destruction
and to prevent non-State actors from gaining access to
sensitive material and knowledge.

Italy is a member of the Proliferation Security
Initiative. It is also a founding member of the Global
Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction and participates in the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism. In
2013, within the framework of the Global Partnership,
we co-chaired with the United States the centres of
excellence sub-working group, which can play a critical
role in strengthening the institutional capacity of States
to mitigate the risks, including criminal activities,
associated with chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear weapons.

The broader scope of resolution 1540 (2004)
relates to major export-control regimes. The current
Italian chairmanship of the Missile Technology Control
Regime is also working to stress that connection.

