Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you and your country,
Mr. President, at this important time for the friendly
nation of Guatemala, on its assumption of the presidency
ofthe Security Council - as you said, for the first time
in its history - for the month of October. Half way
through Guatemala's term on the Security Council, you
can already be proud of your country's contribution to
the work of the Council.

Allow me also to thank Special Representative
Mariano Fernandez Amunategui for his briefing and
to convey to him and the entire team of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
our full appreciation for their efforts to assist Haiti in
its stabilization and development.

More than two years after the disaster that struck
the Republic of Haiti, significant and notable progress
has been made, following the delays already pointed out
in implementing certain key measures in the country's
stabilization process. Morocco welcomes the efforts
of the Haitian authorities to conclude the institutional
reforms needed to strengthen the rule of law.

The Senate's approval of the appointment of a new
prime minister, the publication of the amended 1987
Constitution, the appointment of judges to the appeals
court, the establishment of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary and the launching of the process to
implement an Electoral Council are all significant and
essential stages carried out to bolster State institutions
in accordance with the commitments undertaken by the
Government.

Also, the participation ofwomen in the Government
has been raised to 30 per cent. We welcome that and
the allocation to women of the strategic portfolios of
finance and tourism. We also welcome the adoption
and promulgation of the law on the functions of the
Ombudsman.

Turning to security, we welcome the peaceful
manner in which the authorities re-established order
following the incidents of 17 April incited by former
members of the army and young recruits. That
incident demonstrates the urgent need for the Haitian
Government to accelerate the training of the 15,000
police officers stipulated by the five-year development
plan in order to cover the entire territory by 2016.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, while
significant progress has been made in removing rubble
and rehousing displaced persons, the needs remain
enormous. More than 400,000 people are still living
in more than 500 camps. The situation is all the more
worrisome because the gradual withdrawal of various
humanitarian groups due to the lack of resources, which
contributes to the deterioration of the situation.

Since its establishment, MINUSTAH has amply and
decisively contributed to the operations for the recovery
and stabilization of the country. We were able to see
that with our own eyes when the Council visited Haiti
at the beginning of the year. We must congratulate the
entire Mission staff for what they have accomplished
to date despite obstacles and hardships. While giving
full credit to the Haitian Government for taking charge
of the tasks indispensible to the safety and well-being
of the people, we believe that MINUSTAH should
continue to support the Government's efforts and should
gradually reduce its presence as the situation improves
and stabilizes. In that regard, my country supports the
renewal of MINUSTAH'S mandate as recommended
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2012/678).
The proposals in that report with respect to a reduction
in MINUSTAH staffing strike us as realistic for a
smooth transition and a progressive withdrawal, with
MINUSTAH concentrating its activity on the primary
tasks identified in the report.

More than two years after the terrible earthquake
that struck Haiti, the task before the Haitian authorities
remains difficult and filled with challenges. It is up to
them, of course, to redouble their efforts, demonstrate
their unshakeable commitment to reconstructing the
country, reinforce good governance and set in motion
the reforms needed to rebuild trust, consolidate stability
and encourage outside investment. Nonetheless, the
support and assistance of the international community,
the United Nations and international financial
institutions remains indispensable and critical to
enable the country to return to normalcy and meet the
aspirations of its people. Morocco, for its part, whose
Royal Armed Forces contributed to Haiti's return to
peace and helped to mitigate the humanitarian impact
of the 2010 quake, remains committed alongside the
friendly people of Haiti to strengthening the gains

made and to building a peaceful and prosperous future
for Haiti.

