Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in
welcoming President Mbeki and thanking him for his
valuable briefing and his mediation efforts in the
Sudan. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Menkerios,
for his important briefing and wise leadership of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). I
thank, too, the Permanent Representative of the Sudan
and the representative of the Government of Southern
Sudan for their statements.

We have repeatedly stressed in the Council the
importance of reducing tensions in the Abyei area and
reaching an agreement about it, because it is a priority
issue that is considered crucial to avoiding a relapse
into war. We have also stressed the need to complete
negotiations on the remaining outstanding issues and
post-referendum matters. In that regard, we welcome
the temporary agreement on Abyei, reached as a result
of negotiations held in Addis Ababa, and we would like
to acknowledge the role played by the Prime Minister
of Ethiopia, Mr. Meles Zenawi, as well as the roles of
President Mbeki and Mr. Menkerios, who helped the
parties reach agreement. We also welcome the
Ethiopian forces' readiness to deploy rapidly into
Abyei in order to implement the agreement.

We also wish to welcome the parallel progress
that has been taking place to deal with the tense
situation in South Kordofan. We commend the ongoing
efforts of President Mbeki to help reach a solution to
the outstanding issues and post-referendum matters.
Here, we welcome the progress that has been made in
dealing with economic and financial issues.

We call on UNMIS to continue consulting with
the relevant parties on the Secretary-General's
suggestion for a three-month extension of UNMIS, as
stated in the last report, in order to arrive at an
agreement on post-referendum matters and the
remaining part of the CPA, which are the foundations
of stability in the Sudan and in South Sudan, as well as
of the region in its entirety.

In closing, and from a different angle, we would
also like to call on all parties in Darfur to sign the
document issued by the expanded conference in Doha
and to work on implementing it expeditiously, in a
manner that will lead to a permanent ceasefire and a
final settlement of the Darfur crisis.

