Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this briefing on
the latest developments in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. It congratulates Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, on his edifying presentation, which has
once again recalled for the members of the Council the
need to collectively pursue efforts to ensure the lasting
return of peace and stability to a region that for many
years has been afflicted by multidimensional crises.
I wish also to thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for her
very clear briefing.

Seventy-two years after the adoption of resolution
181 (II), in 1947, on the Palestine Plan of Partition,
the international community continues to face the
challenge of addressing a complex crisis. In the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank in particular, the political and
security situation continues to deteriorate, resulting
in a deeply worrisome humanitarian crisis. Given
this concerning situation, my country would like to
recall its commitment to both the security of the State
of Israel and the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. It also reiterates its firm
support for the two-State solution, with both States
coexisting peacefully in the framework of the 1967
borders. Here my delegation urges the Palestinian and
Israeli parties to demonstrate wisdom by relaunching
the dialogue on the basis of the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations.

According to the World Bank, the unemployment
rate in the Palestinian territories is close to 32 per cent,
a rate that has not been seen in more than two decades,
while the poverty rate is approximately 29 per cent. The
situation is even more concerning in the city of Gaza,
where 54 per cent of the active population, including
70 per cent of the youth, is unemployed. In addition,
there is an inadequate supply of decent housing and of
basic services such as health care, education, access to
drinking water and electricity.

In the face of this serious humanitarian situation,
Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call on the Council to work
in close coordination with the specialized agencies of
the United Nations and all partners in the urgent quest
to find solutions that would make it possible to mobilize
the assistance necessary to meet the basic needs of the
peoples affected.

On this point, it wishes to urge once again all
international partners to step up their support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which plays a key
role in the international architecture of support for the
Palestinian people, who are in distress. Such support
will make it possible not only to continue UNRWA's
humanitarian efforts in the region but also to gradually
reduce its budget deficit, which is estimated at more
than $200 million.

Here Cote d'Ivoire welcomes Switzerland's
commitment to providing a significant contribution
with a view to UNRWA reform and to allowing the
Agency to continue its mission of assisting the more
than 5.4 million Palestinian refugees living in Lebanon,
Jordan and Syria, and in Gaza and the West Bank.

My country believes that the worrisome
humanitarian situation, as well as the threat of a
region-wide spillover of the conflict, will be under
control only when a consensual solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis is found. On this point, it welcomes
the international consensus on the need to resume the
peace process, which is the only viable framework for
mutually acceptable solutions on such key issues as the
status of Jerusalem, the lifting of the blockade of Gaza,
putting an end to the building of settlements in the West
Bank and the issue of the security of the Palestinian
people in Hebron.

On this point, my country calls for the creation of
conditions conducive to the renewal of the mandate
of the Temporary International Presence in Hebron, a
civilian observation mission set up in the framework
of the Protocol in accordance with the 1995 Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, also
known as Oslo II.

My delegation urges all parties to show restraint and
to engage in a constructive dialogue in the framework
of renewed peace negotiations and to refrain from any
unilateral actions that could compromise the efforts
of the international community to reach a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. In that context, it supports
all actions and initiatives that could contribute to
inter-Palestinian reconciliation, in particular between
Fatah and Hamas, so as to allow the Palestinian
Authority to exercise its sovereign functions in Gaza
and the West Bank.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov and Ms. Ursula Mueller in
their tireless efforts to ensure a resolution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and its humanitarian consequences,
which is necessary for the restoration of lasting peace
and stability in the region as a whole.

