Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I should like at the
outset, on behalf of my delegation, to express our
sincere appreciation to the members of the Security
Council for convening this open debate on the agenda
item "Threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts". I would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the
Chairman of the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Andrey Denisov, for
his informative briefing on the activities of the
Committee.

The Government of Indonesia has consistently
been of the view that we need global cooperation and
involvement - with the United Nations at its centre -
to effectively combat international terrorism. It is to
the Organization that Member States must turn to
ensure that the instruments for eradicating this menace
are multidimensional in nature. Indonesia believes that,
in the absence of such approaches, solutions can be
only temporary and limited in nature. It is self-evident
that such approaches will be successful only if they are
carried out under multilateral auspices. Without such
an approach, efforts to deal effectively with terrorism
will only fall short of their fundamental objectives.

Long before the terrorist attacks in September
2001, we ourselves were the unfortunate victims of
acts of terrorism. We know very well the pain, the
suffering and the devastating effects that terrorists have
brought to our society. As a result, Indonesia has begun
to enforce various measures to mitigate this menace. At
the national level, a series of decisions and steps have
been taken, not only to expose the perpetrators of
terrorism but also to successfully prosecute them.
Those measures have been carried out strictly within
the framework of the rule of law, democratic processes
and non-discriminatory norms, and they have thereby
gained the public's confidence. Indonesia, bearing in
mind that terrorist networks and activities transcend
national boundaries, has been cooperating at the
bilateral, regional and multilateral levels.

Indonesia welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1566 (2004) on international terrorism.
We believe that its unanimous adoption will further
intensify the international community's efforts to combat
this evil. The resolution not only condemned all acts of
terrorism in all their forms but also stressed the need to
strengthen judicial cooperation - particularly with
respect to prosecution and extradition - which has
been recognized as a fundamental principle. The
resolution also established a working group whose task
will be, among other things, to consider and submit
information regarding individuals, groups or entities
involved in or associated with terrorist activities.

Indonesia recognizes that seeking to impose
practical measures to prevent and punish terrorists is
only one side of the coin. The other side is ensuring
that such measures are taken in accordance with
international law and with respect for human rights. In
this context, we believe that the working group would
benefit from lessons learned and the experience of the
Al Qaeda sanctions Committee in establishing a
consolidated list.

I should like now to turn to the CTC work
programme for the thirteenth 90-day period, which
covers the months October through December 2004.
Indonesia welcomes and supports the programme,
which in our view will continue to enhance the
effectiveness of our counter-terrorism measures. In this
connection, Indonesia supports measures intended to
enhance the counter-terrorism capabilities of Member
States.
Finally, I would like to stress the conviction of
Indonesia that terrorism is the problem of every nation
and that we can best fight and vanquish this menace
through multidimensional and multilateral approaches
based on international law and respect for human
rights. Indonesia is one such party and, as we have
stated in the past, we stand ready to take the necessary
measures and to work with other States and
organizations to ensure that terrorism will run out of
room to hide and that it is defeated.

