Mr. Borghini (Monaco) (spoke in French): The
principality of Monaco is always very mindful of
anything that affects children. We have taken note of
the important report of the Secretary-General
(S/2003/1053), and we thank him for it. We also thank
his Special Representative and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) for
their briefings this morning and their work.

We noted with satisfaction some progress in the
report, particularly in defining norms, drafting reports,
establishing aid and monitoring mechanisms, raising
awareness among the public and authorities, continuing
negotiations and drawing up peace agreements,
working to promote child protection and reintegration,
and in the development of the situation of some
countries - unfortunately rare - all of that often with
the valuable participation of non-governmental
organizations.

However, as the Council is aware, children
continue to be killed, wounded, mutilated, tortured,
raped, prostituted, abducted, displaced, terrorized,
forcibly recruited, forced to become killers themselves,
and so on. As the report stresses, all of this takes place
in a general climate of impunity. The two lists that
appear in the annexes to the report (S/2003/1053) and
that include more than 50 groups and factions or even,
it seems, the armed forces of Member States of our
Organization, are very disturbing. Of course, we are
aware of all the difficulties encountered in trying to put
an end to the conflicts that lead to all of these crimes
and in trying to put an end the crimes themselves, and
we understand that action on these issues needs to be
varied, ongoing, persistent and coordinated. To that
end, we support, of course, the fundamental principles
that should be implemented in the area of the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration of children, both boys and girls, whether
disabled or not. We likewise support the
recommendations for establishing dialogue with the
parties to the conflicts and the commitments resulting
from this, to the extent possible.

Finally, we support the final recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, in
particular, the recommendations dealing with concrete
action decided on by the Security Council, with appeals
for compliance with norms, with condemnation of
violations committed and implementation of targeted
measures, and with the role of the International
Criminal Court in pursuing the perpetrators.

Before I conclude, I wish to reiterate the thanks
already addressed this morning to the French
delegation for its active role on this issue. And, truly
concluding at this point, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate Chile on the way you have organized and
facilitated this meeting of the Council. Since this is the
first time that I address the Council, I would like to
greet all members, whether permanent or non-
permanent, former or new, and I wish them courage,
determination and success in discharging their
responsibilities.

