Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the high office
of President of the Security Council for the current
month. I am sure that under your able guidance the
Council will successfully fulfil its responsibilities.
The situation in Somalia, as analysed by the special
political adviser to the Secretary-General and presented in
his briefing to the Security Council, does not present a
rosy picture at all. After the withdrawal of United Nations
peace-keeping forces, the prospects for reconciliation
between General Aidid's, Mr. Ali Mahdi's and the other
warring factions had improved. It was hoped that, after
the withdrawal of United Nations forces, the various
political factions would work towards national
reconciliation in order to restore peace, provide security
for the people of Somalia in general and foreigners in
particular, and bring about socio-economic development.
However, the situation prevailing today, which is still
characterized by slow economic activity, by disease and
by widespread malnutrition affecting women and children,
reminds us of Somalia's tragic history.

The shooting of a representative of an Italian non-
governmental organization indicated once again that
foreign nationals working in Somalia were not safe. This
sense of insecurity has not only hampered the scope of
international humanitarian assistance, but has also created
numerous logistical difficulties for the personnel of the
non-governmental organizations. The international
humanitarian organizations are also facing serious
problems with the local administrations. The building of
military bases by various warlords can bring only misery
to the people of Somalia, especially after the assassination
of a noted peace activist, Mr. Elman Ali Mohammad, and
particularly if the ongoing negotiations for reconciliation
fail.

It is almost a year now since the last peace-keepers
left Somalia. Against the backdrop of all information
received from various agencies, the Security Council
needs to review the situation in Somalia. We need to

 

furnish answers to the following questions: have the goals
set forth before the withdrawal of United Nations peace-
keeping forces been achieved? Have the people been
allowed to determine their own destiny without fear? Are
people of Somalia leading their lives according to their own
free will? Have the devastated buildings, hospitals and
schools been rebuilt? Has the widespread devastation been
replaced by the greater level of economic activity that
prevailed before 1992? And, has a government of national
reconciliation been formed? If the answer to these questions
is in the negative, then the Security Council should not
abandon Somalia at such a critical juncture in its history:
the United Nations agenda of ensuring a decent and
harmonious life for the people of Somalia still remains
unfinished.
Pakistan paid an unacceptably high price in Somalia
with the death of 32 of its peace-keepers, but we stood firm
in our solidarity with the international community in order
to achieve the greater objective of preserving peace and
security in that country. We will continue to support our
Somali brethren in their effort to initiate a process of
reconstruction and rehabilitation.

Pakistan urges the Security Council to demonstrate its
credibility by taking effective and a positive steps to boost
its role of mediation and arbitration in Somalia, and in all
other places where disputes are taking a heavy toll of
human life and property, honour and dignity. The most
important of all these elements is the resolve of peoples to
determine their future according to their own free will.

The maintenance of peace and security is the
permanent responsibility of the United Nations. If peace
breaks down in one part of the world, the breakdown
cannot be cauterized by ignoring it. Local or national
conflicts have the potential of threatening regional and
international peace and security. The United Nations
therefore cannot afford to put serious problems on the back
burner or on an autopilot: this kind of passive crisis
management can be not only a betrayal of the United
Nations own mandate, but will also lead to bloodier and
costlier conflicts and strife. The United Nations should not
suspend its own mechanisms of good offices, arbitration or
mediation once the spotlight on a crisis is switched off. The
Security Council and the elaborate apparatus of the United
Nations should therefore keep a sustained and sustainable
interest and involvement in lingering and festering disputes.

The implosion in Somalia had hurt the Somali
economy and polity very deeply. The scars left by the civil
war must, of course, be healed by the Somalis themselves,
but with the assistance of the international community.
We should not write off States with serious internal
problems as failed States; they need our constant support
until they become fully functional and operational.

