Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking the Australian presidency for providing
me with this timely and very important opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's efforts pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014).
I recall that the Committee, with the support of its
Executive Directorate (CTED), is mandated by that
resolution to identify gaps in Member States' capacities
to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005)
that may hinder States' ability to stem the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters; identify good practices
in States' implementation efforts; and facilitate the
necessary technical assistance to fill implementation
gaps. While implementing its mandate, the Committee,
with the support of CTED, has prepared a preliminary
analysis of the principal implementation gaps. This
non-State-specific analysis will be issued as a document
of the Security Council under the symbol S/20l4/807.
Allow me to highlight some of the key findings of this
analysis.

With regard to the legal framework. States must
determine whether their laws criminalize specific acts
related to foreign terrorist fighters, in accordance with
paragraph 6 of resolution 2178 (2014). Our preliminary
analysis indicates that, although many States have
introduced, pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
comprehensive legislation that could be transposed
to meet the challenges of the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, others do not have adequate legislation in this
respect. Some States, for example, do not yet adequately
criminalize the broad range of preparatory acts related
to the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, including acts
aimed at facilitating the travel of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as the travel of such fighters through
their territories in transit for the purpose of committing
terrorist acts in other States.

It is also evident that bringing foreign terrorist
fighters to justice faces significant practical challenges.
Many States lack the capacity needed to ensure
that individuals participating in activities related to
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters are brought to
justice through effective prosecution in accordance
with resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2178 (2014). Among
other things, the Committee's ongoing dialogue with
States has revealed difficulties in obtaining evidence
from other countries - whether of origin, transit or
destination - and has shown that few foreign terrorist
fighters reveal their plans before leaving. International
judicial cooperation on the matter needs to be stepped
up and made more effective. Gaps also continue to
exist in arrangements and mechanisms relating to
extradition.

On the law enforcement side, resolution 1373 (2001)
requires States to take the necessary steps to prevent
the commission of terrorist acts. Many States, however,
lack adequate capacities to monitor communications
through special investigative techniques and other
lawful methods in implementing this preventive
aspect. Gaps exist also in the international exchange
of information by law enforcement and intelligence
agencies aimed at preventing the commission of terrorist
acts and bringing terrorists, including foreign terrorist
fighters, to justice, including by the provision of early
warning to other States by exchange of information.
This form of information exchange can be vital to
countering the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
and needs to be enhanced.

Significant gaps remain in Member States'
implementation of the border-control provisions of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). The lack of
relevant information and analytical capability at border
crossings hampers States' ability to detect and prevent
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters. Many
States are either inadequately connected to or do not
fully exploit the databases of INTERPOL. Controls on
the issuance of identity papers and travel documents,
and measures to prevent counterfeiting, forgery or
fraudulent use of identity papers and travel documents
are also lagging, for a variety of reasons, including a
lack of effective mechanisms to implement related
requirements. The porous and lengthy nature of many
land borders - including those of States most affected
by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters - also
continues to increase States' vulnerabilities.

When it comes to preventing and disrupting terrorist
financing, many States have yet to ensure, pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), that their legal frameworks
include the criminalization of terrorist financing, or to
establish mechanisms for the freezing ofterrorist assets
without delay. The ability to effectively identify and
prevent the illicit cross-border movement of cash and to
regulate alternative remittances needs to be addressed
with greater urgency. States also need to work actively
with the private sector and non-profit organizations
to provide guidance on how best to protect financial
flows from being diverted to terrorist uses. Perhaps the
most critical gap in States' capacities is the inadequate
sharing of comprehensive, useful and timely financial
information by domestic law enforcement and
intelligence partners or by national agencies and their
international counterparts.

Countering incitement to terrorism and providing
an effective and calibrated counter-narrative is key to
tackling violent extremism, which can be conducive
to terrorism. The emphasis on its importance is one of
the most novel aspects of resolution 2178 (2014), which
is also of relevance in the context of resolution 1624
(2005). Some States have not yet taken adequate steps
to initiate community-engagement programmes or to
develop strategies for effectively conveying targeted
counter-messages aimed at specific groups that may be
vulnerable to radicalization and the spread of violent
extremism. There are also gaps in States' efforts to
counter the use of information and communications
technologies, including the Internet, by terrorists and
their supporters to incite terrorist acts and encourage
support and sympathy for terrorist groups.

Another important gap in many States is the lack of
effective strategies and programmes for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of returning foreign terrorist fighters.

The development of such strategies and programmes is
a specific requirement of resolution 2178 (2014), which
also requires States to adopt prosecutorial strategies to
hold foreign terrorist fighters accountable for terrorist
acts while assessing whether alternative means exist to
better facilitate their rehabilitation and reintegration.

Finally, there continue to be significant gaps in
States' efforts to ensure compliance withtheir obligations
under international law, including international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law in the context of counter-terrorism
measures taken to implement resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005), and this may foreshadow similar gaps
in the implementation ofresolution 2178 (2014). Respect
for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule
of law are complementary and mutually reinforcing
with effective counter-terrorism measures, and are an
essential part of a successful counter-terrorism effort.
The failure of States to comply with these and other
international obligations, including under the Charter
of the United Nations, is one of the factors contributing
to increased radicalization and fosters a sense of
impunity.

Against the backdrop of the new challenges of
terrorism, the Committee is aware of the fact that ever
more countries are recognizing the grave threat posed
by the global nature of foreign terrorist fighters. In
this regard, counter-terrorism actions and measures
are either being considered, reviewed or undertaken by
States to address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as in countering violent extremism
that can be conducive to terrorism. This opens
new dimensions and possibilities for international
cooperation.

The Committee, with the support of CTED,
will continue to develop and deepen the analysis of
States' gaps and assistance needs with regard to the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). That will help States comply with resolution
2178 (2014) and, in so doing, will build on CTED's
unique knowledge base with regard to country-
specific, regional and global assessments of States'
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005).

The Counter-Terrorism Committee will also continue
to compile good practices and make recommendations
to States for strengthening their counter-terrorism
programmes and will continue to count upon key
partners in those endeavours.

Ultimately, the facilitation of technical assistance
is a core aspect of the mandate conveyed by resolution
2178 (2014). The Committee and CTED will underpin
their technical assistance facilitation work with specific
efforts and approaches, taking advantage of the data
gathered by the Fusion Task Force using a gaps analysis
technique. That will include working with States, at
their request, on the development of comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategies. In terms of the delivery
of technical assistance, other players, both within
and outside of the United Nations system, such as
the Counter-Terrorism Task Force, entities within the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force framework and donor States of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, are of paramount importance.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED will
continue to explore effective ways and approaches to
achieving the objectives of counter-terrorism capacity-
building.

The Committee looks forward to future opportunities
for updating the Security Council and the wider
membership on its efforts pursuant to resolution 2178
(2014).
