Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express our thanks to the Secretary-
General for his statement. Allow me also to thank
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, for his important briefing to the Security
Council on his recent visit to Myanmar. My delegation
strongly supports the efforts of the Secretary-General,
and particularly through his Special Envoy,
Mr. Gambari, and we hope that those efforts will meet
with success.

My delegation condemns acts of repression that
prevent the spread of freedom in all parts of the world.
These have many manifestations and forms. We regret
the most recent events in Myanmar and hope that the
situation will return to normal. We call for stability,
achieved through peaceful means, as soon as possible
in the service of the national interests of Myanmar.

In our View, the issue of Myanmar must be
addressed in a highly professional manner, without
selectivity or discrimination. We must understand that
what is needed here is to find solutions, without
resorting to confrontation with Myanmar.

It must be recalled that some principal and
subsidiary bodies of the United Nations continue to
consider the situation in Myanmar. On 2 October 2007
the Human Rights Council adopted its resolution S-5/ 1,
on the situation of human rights in Myanmar. We
would therefore prefer that the Security Council's
approach to this issue be based on close coordination
with those bodies. My delegation would also like to
stress that the ideal way for the Security Council to
deal with this issue would be to support the good
offices of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy,
as well as those of regional organizations and
neighbouring countries, in finding a solution to the
situation in Myanmar, and to avoid attempting to
interfere in the situation in any way.

Finally, we call on the Government of Myanmar
to investigate the recent violations and to bring the
perpetrators to justice. We call on that Government to
resolve internal issues before it is too late. We strongly

call on the authorities in Myanmar to cooperate with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, to fully
assist him and to show greater flexibility, with a View
to achieving prosperity for the people of Myanmar.

