The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I would like to begin by thanking Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for his valuable briefing on the political
track in Syria. I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
full support of the State of Kuwait for Mr. Pedersen's
efforts to revive the Syrian political process. We call
on all parties to support the Special Envoy and work to
help him fully discharge his mandate.

We reaffirm that there is no military solution to
the Syrian crisis. The only solution is a just political
settlement that is facilitated by the United Nations
and Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, in conformity with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). That resolution sets forth the
various steps that are to be taken during the political
transition phase, including the drafting of a new
constitution and the holding of free and fair elections
that include, under the constitution, all Syrians
inside and outside the country, with United Nations
supervision. In that context, we reaffirm the need for
the constitutional committee to be balanced, inclusive
and credible. We hope that the beginning of its work
will pave the way for the long-awaited political process.

We have been following closely and with concern
the military escalation ofrecent weeks in the north-west
of Syria, which has led to the displacement of nearly
350,000 people, and attacks on civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools, resulting in casualties
among innocent civilians. We once again condemn the
targeting of innocent civilians by any perpetrator and
recall the need for all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We also condemn all attacks on civilian-populated
areas waged by terrorist groups, including those listed
on the Security Council sanctions list. At the same
time, we recall that anti-terrorism operations in no
way exempt any party to a conflict from its obligations
under international law, including its duty to abide by
the principles of distinguishing targets, proportionality,
precaution and protecting civilians and civilian targets.
Even wars have rules that must be respected.

As military actions continue in north-west Syria, we
express our concern over their effects and repercussions
on the political process. We reaffirm the importance of
the memorandum of understanding between Turkey and
Russia and call for its implementation. We also call for
the implementation of confidence-building measures
between the parties, including making progress on
detainees, prisoners and disappeared persons. We recall
that this month the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2474 (2019), on persons reported
missing during armed conflict. The resolution was
the first of its kind and must be implemented on the
ground. Its provisions must also be implemented in all
conflicts throughout the world, including in Syria. We
emphasize that it will be impossible to achieve a lasting
and comprehensive peace in Syria without justice and
ensuring that there is no impunity for those who have
committed the most heinous crimes since the start of
the Syrian crisis in 2011.

In conclusion, we reiterate that this conflict
must be settled peacefully, in line with resolution
2254 (2015), in order to enable the Syrian people to
fulfil their legitimate aspirations through a political
settlement that covers all segments of Syrian society
and preserves the unity, independence and sovereignty
of Syria. Indeed, since we are speaking of sovereignty,
we reiterate that the Golan is Syrian Arab territory
occupied by Israel, the occupying Power. The seizure
and annexation by force ofterritories have been rejected
and are in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 497 (1981).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

