I thank the President of the Security Council for convening today's meeting and for his briefing. I also thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing and Ms. Noura Ghazi Safadi for reminding us that we must not turn a blind eye to the existence of non-violent activists in Syria. I would express my sincere gratitude for her informative comments on a topic that is very dear to me. The United States reiterates its call for the Al-Assad regime to immediately release the thousands of civilians being arbitrarily held in detention centres where, as we have noted before, crowded and inhumane conditions significantly increase the risk of a rapid spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Equally important is progress on the Constitutional Committee, whose stakeholders have agreed on the agenda but have not met in recent months because of the unwillingness of the Chair representing the regime to convene virtually. We welcome Special Envoy Pedersen's announcement of the agreement of the opposition and the regime to convene the Constitutional Committee in August. Last week, Syrian and Russian air strikes in Idlib and north-western Hama caused the largest disruption of the Idlib ceasefire agreement since it was established by Turkey and Russia on 5 March. The United States condemns these acts of violence by Syria and Russia, as well as provocations by terrorist groups on the ground, in violation of the ceasefire. We call for an immediate end to air strikes by the regime and Russia, and we urge Damascus and Moscow to recommit to an enduring verifiable nationwide ceasefire. Maintaining the ceasefire in north-west Syria is absolutely vital for the achievement of a political solution to this conflict, and it is essential for the work of the Special Envoy and the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). Once again, we reiterate our call for the United Nations to be at the centre of efforts aimed at formalizing the Idlib ceasefire under United Nations auspices, in accordance with Special Envoy Pedersen's call for a nationwide ceasefire. This call is in line with the demands for a nationwide ceasefire as set forth in resolution 2254 (2015) and for the Special Envoy to monitor the lines of contact to ensure that the ceasefire be upheld. The United States is resolute in its commitment to reaching a political solution to the Syrian conflict. We will continue to reject any attempt by the Al-Assad regime and its allies to use military force, obstruction or disinformation to bypass United Nations efforts to restore peace in Syria. The recent violations of the Idlib ceasefire remind us of just how fragile the political process is and, consequently, how important it is to deny the Al-Assad regime and its allies a military victory in its nearly decade-long war against the Syrian people. To that end, tomorrow the Trump Administration will take decisive steps to prevent the Al-Assad regime from securing a military victory and to steer the regime and its allies back toward Special Envoy Pedersen and the United Nations- led political process. Our aim is to deprive the Al-Assad regime of the revenue and support it has used to commit the large-scale atrocities and human rights violations that prevent a political resolution and severely diminish the prospects for peace. The mandatory sanctions provided for in the Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act of 2019 are aimed at deterring bad actors who continue to aid and finance the Al-Assad regime's atrocities against the Syrian people while simply enriching themselves and their families. The Caesar legislation contains strong provisions to ensure that humanitarian assistance is not in any way impacted by the legislation. It also outlines requirements for the suspension of the Caesar Act sanctions on Syria, including ending all brazen attacks towards its people and holding all perpetrators accountable. The Al-Assad regime has a clear choice to make - pursue the political path established in resolution 2254 (2015) or leave the United States with no other choice but to continue withholding reconstruction funding and imposing sanctions against the regime and its financial backers. I want to focus with a few words on 10 July - 23 days away - when the Council will deliberate on the mandate renewal of the humanitarian cross-border mechanism, as set out in resolution 2504 (2020), and its impact on the United Nations-led political process. The simple truth is that there will be no end to the humanitarian crisis in Syria until there is a political solution. We cannot use the mandate renewal negotiations to shape the political realities on the ground. Our job, above all others, is to uphold the highest humanitarian ideals and do the most good for the vulnerable people around the world. As the political process remains in its early stages, we must ensure humanitarian aid flows to the Syrian people based on their needs. That means humanitarian aid must not be used as a bargaining chip; millions of people depend on United Nations assistance across all parts of Syria. Therefore, every member of the Council must ensure that every Syrian in need of aid is reached by cross-border and cross-line assistance through the most direct routes. For the millions of women, men and children in north-east and north-west Syria, the United Nations-authorized cross-border points of Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah are the most direct routes. The Al-Assad regime has a choice to make, but so does the Council. And I want to say today that we cannot choose, through inaction or gridlock, to starve civilians, deny them shelter and allow COVID-19 to spread as tactics for reaching a political solution. We cannot turn a blind eye, as Ms. Ghazi said. Supporting the continuation of United Nations cross-border access to as many people as possible, regardless of who controls the territory, is just as important as supporting Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts to achieve a political end to the conflict.
