Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios for
his briefing.

It is not often enough that we gather as the Security
Council to talk about the bright side of what we
do - finding new ways for nations to work together to
foster peace and security. Today, I am glad to say, is one
of those occasions.

The African Union (AU) is a critical partner of the
United Nations. From Somalia to Mali to South Sudan,
the AU has joined the United Nations in promoting our
shared values of peace and security across the African
continent. That partnership was further demonstrated
by last week's joint consultations. As we said the last
time we considered this relationship, the question is not
whether the AU and the United Nations will continue to
work together closely. Rather, the question is how we
will deepen and strengthen our partnership.

That partnership has come a long way over the
past decade, thanks in large part to the work of both
the United Nations Office to the African Union and
the AU Peace and Security Council. When those two
organizations work together, mission planning is better,
mandates are clearer and political support is greater. All
of that means that outcomes are better. However, most
importantly, the people on the ground whose safety and

lives depend on that work are better served, which is
what we are working for.

One bright spot in that relationship is the AU
plan to finalize its human rights and conduct and
discipline frameworks. Those are areas where progress
is critical if we are to deepen cooperation. It is
absolutely essential that the AU continue to work to
prevent abuses and promote respect for human rights.
Nothing does more to destroy trust - not to mention
damage the reputation of both the AU and the United
Nations - than abuses and misconduct by troops and
police. That means there must be rigorous procedures
in place for the screening and selection of personnel on
the front end. There must be training, monitoring and
reporting while peacekeepers are in the field, and there
must be independent investigations and accountability
when violations do occur. We welcome the AU
determination to promote respect for human rights, and
we look forward to progress on the implementation of
those frameworks.

We are also encouraged by the closer working
relationship that has been established between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
staff. There has also been progress in improving internal
management and oversight of AU-led peace support
operations. These are all steps in the right direction. We
recognize that fully implementing those benchmarks
for transparency, performance and accountability will
take time, and we stand ready to continue to work
together to see that those frameworks are implemented
and show demonstrable progress.

But before we can consider additional financial
support through the United Nations, we must see
concrete evidence of such progress. The United States
will not consider the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions for any future AU operations until
the benchmarks for financial transparency, conduct
and discipline and human rights are demonstrably
implemented across AU field operations. To do
otherwise would be to riskjeopardizing the legitimacy
of United Nations peacekeeping. We will continue to
support AU efforts to increase financial self-reliance,
including reinvigorating the African Union Peace
Fund. We especially look forward to working with
AU member States to identify non-trade mechanisms
for greater self-financing that are transparent and
compliant with Member States' international obligations
and commitments.

Finally, we look forward to continuing leadership
from the African Union to mobilize member States
to end violence and prevent mass atrocities. In places
like South Sudan, Mali and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the AU has sought to strengthen regional
responses to conflict and atrocities, but there is a good
deal of work left to be done. At the end of the day, we
are confident that this important relationship is moving
in the right direction. We are building a partnership
capable of shouldering shared responsibilities, and we
are building a partnership based on shared values.

As long as we remain steadfast in our commitment
and dedicated to showing progress, we will continue
to strengthen that important partnership. That makes
today a good day in the Security Council.
