Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time in November that I
am taking the floor at a Council meeting, allow me
to begin by congratulating the United Kingdom on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month.
I would also like to commend South Africa, one of the
three African members of the Security Council, for its
excellent and very successful presidency of the Council
in October.

My delegation joins others in welcoming
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, back to the Security Council, and
in thanking him for his comprehensive briefing and
his informative presentation on the fifty-sixth report
(S/2019/843, annex) on the implementation of the peace
agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our thanks
also go to Ms. Selma Korjenie for the enlightening
information she provided.

My delegation duly notes the High Representative's
report on the achievements and progress made over the
past six months in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including
the simultaneous adoption of a package of measures
related to the European Union reform agenda, which
demonstrates the commitment and the remarkable
efforts that have been made towards Euro-Atlantic
integration, as well as mutual interest in the common
objective of stabilizing the country.

While my delegation recognizes and applauds the
positive advances that have been made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the reporting period, we are equally
concerned about the lack of progress in the formation
of a Government following the general elections of
7 October 2018. It is in that regard that we urge the
parties to work together for political stability and to
address these problems as soon as possible, with a
view to ensuring a promising future for the country
and achieving reconciliation among its various ethnic
groups and communities. We believe that there is still
much to be done. We must therefore continue to work
to build a common vision of the future that will help
to foster lasting national unity and cement the role of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Balkans, Europe and
the world. We encourage the parties to amend the laws
relating to the Federation House of Peoples, strengthen
the rule of law, ensure the full implementation of
election results and continue efforts to contain and
eliminate ethnic divisions, crime, corruption, violent
extremism and terrorism, which continue to be the key
issues in the quest for stability and prosperity in the
country and the region.

My delegation advocates full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend the commitment
of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
within his mandate, and emphasize our support for his
efforts to promote the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Equatorial Guinea stands ready
to work with the international community to support
lasting peace and security and sustainable development
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We would like to conclude our brief statement by
welcoming the unanimous adoption of resolution 2496
(2019) submitted by the Federal Republic of Germany,
which extends the mandate of the European Union-led
Operation Althea by a further 12 months.

