Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her briefing.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria and commends the United Nations
and all the parties concerned for their efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria.

As we speak, there are still close to 12 million
people in Syria in need of humanitarian assistance.
In north-east and north-west Syria, many localities
have been ravaged by floods. The situation in Rukban
camp remains a cause for concern. A large number
of civilians are heading towards Al-Hol camp.
Humanitarian relief operations are facing challenges.
At the same time, as the overall situation, including
the security situation, stabilizes in Syria, we will see
a more favourable environment for improving the
humanitarian conditions. In that context, China wishes
to make the following observations.

First, the Syrian parties should put the future of the
country and the well-being of the people first, continue
to abide by the relevant Council resolutions, implement
previously reached agreements, continue to engage in
the political process and create conditions to further
alleviate the humanitarian situation. The international
community should steadfastly support the role of the
United Nations as the primary mediator, lend its support
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and push
the Syrian parties, through a Syrian-owned and Syrian-
led process and on the basis ofresolution 2254 (2015), to
seek solutions through negotiations that accommodate
the concerns of all parties. Council members should
engage in comprehensive consultations and foster
conditions that are conducive to a political settlement
of the Syrian issue. The future of Syria can be decided
only by the Syrian people, without outside interference.
The international community should respect the Syrian
Government and people in their efforts to safeguard
national security and stability.

Secondly, the United Nations and the international
community need to scale up assistance - in cash and
in kind - to the Syrian people. In the light of evolving
needs, they should adjust and improve their humanitarian
relief operations. Cross-border humanitarian relief
measures represent ad hoc arrangements under special
circumstances. Full respect should be accorded to
Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, in strict compliance with Council resolutions.
Humanitarian operations should be guided by the United
Nations guiding principles on humanitarian relief and
the relevant provisions of international law, under the
oversight of the United Nations throughout the process,
with particular emphasis on greater transparency
and better communication and coordination with the
Syrian Government.

Thirdly, the international community needs to
actively support the Syrian Government and people
in socioeconomic reconstruction in order to create
the conditions for the return of refugees and displaced
persons. According to a survey, 83 per cent of the
people in Rukban camp wish to return to their place
of birth; efforts should be made to make that happen.
Steady progress in reconstruction can give hope to the
Syrian people and lead to long-term stability in Syria.
The return of Syrian refugees to their home can also
ease the pressure on host States.

China attaches great importance to the
humanitarian situation in Syria and has contributed
its part to alleviating the suffering of the Syrian
people. Since the outbreak of the crisis, and acting
through bilateral and multilateral channels, China
has provided much humanitarian aid to refugees, both
inside and outside Syria, including medical, winter and
nutritional supplies. At the opening ceremony of the
eighth ministerial meeting of the China-Arab States
Cooperation Forum in July last year, President Xi
Jinping announced that China will provide additional
assistance to the people in Syria and other regions. Work
has been in full swing to fulfil that pledge. Moving
forward, China will continue to provide assistance to
Syrian refugees in Syria and neighbouring countries to
the best of our ability.

