Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia welcomes
and thanks the Chilean presidency of the Security
Council for initiating the present debate. We concur
with your conclusion, Mr. President, that inclusive
development manifestly embraces the three pillars of
the United Nations system, namely, peace and security,
development and human rights. We also view the
significance of the issue very much in the context of
the function of prevention.

In that respect, the United Nations system and the
relevant regional and subregional organizations indeed
have an important role and a reasonable set of available
tools and mechanisms to address prevention. However,
it needs to be recalled time and again that the primary
responsibility for preventing conflicts lies with nation
States. To a considerable degree, the capacity of
national Governments to deliver on their responsibility
and to act in favour of the prevention of conflict lies
in their consistent promotion of policies of inclusion.
The two objectives intertwine. Therefore, we believe
that consistent analysis and review of the conduct of
inclusive policies by national Governments provides
tangible benchmarks for assessing stability and
detecting the warning signs that point to implications
of failure.

Over the years, the international community,
in particular the United Nations, as well as relevant
regional and subregional organizations, have developed
a diverse set of tools for peer review, information
gathering and analysis and the monitoring of situations.
However, without undermining the progress made in that
respect, we should admit to the lack of sufficient action
in addressing policy failures at an early stage - and
well before the international community faces a crisis
situation. We fully share the President's argument about
situations of exclusion and discrimination as being the
root causes of many conflicts. We view monitoring,
detecting and resolutely acting on such situations as a
function of early warning and preventive diplomacy.
Striking a balance between detecting situations and
acting upon them remains an ongoing challenge at both
the national and international levels. The 1994 genocide
in Rwanda is an extreme and poignant case in point.

We recognize the conduct of inclusive policies for
development as a complex issue in the overall conduct
of national policies within boundaries, which relates
directly to their institutional capacities as much as
to the very nature of governance and the building of
national institutions. Therefore, inclusive policies are a
derivative of an inclusive Government.

We strongly believe that Governments and
national institutions that promote, follow and abide
by the principles and norms of the rule of law, good
governance, democracy, equality and human rights
are adequately equipped to sustain stable societies.
Sustained economic and social development, poverty
eradication, combating corruption and other policies of
equitable distribution of national wealth fundamentally
reinforce the sustainability of stable societies.
However, the effective pursuit of that set of objectives
is attainable and tangible first within a framework of
justice, political equality, democratic participation and
inclusion.

Strictly speaking, it cannot be assumed that
development follows democracy, because the objectives
are firmly interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
However, the generation of wealth without its equitable
distribution is idiosyncratic to societies with weak
democratic institutions. It is a primary source of
exclusion and injustice.

We believe that the post-2015 development
agenda and the formulation of the next generation of
sustainable development goals should duly reflect such
considerations, bearing in mind, among other things,
the security aspect of inclusive development.

Exclusion and discrimination, as the antithesis of
inclusive and participatory governance, underlie the
challenge to the legitimacy of sovereignty claims over
populations and territories. Such policies of exclusion
and discrimination have multiple forms of expression.
They are particularly acute and prone to exploding into
conflict situations where such policies are not merely
condoned, but consistently upheld and promoted at
the highest level of Government. Incitement to hatred,
hate speech, xenophobia and other forms of fuelling
discrimination are triggers to exclusion at all levels. We
know of situations where such policies aim primarily
at consolidating a dictatorial grip on power. There
is legitimacy in resistance and self-defence when
there is an existential threat to the physical security
of populations at risk. History knows of examples of
waiving the legitimacy claim of territorial integrity in
favour of self-determination when there is a breakdown
of political, moral or ethical commitment and capacity to
safeguard populations from outright extermination and
death. The claim ofa conflict between those two norms
of international law must therefore be consistently and
carefully measured against every specific situation.

The ultimate and most dehumanizing forms of
exclusion and discrimination are genocide and other
atrocity crimes. The Secretary-General has accurately
defined the broad consensus among the international
community and the community of genocide scholars,
according to which genocide and other atrocity crimes
are not spontaneous and isolated events; rather, they
are processes with histories, precursors and triggering
factors, which, combined, enable their commission.
In that respect, we welcome and commend the recent
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes - a tool for
prevention developed jointly by the Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility
to Protect.

A careful study and analysis of the Framework and
the set of risk factors therein reveals a strong, visible
linkage between the consistent failures of inclusive
policies, on the one hand, and the degeneration of
situations to atrocity crimes, on the other. A weaknesses
of State structures, including the lack of an independent
and impartial judiciary, high levels of corruption, poor
governance and the absence of accountability, as well
as the lack of representative national civil society and a
diverse and independent national media, as well as acts
of incitement and hate propaganda, are examples of
risk factors related directly to the failures of inclusive
development.

The Framework is therefore an indispensable tool
in the analysis and assessment of inclusive policies,
combined with the function of prevention. We encourage
the Security Council to pay heed to the Framework in
its analysis of specific situations.

