Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Mr. John Ging, for
his briefing on the situation in eastern Ukraine. We
think that OCHA and other humanitarian agencies
should regularly inform the Security Council of the
humanitarian situation in the region and provide
objective statistics on the situation of civilians,
including data on those wounded or killed, as well as
on the destruction of civilian infrastructure.

On a human scale, the situation in the east,
particularly in Donetsk and Luhansk, is disastrous.
Today there is a definite need to speak about a true war.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
has officially recognized that there is an internal armed
conflict in the east of Ukraine.

In spite of international agreements, including
the 17 April Geneva agreement and the 2 July Berlin
agreement, both of which were signed onto by the
Ukrainian Government, Kyiv continues to step up its
military operations, taking hundreds and thousands
of lives with it. According to information we have
received, the punitive militia are playing a leading role.
They are subordinate to no armed forces in Ukraine.
They are carrying the orders of certain leaders of the
Security Council of the country and are financed by
local oligarchs.

Overflights of cities have become a daily reality.
Artillery, tanks and Grad rockets are used. Locals are
continuously reporting that phosphorous bombs and
cluster bombs are being used. There is indiscriminate
shelling of housing blocks and critical civilian
infrastructure. In many small towns, about 80 per cent
of the houses have been destroyed. According to most
conservative estimates, more than 600 buildings have
been reduced to rubble. Today there was a rocket attack
in Shakhtyorsk. On 2 August, Ukrainian artillery
shelled the city of Pervamaisk, where homes, two
electrical power plants and hospitals were destroyed.

As a result of shelling by the Ukrainian armed
forces, shells have been falling into Russia. There
have been about 20 such incidents. On 3 August, a
Ukrainian army mine exploded at the Gukovo crossing,
Rostov oblast, where monitors from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) were
working.

According to the most conservative estimates by
international humanitarian agencies, more than 1,367
people have been killed and thousands have been
wounded, including children. Those are worrisome
numbers. In one day alone, 40 people were killed in
the city of Golov. More than 4 million people live
in the areas where military operations are taking
place. Of them, more than 200,000 have been left
without drinking water. There is a critical health and
epidemiological situation in Luhansk. Houses are
without electricity and, because of shelling, there is no
clean water. Telephone communications are impaired
and there are no garbage removal services. Ukrainians
have begun to leave the country en masse.

Almost 800,000 Ukrainians have come to Russia
since the beginning ofthe crisis. Some - about 170,000
of them - have come to Russian migration services to
legalize their situation. Centres have been opened for
refugees. Our country stands ready to undertake that
great burden. We do not need material assistance from
outside. We stand ready to provide human assistance to
Ukrainians on our own.

The most dramatic situation in the east of Ukraine
is on the health front. The majority of doctors have been
evacuated. It must be understood that in the areas where
military clashes are taking place the most vulnerable
have been left behind, and they have no way of leaving.

It seems that the Kyiv authorities are not interested
at all. We have made multiple appeals to them to create
humanitarian corridors to evacuate children and the
vulnerable, including orphans. We have also appealed
to them to allow humanitarian assistance from Russia
to be let in. But Kyiv has rejected all ofthose proposals.

Russia calls upon the international community to
take emergency measures to improve the humanitarian
situation in the east of Ukraine. Because of that,
on 4 August, Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, once again sent an official appeal
to humanitarian agencies associated with the United
Nations, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and the
ICRC to create a humanitarian mission. We would like
to send a convoy with Russian humanitarian assistance
under the aegis and with the support of the ICRC to
Donetsk and Luhansk and other areas of Ukraine
where internally displaced persons from the east are
concentrated.

We stand ready to act with full transparency. We
will allow the International Committee of the Red
Cross monitor the convoys, their transport routes and
the distribution of aid. We think that, first and foremost,
there is a need to provide food, medicine and medical
equipment, as well as water purification systems and
generators.

There are many cases in which providing assistance
to civilians suffering from an armed conflict is very
difficult. That applies, for example, to the situations in
the areas controlled by terrorist organizations in South
Sudan, Iraq and Syria. The situation in eastern Ukraine
demands that an end be put to the political posturing
and that international humanitarian principles be
genuinely respected.

Finally, Kyiv's approach of violently repressing the
eastern regions will have very difficult consequences
for the entire Ukrainian population, and that is simply
regrettable.
