The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of India and Ambassador Puri for their leadership and
initiative in scheduling this debate on peacekeeping.

But let me begin with this morning's most
immediate developments. As members of the Council
know, United Nations House in the Nigerian capital,
Abuja, was struck by a car bomb around 11 a.m. local
time this morning. These buildings house 26
humanitarian and development agencies of the United
Nations family. I met with our staff in Abuja during a
visit just two months ago.

In a statement to the media, I described this
terrible act as an attack on those who devote their lives
to helping others. We condemn it utterly. We do not yet
have precise casualty figures, but they are likely to be
considerable. Many people are dead; many more are
wounded. Nigerian and international search and rescue
teams have mobilized and are moving the injured to
hospitals and providing emergency aid.

I have asked the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, to go Nigeria immediately, and
I am mobilizing the United Nations system to respond
to this emergency. The Deputy Secretary-General will
be accompanied by the United Nations security chief,
Under-Secretary-General Gregory Starr, and will meet
with Nigerian authorities upon arrival in Abuja.

On this very sad occasion, I extend my deepest
sympathies to the victims and their families. The
United Nations will undertake every possible effort to
assist them during this difficult time. Let me say
clearly: These acts of terrorism are unacceptable. They
will not deter us from our vital work for the people of
Nigeria and the world. This outrageous and shocking
attack is evidence that United Nations premises are
increasingly being viewed as soft targets by extremist
elements around the world.

Peacekeeping is one of the most visible, difficult
and critical roles played by the United Nations. It is
also a role that only the United Nations can play in a
truly global sense. Peacekeeping is an essential tool for
overcoming threats to international peace and security
and supporting complex transitions from conflict to
stability. It requires a variety of approaches to respond
to various local needs and a wide range of political
11-4815]
realities. To be successful, peacekeeping operations
must have a clear and achievable mandate, unified
political support from the Security Council, and
adequate, predictable human, material and financial
resources. Where this has occurred, we have seen
considerable success, such as in Liberia and Timor-
Leste, or with the referendum in the Sudan. Where we
have struggled, we have also learned.

Since 2001, the number of uniformed personnel
has doubled, reaching a high point of more than
101,000 early last year. Although the rate of growth
slowed in 2010, the complexity of missions remains
high, requiring ever more flexible and adaptable
uniformed and civilian personnel. Indeed, we may be
entering a new phase, with diverse and multifaceted
situations where peacekeeping may play a role.
Peacekeeping will need to evolve to meet specific
demands in a variety of environments and to flexibly
and nimbly bring together multiple capabilities in a
coherent and effective manner.

Notwithstanding the responsibility of host
Governments, peacekeepers are increasingly tasked to
take on the protection of civilians - placing higher
demands on their work, greater scrutiny on their
performance, and a growing need for sufficient
resources to properly carry out such mandates. With
these shifts in mind, the New Horizon initiative of
2009 set out an agenda for strengthening peacekeeping.
This has served to build a common Vision and stronger
partnership linking the resources of the Secretariat, the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the wider membership of the
Organization. Unfortunately, some aspects of this
partnership are under increasing pressure. The current
financial climate, differing perspectives on mandated
tasks, and, in some instances, the loss of host
Government consent have all created tensions in our
relationships.

Achieving a collective response is also
complicated when key stakeholders - such as those
who mandate missions, those who contribute
uniformed personnel and those who are major
funders - are separate groups. If these groups remain
distinct even as mandates become more demanding,
tensions and divisions are inevitable, with potentially
negative impacts on our operations. We must continue
to improve the peacekeeping partnership. We have a
common responsibility to make sure that our
11-48151
peacekeepers are up to the task, which means ensuring
both adequate support and equipment.

One way forward is outlined in the draft
presidential statement to be adopted today, in which the
Council requests that the Secretariat ensure that troop
and police contributors are engaged early, with
appropriate information, to enable effective
consultations between the Council and the Secretariat.
I agree with this approach and look forward to working
with the Council to implement it.

We also recognize the restrictive context in which
we operate, such as that presented by the global
financial situation. The impact on Member States is
well understood. The Secretariat will continue to seek
ways to yield efficiencies. The global field support
strategy is a central part of this picture. The strategy is
designed to optimize efficiencies in the management of
resources entrusted to the Organization by Member
States through a global approach. This is a
comprehensive response to key logistical and
administrative challenges, and is aimed at enabling
timely mission start-up and drawdown, improved
provision of support, and increased transparency and
accountability for resources.

The enormous role of civilian peacekeepers is
also critical. Close to 20,000 civilians within
peacekeeping operations are currently implementing
activities in support of peace processes, encompassing
security sector reform, rule of law and local
governance development, human rights monitoring,
disarmament, demining and the provision of complex
mission support. The implementation of the findings of
the recent civilian capacity review will increase our
capabilities in this regard, and we look forward to the
Council's support for this effort. Early peacebuilding
tasks have also become an integral part of many
operations and should be implemented in an integrated
manner.

Partnership is the cornerstone of peacekeeping.
Let us build on the relationships that now exist, and
overcome potential frictions that could hinder our
work. Through increased engagement, extensive
dialogue and a shared understanding of our common
goals, we can uphold the aims of the Charter and live
up to the expectations of the people who look to us in
their time of need.

In closing, I would like to acknowledge the
sacrifice of the thousands of colleagues and friends
3
who have given their lives in the line of duty, and to
pay tribute to all those working in peacekeeping today
for their commitment to this noble cause.

