Judge Agius: I am most honoured to present the
fifteenth progress report of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (8/2019/888, annex I) and to do so under the Security Council presidency
of the United States.

At the outset, allow me to sincerely thank all the
members of the Council for their continued support
to the Mechanism and acknowledge in particular the
contributions that have been made over the past two
years by the outgoing members, namely, Cote d'Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Poland and, of course, Peru,
which has so capably chaired the Council's Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. I take this
opportunity to congratulate the incoming members
of the Council, whom I look forward to working with
in 2020. I also thank the Office of Legal Affairs for
its wonderful assistance. Furthermore, I would like
to acknowledge and sincerely thank the Mechanism's
outstanding host States, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

I am proud to represent the Mechanism, which was
established in 2010 by the Security Council to carry
out the residual functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In doing
so, the Security Council affirmed the extraordinary
role played by the two ad hoc Tribunals in carving out
a new kind of justice, and the pressing need to protect
their precious legacies in order to continue to guard
against impunity and ensure the rule of law. Believe me,
the principals, Judges and staff of the Mechanism are
aware of the weight of the responsibilities entrusted to
us and of the importance of succeeding in our mission.
We are working tirelessly to ensure that we discharge
our duties as effectively and efficiently as possible. I
take this opportunity to thank and praise my colleagues
and all staff at the Mechanism for their ongoing efforts.
The report before the Council outlines the activities of
the Mechanism over the past six months and highlights
a number of key developments, as I shall explain.

In terms of the existing judicial workload, I am
pleased to report that, at the Mechanism's Arusha
branch, the review hearing in the Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware case was successfully held from 16 to
24 September. That was the first time the courtroom
at the Arusha branch had been used for an evidentiary
hearing. The smooth manner in which the proceedings
were held represented a remarkable team effort
between staff from different sections at both branches.
Just a few days later, on 27 September, months ahead
of schedule, the Appeals Chamber delivered its review
judgment in the case. The Appeals Chamber rejected
Mr. Ngirabatware's attempt to show that the four key
witnesses underpinning his convictions had truthfully
recanted their trial testimonies and decided that the
appeal judgment against him remains in force.
Another significant development in Arusha also
concerns Mr. Ngirabatware. I am referring to the
confirmation by the single Judge on 10 October of
an indictment against him concerning allegations of
contempt and incitement to commit contempt of the
ICTR and the Mechanism. Mr. Ngirabatware pleaded
not guilty at his initial appearance on 17 October, and
on the following day the Prosecution requested that that
new contempt case be joined to the existing contempt
proceedings in Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al.
case. I can share with the Council that, only yesterday,
the request for joinder was granted by the single Judge.
Mr. Ngirabatware's contempt case will therefore be
joined to the Turinabo et al. case, which will now
proceed against six accused persons rather than five.

In the Turinabo et a]. case, the reporting period
saw the continuation of an extremely active pre-trial
phase, with more than 53 decisions being issued by the
single Judge. Two status conferences were held and the
trial, which was originally scheduled to commence on
7 October, was postponed following a request by the
Prosecution to substantially amend the indictment. The
joinder of the new Ngirabatware contempt case will
also have an impact on the start of the trial. However, in
the decision issued yesterday, the single Judge rejected
a request by Mr. Ngirabatware for a start date in August
2020 and indicated that the trial will commence within
months of the date anticipated before the request for
joinder was filed. It is therefore expected that the joint
contempt trial will commence in the first half of 2020
and conclude by December 2020.

Regarding our judicial activity in The Hague, I am
pleased to report that the current caseload remains on
track. In the Stanisic' and Simatovie retrial, the defence
case commenced on 18 June. The defence for Mr. Jovica
Stanisie concluded the presentation of its evidence in
October, while the defence for Mr. Franko Simatovie
began presenting its evidence on 12 November. In line
with previous forecasts, it is expected that the trial will
be concluded andjudgment delivered by the end of2020.
Likewise, I can confirm that the appeal proceedings
in the Mladic' case are progressing smoothly. The
preparations for the appeal hearing are currently under
way and the judgment is anticipated to be delivered by
the end of next year.

In addition to the legal work, I would like to draw
attention to some of the Mechanism's other activities
during the past six months. In particular, the Mechanism
has made significant efforts, indeed great strides, in
harmonizing practices and procedures between its
Arusha and Hague branches. the Council will recall
that this is one of the main priorities of my presidency,
and I am heartened that the Mechanism's Prosecutor
and Registrar also share this goal.

Most notably, as Council members will see in the
report, after seven years a common filing system for
both branches has finally been launched. I am referring
to the unified judicial database. By the end of the year,
the transition is expected to be finalized, and alljudicial
records from the ICTR, the ICTY and Mechanism cases
will be available through one database, not only to
Mechanism staff but also to the general public. I note
that the development of a unified database was one of
the recommendations arising out of the 2018 evaluation
by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (0108) of
the methods and work of the Mechanism, which was of
particular interest to the Security Council, as reflected
in resolution 2422 (2018).

A judicial records and court operations unit has
also been created in Arusha, increasing the capacity
of that branch to seamlessly manage court hearings
and filings, and forming an important counterpart to
the Hague unit. A duty roster of Arusha staff members
has likewise been established. These changes will
ensure greater consistency between the branches and
more streamlined operations, and they are extremely
welcome. However, we will not stop there. Let me
affirm that the principals, management and staff of
the Mechanism, as well as its Judges, are committed to
identifying further areas where harmonization can be
enhanced and efficiencies optimized.

Having outlined some of the Mechanism's activities
and achievements in the past six months, allow me
to share with the Council what the Mechanism is
looking forward to in the coming year. As members
will appreciate, 2020 is shaping up to be an extremely
important year for the Mechanism, and therefore also
for the Security Council. There are many milestones
within our grasp.

First, we look forward to completing most of our
judicial caseload in 2020, and to thereafter becoming a
leaner residual institution. Indeed, with the exception
of any potential appeals, the Mechanism expects to
conclude all existing cases within the next 12 months.
To clarify, that does not mean that the Mechanism will
close once the cases are completed. On the contrary,
the Mechanism was tasked by the Security Council to
perform numerous residual functions that will continue
for many years into the future unless the Council
decides otherwise. The Mechanism will therefore be in
a position to focus primarily on its continuous residual
functions after 2020, in the absence, I should add, of
any fugitive trials or review proceedings. In so doing, it
will be able to truly fulfil the Security Council's vision
of the institution as a

"small, temporary and efficient structure, whose
functions and size will diminish over time, with
a small number of staff commensurate with its
reduced functions". (resolution 2422 (2018),
para. 5)

I am sure the Council will agree that that is a very
appealing prospect.

Secondly, we look forward to engaging in 2020 with
the Security Council regarding its forthcoming review
of the Mechanism. As the Council surely recalls, the
Mechanism was tasked to operate for an initial period
of four years and for subsequent periods of two years
following reviews of its progress by the Council. The
third such review of the Mechanism's progress by the
Security Council will take place in 2020. In addition, the
OIOS commenced a further evaluation of the methods
and work of the Mechanism in October, which will
carry into next year. Officials of the OIOS Inspection
and Evaluation Division visited the premises in The
Hague last week and are currently in Arusha. These
processes will be complemented by several ongoing
and pending audits by the OIOS, as well as the Board
of Auditors.

As in the past, the Mechanism takes such
accountability processes extremely seriously. It
therefore looks forward to opportunities to assess its
progress and find new ways of increasing the efficiency
and effectiveness of its operations, including through
further harmonization between the branches, and
measures to improve staff morale and performance. The
Mechanism is ready to engage in frank discussions for
the purposes of identifying areas where improvements
can be made, as well as areas where best practices have
already been implemented. It notes, however, that these
processes are intensive in terms of time and resources
and reduce its ability to perform core functions.

Thirdly, the Mechanism looks forward to the
continued and increased cooperation of Member States
in relation to key aspects of its residual functions.
Here I will mention the enforcement of sentences.
Currently, 50 persons convicted by the ICTR, the
ICTY or the Mechanism are serving their sentences
in 14 Member States, and the Mechanism is deeply
grateful for their ongoing assistance. It welcomes the
cooperation of those and other States as it endeavours
to expand its enforcement capacity and to identify
enforcement States for the convicted persons who
await transfer. Separately, in relation to enforcement,
I also look forward to continuing to improve the
quality and transparency of the Mechanism's approach
to early release and related matters. An updated
Practice Direction will be forthcoming once the usual
consultation process is complete.

I will also mention the eight remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR. The arrest and prosecution of
those individuals is a top priority of the Mechanism and
a primary focus of the Office of the Prosecutor. The
Mechanism is prepared to conduct a trial in the event
that a fugitive is apprehended, but in order to do so it
will require the continued cooperation and assistance
of Member States, as indeed called for by the Council
on several occasions. In that regard, the Mechanism
trusts that South Africa, as one of the current members
of the Council, will decide to honour its Chapter VII
obligations, as well as the values that unite the Council,
by securing the arrest ofthe fugitive that was located on
its territory in 2018, almost 18 months ago. South Africa
has done so in the past by arresting and transferring
ICTR fugitives on two occasions, in 1999 and again
in 2004. The Mechanism strongly regrets the current
lack of progress, particularly since, as we all heard in
this very Chamber in July of this year (see S/PV.8576),
South Africa believes that States have an international
obligation to cooperate with the Mechanism and
the Prosecutor.

The issue of the nine persons who were acquitted
or released by the ICTR, but remain in a Tanzanian safe
house, is another area in which the Mechanism looks
forward to the meaningful cooperation of Member
States. As I have stated before, the Mechanism finds
itself with the day-to-day responsibility for those
persons, even though that was never part of the
Mechanism's mandated functions. As time passes,
the situation of those men becomes more and more
untenable. A permanent solution must be found on
an urgent basis, and the Mechanism will rely on the
Council's renewed interest and resolve to take action.

Fourthly and finally, we look forward to enjoying
the continued support and assistance of the Security
Council and the broader United Nations membership,
particularly with respect to the Mechanism's budgetary
requirements, as we work together towards our
common goals. In that regard, members of the Council
will be aware that the Mechanism's budget proposal
for 2020 will soon be under consideration by the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly. As I have outlined,
the Mechanism is poised to complete the bulk of its
existing caseload in 2020. It strives every day to meet
the expectations of the Security Council, which are
indeed high. The Mechanism is prepared to do its work
and to dispose of the remaining cases as efficiently and
effectively as possible, but it will require the necessary
resources to do so and all the support that the Council
can provide.

Just as in the past, I have confidence that the
international community will not let us down and
that it will remember why the ad hoc Tribunals and
the Mechanism were established in the first place. We
were vividly reminded of why those institutions were,
and still are, necessary earlier this year, which marks
25 years since the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, just as we will be reminded in 2020 when we
gather to commemorate 25 years since the genocide
in Srebrenica. For all those reasons, I trust that the
prevailing scepticism regarding international criminal
justice will be set aside so that the mandate of the
Residual Mechanism, as determined by the Council,
can continue to be fulfilled. I thank all those present in
advance, and I look forward to our joint achievements
in the coming year.

