Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their
important briefings, which shed light on a situation
that calls for the urgent attention of the Council. We
believe that the information they provide us, together
with that from representatives of civil society and
bodies of the United Nations system, makes it possible
for us to achieve a more in-depth, balanced and
objective understanding of the specifics underlying
any conflict, and this should therefore be promoted at
Council meetings.

Peru is monitoring with concern the developments
in Yemen. The facts show that violence persists in
various areas of the country, taking a high toll in human
lives. It is clear that the implementation of the important
agreements reached in Sweden is an extremely complex
undertaking, as the marked lack of confidence between
the parties represents a major obstacle in that respect.
The violations of the ceasefire and delays in the process
can largely be attributed to that factor.

However, Mr. Griffiths has reported some positive
signs. If we act quickly and resolutely, these could lead
to tangible progress towards achieving sustainable
peace in Yemen. Here we refer specifically to the
unilateral release by Ansar Allah of detainees and its
offer to stop its attacks on Saudi territory. We expect
a similar willingness by all parties, in keeping with
the expectations of the international community. We
urge them not to miss this window of opportunity,
which is based on the guarantee that the Council
will see to it that there is strict compliance with the
commitments undertaken.

We also expect that these necessary understandings,
if they are reached, will translate into a new round of
consultations, which will make it possible to progress
towards an inclusive political solution promoted by the
United Nations. We believe that, in parallel, efforts
should be made speedily so as to reduce tensions in
the south of the country. In that regard, we welcome
the good offices of Saudi Arabia and hope that they
will lead to an early agreement that will consolidate
Yemeni institutions and safeguard the country's
territorial integrity.

All of these efforts at the political level are more
than ever necessary given that, as Mr. Lowcock
has recalled, the humanitarian crisis seems to be
intensifying on the ground. There is an imminent threat
of widespread famine, and it has been reported that the
number of cases of cholera has increased this year.

We believe that the Council must fulfil its
responsibilities and ensure strict compliance with
the presidential statement adopted in August
(S/PRST/2019/9). This includes, inter alia, facilitating
the safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance as well as the unrestricted flow ofcommercial
goods, especially food, medicine and fuel, as speakers
have emphasized this morning.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Peru's
commitment to achieving a sustainable peace in Yemen
that would put an end to the humanitarian disaster,
promote regional stability and ensure accountability for
the crimes committed.

