Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I would like
to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August, and commend it for convening this important
open debate on children and armed conflict. Our thanks
and appreciation also go to all briefers for their valuable
contributions.

Azerbaijan commends the Security Council for
keeping this topic high on its agenda and for the work
undertaken by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2016/360)
once again presents a devastating account of children
suffering from armed conflict. We especially note with
concern the increasing trend in child abductions. In this
regard, we reconfirm our support to resolution 2225
(2015), which designates abduction as a new criterion
for listing of parties in the Secretary-General's annual
report.

The impact of violent extremism on children 4 in
particular the use of the Internet and social media to
brainwash and recruit children as combatants, suicide
bombers and executioners - has reached alarming
dimensions. We concur with the assessment in the
report that purely military and security approaches are
not sufficient. To effectively address the challenge, we
should focus on the triggers of violent extremism and
provide greater support to education as a powerful tool
to counter extremist ideologies.

The issue of children displaced by armed conflict is
another matter of utmost concern to Azerbaijan, and we
fully share the Secretary-General's recommendation,
offered in paragraph 222, that the Security Council
highlight, in its resolutions and debates, the prevention
of displacement and the rights of children displaced
by conflict.

It is obvious that more sustained efforts and renewed
commitments are urgently required to combat impunity
in a more resolute manner. National authorities should
investigate and prosecute all violations and abuses
committed against children in situations of armed
conflict by bringing those responsible to justice and
thereby fully ensuring accountability, which will serve
as a strong warning to all perpetrators around the world
that their horrendous crimes will never be tolerated or go
unpunished. The international community should also
play a more proactive role in ensuring accountability
and the rule of law. In this context, we encourage the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to continue to share
information with the appropriate sanctions committees.

The war waged against Azerbaijan by neighbouring
Armenia has claimed the lives of tens of thousands
civilians, including children. In its relevant resolutions,
the Security Council has condemned the violations
of international humanitarian law committed during
the conflict, including attacks on civilians and the
bombardment of inhabited areas. However, the
perpetrators of those violations, including members
of the political and military leadership of Armenia,
continue to enjoy impunity, and this situation represents
a serious challenge to ensuring sustainable peace,
justice, truth and reconciliation.

Recently, in April, Armenia conducted large-scale
attacks, including against the civilian population of
Azerbaijan, as a result of which children were killed
and a number of schools, kindergartens and medical
facilities substantially damaged. In this regard, we
subscribe to the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that that all parties to the conflict should refrain
from using explosive weapons in populated areas.
Indeed, the suffering of children could be significantly
alleviated if the parties were to respect international
humanitarian and human rights law.

The vast majority of atrocities against children are
attributed to non-State armed groups. The international
community should do its utmost to support the
countries concerned in their struggle to eradicate such
armed groups. The Secretary-General's report refers to
the need of United Nations engagement with non-State
armed groups in order to effectively protect children.
While we recognize the humanitarian aspect of this
matter, it is our firm belief that any engagement with
the non-State actors should be undertaken exclusively
with the consent of the legitimate Government on whose
territory such groups operate. Otherwise, we run the
risk of sending the wrong message that violence pays
and of granting privileges to groups that undermine the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political unity of
United Nations Member States. On its part, the Council
should not only condemn acts by terrorist or extremist
forces; it should also adopt and apply a zero-tolerance
policy against them so as to create a safe environment
for children.

On a positive note, we are pleased to see that
some progress was made in alleviating the suffering
of children in situations of armed conflict during
the reporting period. Various action plans to end the
recruitment and use of children have been signed and
thousands of children have been released from armed
forces and armed groups. We welcome the progress made
by the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. Azerbaijan
supports the mandate of the Special Representative
and encourages her to pay attention to the suffering of
children in all situations of armed conflict

Let me conclude by highlighting the urgent need of
conflict resolution all over the world, which constitutes
the most efficient way to put an end to the plight and
suffering of children. We call upon all Member States
and the international community to accelerate their
conflict-resolution efforts to that end.

