Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate on the
situation in Timor-Leste. We also thank His Excellency
Ambassador Nelson Santos, Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste, for his informative statement on the
situation in his country.

We had hoped to hear directly today from Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao via video link, but in the end
that was not possible. We register our disappointment
that we could not do so. But we are very grateful that
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, has given us a
comprehensive presentation on the latest events in
Timor-Leste and, in particular, on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/26).

My delegation is also very appreciative of the
dedicated efforts of the men and women of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the entire United Nations team in support of the
people and the Government of Timor-Leste, under the
leadership of Mr. Atul Khare.

I also want to thank you, Mr. President, for
accepting the request of the core group countries that
have been supporting Timor-Leste outside the Council
to come and join in the debate on this issue today. I
think the fact that we have seen representatives of
countries outside the Council come here to present
their views to us on the situation in Timor-Leste, as
they will do later, is an indication that the future of
Timor-Leste matters not only to us, but also to the
United Nations community as a whole. We thank you
for having opened the door for others to participate
here.

Like other delegations, we were shocked to learn
recently that President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmao were attacked on 11 February. We
wish President Ramos-Horta a full recovery so that he
can continue to lead his country on its path to
consolidate democracy and stability. South Africa
would like to reiterate its condemnation of those
attacks in the strongest possible terms. We further
applaud the Security Council for its swift response to
that heinous act, not only by convening emergency
consultations, but also by adopting a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/5), which sent the word out
that the Council is watching the events in Timor-Leste.

We also wish to commend Timor-Leste's
neighbouring countries. Timor-Leste has been blessed
with neighbours that have been there to assist,
especially in its greatest time of need. Those countries
include Australia and New Zealand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Singapore and others, which reacted when
these events happened. We particularly wish to thank
Australia, which immediately released security forces
that went to assist Timor-Leste in its great hour of
need. We also wish in particular to recall the very

strong political statement by the Government of
Indonesia, which also sent out the message that the
attack on the democratic institutions of Timor-Leste
would not be acceptable at all.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on
Timor-Leste is a source of both hope and challenge. On
the one hand, it describes a series of significant strides
achieved, including the successful holding of
presidential and parliamentary elections, the formation
of a democratic Government and the general
improvement of the security situation in Timor-Leste.
On the other hand, the report also highlights, as it
should, some of the key political, security and socio-
economic challenges facing Timor-Leste, including the
issue of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the
lack of capacity in key Government institutions.

In paragraph 3 of his report, the Secretary-
General correctly notes:

"The performance of the Parliament,
Government and other State institutions in Timor-
Leste reflected progress in policymaking and
active political debate within democratically
sanctioned arenas".

Despite the persisting differences among political
leaders and parties in Timor-Leste, we are confident
that they will overcome their differences, work
together to address priority needs and cooperate on the
need to move their country forward.

As Mr. Guehenno reported, the ongoing dialogue
among the leaders of various political parties in Timor-
Leste, under the leadership of President Ramos-Horta, is
a great step indeed for the future of Timor-Leste. We
reaffirm our support for the continued efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
promote dialogue and reconciliation among parties in
Timor-Leste through inclusive and collaborative
processes. We hope that the meetings of the High-level
Coordination Committee and the Trilateral Coordination
Forum will produce much-needed dialogue and progress
on the key priorities of the country.

As we have stated before, the problems of Timor-
Leste - particularly those related to IDPs or the
so-called petitioners - cannot be solved by only one
party; they can be addressed successfully only by all
Timorese, working together collectively.

My delegation welcomes the improvement in the
overall security situation in Timor-Leste, owing to the
collective efforts of the national police force of Timor-
Leste, UNMIT and other stakeholders. Notwithstanding
that progress, the South African delegation believes that
reform of the security sector remains urgent and
indispensable. Security sector reform should be owned
and led by the Government of Timor-Leste and should
be supported by the international community.

In that regard, the task of rebuilding the national
police force of Timor-Leste remains crucial and is in
the interest of achieving long-term stability in the
country. My delegation welcomes the considerable
progress achieved in the screening and mentoring
process for the national police. South Africa welcomes
the Secretary-General's intention to send an expert
mission to UNMIT in the first quarter of 2008 to
conduct a thorough assessment of the requirements of
the national police, as well as possible adjustments to
UNMIT in order to improve police skills.

In paragraph 61 of his report, the Secretary-
General correctly stresses: "With the manifold
challenges ahead, this is a critical moment for the
United Nations to reaffirm its continued commitment
to Timor-Leste". We, too, believe that the continued
presence of the United Nations in Timor-Leste is
essential to address the multifaceted challenges facing
the country, including political, institutional and
security aspects.

We wish to thank the Council for having agreed
to extend the mandate of UNMIT for a period of
12 months in order to work in partnership with the
Government of Timor-Leste to strengthen stability,
promote democratic governance and political dialogue
and foster national and social cohesion. UNMIT's
commitment to Timor-Leste was illustrated in the
successful organization and conclusion of presidential
and parliamentary elections in the country. Now the
hard work remains: the country has to rebuild and
strengthen its own democracy.

Nevertheless, further efforts are needed to focus
UNMIT's supportive role on other post-electoral
priority areas, including the strengthening of capacities
in the judicial system, support for strengthening
security institutions and support for dialogue and
reconciliation. Equally important, bilateral and
international support would prove invaluable in
capacity-building and in the strengthening of various
sectors of the State.

In view of the factors I have just mentioned and
the continued need for Timor-Leste to count on the
support of the international community, in particular
the United Nations system, at this critical stage of its
nation-building process, South Africa strongly supports
the Secretary-General's proposal. We again wish to
thank the Council for having accepted that the mandate
of UNMIT should be extended for a further 12 months
at the present composition and strength. We also call
upon the broader international community to stay the
course in Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, we encourage the Government, the
political parties and the people of Timor-Leste to
utilize the support and presence of UNMIT. As I have
reminded the people of Timor-Leste, UNMIT's stay is
not endless. So they must use it to the best of their
ability now. I am glad that the Council has made it
available to them for the next 12 months. We hope that
UNMIT can be there to strengthen democracy and to
help the people of Timor-Leste.

