Mr. Charwath (Austria): I would like to thank
France for convening this timely open debate. We
welcome the opportunity to discuss the protection of
civilians in the context of peacekeeping operations.

Of course, Austria fully aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians,
respectively. In our national capacity, we would like
to highlight a few additional points. I have three
remarks to make on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping operations.

Firtst, it is clear to us that peacekeeping operations
have an important role to play when it comes to
the protection of civilians. Even where the United
Nations has deployed troops, we are convinced that
the sustainable protection of civilians can be achieved
only through durable peace and political solutions.
As such, it is paramount that peacekeeping missions
follow a whole-of-mission approach to the protection
of civilians.

Secondly, we cannot overemphasize the need to
provide adequate training and equipment to military
and police personnel deployed in United Nations peace
operations. To strengthen this aspect, all troop- and
police-contributing countries need to improve the
cooperation and transparency of their national training
efforts and bring them in line with the relevant United
Nations standards. The certification of such training
courses is an excellent opportunity to do so, and Austria
is proud to be among the first countries to obtain such
certification for our national protection of civilians
training course. We are very happy to be able to host
the United Nations workshop for the development
of protection of civilians training material, in close
cooperation with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, this fall.

Thirdly, another key aspect for a more effective
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations is
the timely availability of threat and risk assessments. It
is therefore important to further develop an integrated
intelligence-gathering and analysis capacity to improve
situational awareness. Because we believe in the
importance of effective peacekeeping operations to
the protection of civilians, Austria gladly endorsed the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians in the
margins of the General Assembly debate on peace and
security last month, and we are very encouraged to see
the number of supporters grow.

I have just a few remarks to make on the protection
of civilians where there is no United Nations mission.
While peacekeeping operations play an important role
in the protection of civilians, there are many conflicts
where civilians are under attack, yet there is no mission
in place to protect them. We welcome the findings
and recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2016/447). We continue to call for full
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law, as well as for accountability, including
through the International Criminal Court.

One of the most severe current challenges in this
field is the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. We strongly welcome the Secretary-General's
focus on this issue in his report, and were pleased to
see it feature prominently at the World Humanitarian
Summit. Together with a number of other countries,
Austria used this opportunity to subscribe to one of the
Summit's core commitments related to the use of these
weapons, pledged an additional commitment and hosted
a side event on this issue. Austria continues to support
the objective of an international political commitment
dedicated to the protection of civilians from the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas and joins the
Secretary-General in his call on all States to engage in
this initiative.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
the most efficient way of protecting civilians is by
preventing and ending armed conflicts. Hence we fully
support the work of the United Nations to find political
settlements to conflicts and to strengthen its mediation
and conflict-prevention capacity, including the
Secretary-General's Human Rights Up Front initiative.
In this context, it goes without saying that we support
further implementation of the women and peace and
security and the children and armed conflict agendas.

I would like to assure the Council that Austria will
continue to work closely with all interested stakeholders
to further strengthen the protection of civilians.

