Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
the Police Commissioners from various peace missions
and Ms. Marie-Joseph Fitah-Kona as the representative
of a host country.

The police component is an integral part of the
peace and security architecture, and we must therefore
enhance its role in that regard. We recognize the major
role that police units play on the ground in bridging
the tasks related to United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, which demonstrates the need for
coordination between police and military components,
together with humanitarian and civilian components.
We also stress the importance of developing close
cooperation with national authorities, communities and
civil society in order to reach all sectors of society in
promoting the rule of law, which is why we believe it
important to increase the percentage of police officers
in peacekeeping operations.

We appreciate the United Nations efforts to ensure
that police-contributing countries meet required
standards, in the knowledge that deployment and
training challenges remain. As has been highlighted
in the latest reports of the Secretary-General on police
activities, training and adequately equipping police
personnel prior to deployment and the selection of
qualified police units are crucial. By "training", we
also mean a people-centred approach to justice, the rule
of law and due process, as well as human rights, child
protection, conflict-related sexual violence and gender-
based violence, without forgetting the importance
of communicating with communities in their own
language. Police-contributing countries must redouble
their efforts in shouldering their responsibility in
that regard.

I should like to ask Mr. Lacroix where he believes
major gaps exist in the predeployment training required
for police personnel and what impact such shortcomings
might have on the ground?

Peace operations must be inclusive and responsive,
and therefore the oversight of gender issues must be
ensured in the design, planning, implementation and
evaluation of peace operations. We appreciate the fact
that the number offemale chiefs ofpolice components has
increased. However, women remain underrepresented
in positions at the senior level. Increasing their presence
in police forces opens channels of communication for
women and girls on the ground, while addressing their
protection concerns and immediate needs.

We therefore take this opportunity to congratulate
Major Seynabou Diouf- an officer in the Senegalese
National Police who is deployed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, leading a force to counter
sexual abuse and exploitation - on having recently
received the United Nations Female Police Officer of
the Year Award.

We would also like to ask Mr. Lacroix to tell us
about initiatives of the United Nations Police Division
to increase the number of female police officers and to
integrate a gender perspective into the operations of the
police component?

Lastly, we express our commitment to and support
for the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and its shared commitments. We believe
that the achievements of United Nations policing are
intrinsically connected to the realization of the ideal of
sustaining peace. However, all the goals that we have set
and committed ourselves to cannot be achieved without
a genuine understanding of the root causes of conflicts,
supported by prevention and early-warning efforts.

We would like to conclude by thanking United
Nations police personnel for their dedication, where they
risk their lives daily to protect the most vulnerable and
in the pursuit of lasting and sustainable peacebuilding.

