Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): One year after the
end to the genocide in Rwanda, one year after the end of
the civil war, Rwandan authorities and the people of
Rwanda have accomplished a very great deal in
reconstructing their country. For this, they deserve our
admiration and congratulations.

Problems remain, of course. Of these, none is more
pressing than that of the refugees. Gathered in the

 

millions in camps just outside the country, they are, on the
one hand, being controlled, even terrorized, by camp
leaders, partisans of Rwanda's previous genocidal regime,
and, on the other hand, being demoralized by the ready
handouts provided through the international community's
generosity - handouts that are an easier source of
livelihood than working the fields in their home villages.

Even more disturbing are reports of arms trafficking
in the camps and of possible preparations for another
military conflagration in the area. This gives the camp
leadership a Khmer-Rouge tint, to be sure. Perhaps the
most significant aspect of the draft resolution under
consideration is operative paragraph 2, which would kick
off a process that would eventually, we hope, lead to a
thorough investigation of arms flows in the region; and we
are pleased that the Government of Zaire has expressed its
support for the establishment of a commission of inquiry to
this effect.

If the return of refugees is hindered by their
campmasters, on the one side, they are not assured of a
terribly warm welcome in Rwanda, on the other side.
Unlike the situation of the camps, this is a situation over
which Rwandan authorities have far greater control.
Paradoxically, as domestic stability is ever more firmly
established, the relative weight of responsibility for refugee
return that falls on Rwandan authorities increases. The
Government must have as its constant priority improving
conditions: both those that are tied directly to refugees'
willingness to return and those that shape the overall image
of the country and thus influence their willingness to return,
at least indirectly.

Two of the latter aspects are particularly important: the
situation in jails and the justice system. The two are linked.
There can be no excuse for 50,000 people to be languishing
in jails a year after the end to the genocide - with no
relief in sight, because no trials have started. It is
imperative that the Government, which we hear is not
united in its view on these matters, demonstrate the
necessary political will and resolve fundamental political
issues that are delaying the process, namely: first, the
nomination of judges to the Supreme Court; secondly, the
use of expatriate personnel in the judicial system; and,
thirdly, the solution of procedural irregularities that have
resulted from the emergency nature of most arrests.

The start of trials has to become a priority for all
branches of government; the legislature and the executive
have to cooperate with the judiciary for judicial action to
begin.

This draft resolution started out as one dealing with
the now-obsolete provisions of the arms embargo that
resolution 918 (1994) imposed on Rwanda. The embargo
was imposed on a genocidal regime, and many of us
recall the sorry spectacle of a representative of that
regime sitting at this table, making his objectionable
presentation and voting against paragraph 13, which
actually imposed the embargo. Surely, a lot has changed
since then.

Today we are in effect suspending the arms embargo
for a little over a year, allowing it to terminate
automatically unless the Council decides to reimpose it,
based on a report that the Secretary-General is called
upon to submit next August. In other words, Rwanda is
not off the embargo hook entirely; and one hopes that
progress in solving its domestic problems, and, for that
matter, progress in resolving the camp-population issue,
will be so clear that there will be no reason to reimpose
it.

The embargo-suspending provisions of this draft
resolution rightly emphasize two things: first, any arms
flows into Rwanda must be destined solely for the
Rwandan Government forces - that is to say, for no
other forces in the country, and for the forces of no other
Government outside the country; and, secondly, the free-
for-all arms bazaar is one of the greatest scourges of the
countries in the region.

