Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Haiti has been going on for more than five years. In this

 

regard, the Council has adopted many resolutions extending
the mandate of the operation while constantly changing its
name.

China has always supported the United Nations efforts
to provide necessary assistance to the people of Haiti and
has always been in favour of the relevant resolutions. We
still believe that the United Nations should continue to
provide assistance to the people of Haiti to help them
overcome the political crisis and carry out economic
reconstruction.

Not long ago the Permanent Representative of China,
Ambassador Qin Huasun, Visited the Republic of Haiti.
Having learned first hand about the situation on the ground,
we believe that of late the situation in Haiti has been
relatively stable and that it does not constitute any threat to
international or regional peace and security. With the help
of the United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH), the establishment of the Haitian National
Police force has also made considerable progress.

The resolution before us stresses that economic
reconstruction is the major task facing the Government and
people of Haiti.

Under these circumstances, China believes that it is
necessary to promote and encourage the relevant
development and financial institutions to play a major role
in Haiti instead of continuing to extend the mandate of
MIPONUH for another year. China understands the
importance of building a highly effective and professional
police force in Haiti. At the same time, we believe that the
stability and development of Haiti not only hinge on the
building of a police force but also involve various other
aspects. Only the restoration of the economic and social
development of Haiti can ensure the maintenance of
stability and lead to a genuine and lasting settlement of the
present difficulties.

We have taken note of the letter from President Preval
and the report of the Secretary-General. We have also taken
note of the wish of the group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti. In order to seek an appropriate solution
to this question, China has displayed considerable
flexibility, suggesting that the mandate of MIPONUH be
extended for an appropriate period and that the next step be
decided in accordance with the practical situation then. This
suggestion both follows the general practice of the Council
in authorizing the extension of peacekeeping operations and
accommodates the specific situation of Haiti and of
MIPONUH. In particular, it avoids the situation in which
the Council, in dealing with regional hot spots, may adopt
a double standard.

It is regrettable that our major amendment proposals
have not been taken into account and adopted by the co-
sponsors. As a result, my delegation was compelled to
abstain in the voting on this draft resolution.

China undertakes to continue to support the United
Nations presence in Haiti to demonstrate the international
community's attention to and support for the peace
process and economic reconstruction of Haiti. We hope
that Haiti will get out of the present political impasse as
soon as possible and that the elections will be conducted
smoothly. We believe that with the help of the
international community, the people of Haiti will
eventually reach their goal of long-lasting peace and
security, prosperity and development.

