Mr. Ri'icker: I am honoured to have this
opportunity to address the Security Council and
grateful to you, Sir, and to the members of the Council
for the invitation. I took up my new responsibilities
only a few days ago, but have been Deputy Special
Representative for the last year and a half, so I am not
new to Kosovo.

I welcome the presence here of the Prime
Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Agim Ceku. Attendance by the
head of the Kosovo Government has become a regular
feature at these meetings, which is right and fair since
we are discussing the future of the people of that
territory.

The status process dominates the political agenda
in Kosovo at the moment and will continue to do so
until Kosovo's final status is determined. The United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) considers it a priority to support the Special
Envoy and his Office in the pursuit of their delicate
and difficult task, while acknowledging that UNMIK
itself does not have a role in the determination of
Kosovo's final status. The general feeling in Kosovo
now is that a new phase of Kosovo's history is about to
begin. That makes the majority of the people
hopeful - but also nervous, since the outcome is still
uncertain. Although progress continues to be made, and
although UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government (PISG) continue to work together to
improve governance in Kosovo, in the background of
all activity now is that uncertainty about the future.
One idea I would like to leave the Council with today
is that Kosovo needs to be rid of that uncertainty, and
to move on.

It is encouraging for the future of Kosovo that the
status negotiations on the Pristina side have been
conducted by a unity team led by President Sejdiu.
Opposition leaders in that process have achieved a
difficult balance between solidarity within the unity
06-51929
team and a critical domestic stance towards the
performance of the Government, as is normal in
democracies. Along with the status process, there is
still the need to provide good government and public
services to the people of Kosovo. Under the energetic
leadership of Prime Minister Ceku the pace has
remained at the rate reported in our last presentation, in
June.

The standards programme has received even
greater attention since the Contact Group presented the
Government, on 9 June, with a list of 13 priorities,
drawn largely from the results of the 30 April UNMIK
technical assessment on standards implementation. The
list presented to the Government by the Contact Group
identified key areas, mainly with regard to the
protection of minorities and community rights - for
example, new laws on cultural heritage, languages and
so forth. The PISG, with help from UNMIK, have
devoted much attention to meeting the targets set by
the Contact Group. The priorities have by now been
mostly achieved. With regard to the remaining
priorities, they are on track and progress is being made.
I thank the Contact Group for that contribution to the
standards process, which has undoubtedly helped to
maintain the momentum on implementation.

At the same time, the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, drafted in 2004, was in need of
revision to reflect changing realities. Last month,
therefore, the Government adopted an Action Plan to
implement its European partnership. That Action Plan
now forms the basis of both European integration and
standards work, and so unites two processes that have
the common objective of achieving social and
economic progress.

One area of particular concern to us is the
situation in northern Kosovo. In May, several highly
publicized security incidents occurred that - without
any evidence - were portrayed by some Kosovo Serb
leaders and Serbian authorities as inter-ethnic attacks.
Those incidents were used by the municipalities north
of the river Ibar to sever all cooperation with the
Pristina authorities. That boycott continues, although
the northern municipalities continue to cooperate with
UNMIK. Meanwhile, UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) have substantially expanded and enhanced
their security presence north of the river Ibar.

Still, incidents of Violent crime occur, such as the
grenade explosion in a Serb bar in northern Mitrovica
06-51929
and the subsequent violent response against non-Serb
passers-by. For several days we had to close the main
bridge linking the two sides of the town, but we have
now started to reopen the crossing as the situation has
become more stable. Violent crimes are to be deplored
wherever they occur, and prosecuted with the full force
of the law. But frequent attempts to portray Kosovo as
a place where non-Albanians, in particular the Kosovo
Serbs, are under constant attack and are daily victims
of ethnic crimes are completely unjustified. They do
not reflect the reality on the ground.

Serbs and Albanians will have to live together in
Kosovo whatever the outcome of the status
discussions. We all know that will not be easy. But, in
fact, we see many encouraging examples in Kosovo
where people are already finding practical solutions to
their common problems and are laying the foundations
for a multi-ethnic Kosovo. But, obviously, those are
not the cases that attract attention and publicity.

In that context, I strongly support the initiative of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) High Commissioner on National
Minorities, Ambassador Rolf Ekeus, who intends to
launch, in October, a systematic, structured approach to
promote reconciliation.

Belgrade retains a powerful influence over the
attitudes of the Kosovo Serbs. I would wish to get a
clear signal from the Belgrade authorities to the
Kosovo Serbs that their future is in Kosovo if they
wish it, that they have no reason to leave and that they
should find ways to cooperate with the elected Kosovo
authorities. A valuable part of that signal would be the
withdrawal of the directive that Serbs in the public
service must either leave the PISG payroll or else lose
the extra salaries and other benefits paid by Belgrade. I
am ready to work with Belgrade to build a Kosovo
where neighbours with such a troubled past can finally
find a common future.

The PISG has continued its outreach campaign,
and Government ministers continue to seek out non-
Albanian audiences and to reassure them. But that
campaign has not always been successful in gaining
trust. For example, Serbs in the enclave of Velika Hoea
recently refused to meet the Prime Minister. Certainly,
the Kosovo Government has a responsibility to gain the
trust of all of its citizens But if there is no wish even
for dialogue from its interlocutors, then its power to
succeed is somewhat limited.
3
Yes, the Kosovo Serbs are in a difficult situation.
They fear for their future and they do not know whom
they can trust. They have been barred for over two and
a half years from participating actively in the work of
the Kosovo Assembly or the Government. But isolation
is not the answer to their problems; integration is.

The security situation has remained stable,
although I would not deny that there continue to be
risks - for example, incidents such as the ones I
mentioned, which might themselves be relatively
insignificant but which might escalate. In such an
environment, security policy is always a priority. I am
glad to acknowledge the continuing good cooperation
between the leadership of UNMIK and KFOR.

I spoke earlier about the implementation of
standards and the PISG's growing commitment to
serving the public. Two areas that need particular
attention are justice and the economy. We noted in June
the need to build a justice system that can command
the faith of the population and business, whatever
community they come from. Efforts to reappoint all
judges and prosecutors on the basis of a reassessment
of their credentials should contribute to an
improvement and should begin soon. But building an
efficient and impartial justice system for Kosovo is a
task that will take some time.

As for the economy, the legal and institutional
framework for a functioning market economy is largely
in place. However, increased private sector
development is necessary to extricate Kosovo's
economy out of a vicious circle of low growth,
unemployment and a large trade imbalance. There are
encouraging signs in that respect. Annual gross
domestic product (GDP) growth for Kosovo has been
projected at some 3 per cent. Given the shrinking
public sector and diminishing donor input, such a
performance is due to an expansion of the private
sector. Moreover, privatization has continued at an
accelerated pace. Overall, Kosovo's economic growth
will depend on investment-led development of key
economic sectors, and clarification of Kosovo's status
would remove certain complications that currently
affect long-term investment decisions.

We in UNMIK are well aware that we retain our
mandate under resolution 1244 (1999) for as long as
the Council decides. At the same time, against the
background of the status process, we have to start
planning for the end of the mandate. We have
continued to follow the thinking of the Contact Group
on the likely shape and powers of the international
presence which will follow us, and we have maintained
a dialogue with international partners on the transition
from UNMIK to that future presence. There is now in
Pristina a European Union planning team looking at
future involvement in the police and justice sectors,
and a separate team advising Brussels on the
composition of the future international civilian office.
We have regular contacts and discussions with both
those teams, and we also have a Steering Group which
brings together international actors with an interest or
role in the transition process. We plan to include other
interested parties in the discussions at various levels,
including the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, which also need to prepare for the time of
transition which lies ahead.

The devolution of UNMIK's powers and
activities will in itself be a major exercise, and we are
planning for that too. We need to do this even though
we have no timetable for the end of UNMIK's mandate
under resolution 1244 (1999), in order to be ready to
move forward quickly and efficiently when the time
comes.

As I said earlier, UNMIK will discharge its
responsibilities as long as it has them. But I would like
to reiterate that, for the sake of the people of Kosovo
and their future, the current period of uncertainty needs
to be brought to an end as soon as possible. Yes, there
will be tensions and difficulties in the months ahead,
and we can expect emotions occasionally to spill over
when something so vital to people's interests is being
determined. But I believe that the tensions and
difficulties arising from any delay in this process
would be even greater. Delay will not bring
reconciliation. Delay will not lead to economic
recovery. Delay will only prolong the tensions existing
in Kosovo society, which will feed frustration and
make the new start, when it does come, even harder to
get right.

I look forward to serving as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo at a
historic time. I expect to be the last person to perform
that function. In any case, I am well aware that the task
is not easy. But we must get it right, and I am
absolutely convinced that together we can get it right if
the current momentum in the status process is kept up.
06-51929
Momentum is key. Let me conclude by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Council for your continued support in this very crucial
phase of our mission.

