Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
We are pleased to see you, Sir, presiding today over
this meeting devoted to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That reminds us of the important
contribution being made by Pakistan to this effort of
the international community.

The Permanent Representative of Ireland will
shortly make a statement on behalf of the European
Union that I fully endorse. Therefore, I shall confine
myself to a few remarks.

I should like at the outset to emphasize that the
implementation of the Brahimi report has enabled us to
make considerable progress over the past four years in
United Nations management of peacekeeping
activities. I say that because we believe the Brahimi
report remains relevant, and the few points I wish to
make are within that context.

We note a recent change of direction in the
peacekeeping dimension. The complexity of operations
is steadily growing. The number of operations and that
of their staffs are constantly increasing. All of that
leads us to think that these trends will only become
more pronounced in future, because of the growing
demands outlined in the non-paper issued by the
Pakistani delegation. I am struck by the figures before
us today: 14 operations under way; 51,000 staff,
civilian and military combined; four new missions; an
increase in expenditures that will bring the budget to
more than $3 billion.

In the light of those developments, we believe
that the United Nations has thus far demonstrated a
satisfactory capacity to adapt. We owe that to Jean-
Marie Guehenno. We also owe it to the mobilization
and dedication of men and women who have come
from many troop-contributing countries.

This capacity to adapt has also been translated
into conceptual innovations; I will cite three of them.
First is the development of complex operations, which
now include peace-building strategies. Peacekeeping
operations thus find themselves entrusted with
missions ranging from the implementation of rapid-
deployment projects to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes, to strengthening
the rule of law or even to human rights activities. The
most recent mandates we have adopted with regard to
Cote d'Ivoire and Haiti are good examples.

I am also struck by the fact that the United
Nations has improved its capacity to take into account
a regional approach to crisis management. Missions
within a particular subregion are now better
coordinated, particularly in terms of sharing logistical
support. Finally, the adoption of resolution 1353 (2001)
has enabled us to enhance coordination among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries.

We should ask ourselves whether that progress is
sufficient. We believe that it is not - that we must
devote greater thought to the matter. Three questions
can be posed in that connection.

First, is it possible to limit the duration of
peacekeeping operations? It is difficult to do so, but we
must try hard, first of all by systematically assessing
the duration and adaptation of mandates and the
adequacy of mission staffing, depending on the
development of the situation on the ground. Such
assessment must be carried out regularly and
thoroughly, regardless of a mission's age. We believe
that the Council must also regularly ask itself about a
mission's effectiveness: when has a mission attained its
objectives? When can a peacekeeping operation result
in depriving local actors of any sense of responsibility?

Secondly, we believe it is important to make
greater use of the approach taken recently in resolution
1528 (2004), on C6te d'Ivoire. That approach consisted
of envisaging an exit strategy when establishing the
mission. Such a search for a long-term View of the
development of peacekeeping operations should, in our
View, be accompanied by careful planning of handover
to development and transition actors - particularly
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
international financial institutions. We believe that the
Security Council must be increasingly firm on those
two points; otherwise, estimates of heavy financial
constraints will ultimately become the decisive
criterion for the creation or extension of mandates.

Secondly, is it possible to better distribute the
burden of implementing peacekeeping operations?
Whatever reforms may be envisaged, we feel that the
main responsibility for the maintenance of peace
remains with the Security Council and must do so. In
the field, it falls to the special representative of the
Secretary-General. One might consider, however,
whether it would not be possible to further call on the
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations
to undertake certain civilian missions that would be
integrated into peacekeeping operations. We know that
a considerable number of civilian posts in missions are
currently unfilled. One might wonder whether it might
not be more appropriate to associate agencies with the
implementation of certain civilian tasks in order to
allow us to use our tools more coherently.

In the same vein, cooperation with regional
organizations, which frequently have faster reaction
capacities than the United Nations, should be
reinforced. The success of recent operations
undertaken by the European Union in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, by the Economic Community
of West African States in Liberia and by the African
Union in Burundi attest to the effectiveness of such an
approach. In the context of recent advances, we would
also note the role played towards the successful
outcome of such interventions by the European
initiative on the rapid deployment of tactical teams or
support programmes for the development of regional
peacekeeping capacities, particularly African
capacities.

My third and last question is: How can we ensure
better utilization of available resources? We must build
on our progress by further improving the operational
capacities of United Nations peacekeeping.

The integrated planning of missions must be
further developed. My delegation is convinced that the
special representative of the Secretary-General should
be appointed as rapidly as possible after the adoption
of a resolution creating an operation, as was done with
Mr. Klein in the Liberia operation, if memory serves.
The special representative's involvement in
establishing the mission will allow operations to be
deployed under his authority in a more coordinated
fashion.

Existing processes for cooperation with troop-
contributing countries should be revitalized and other
contributors, including the financial ones, should be
more closely involved. To that end, we feel, on the one
hand, that the provisions of resolution 1353 (2001)
could be better exploited, and that, on the other, the
working group on peacekeeping operations could be
better utilized.

Above and beyond the military aspects, we feel
that two other ideas should be explored. First, with
regard to the internal functioning of the Secretariat, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations already has
considerable means and yet sometimes encounters
difficulties, particularly with respect to deploying new
operations in the field. It must be said that there are
many new operations currently under way and that they
involve very cumbersome work for the Department. In
that regard, developing a checklist of the bottlenecks
restricting the Department's capacity might allow us to
pinpoint areas for reform.

We should already be considering ways of giving
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations more
budgetary flexibility, enabling it in particular to
address the recruitment problems it encounters. We
must also find ways better to inform Member States on
the Department's needs. The Secretary-General's
mention of the French-speaking police was quite
appropriate in that respect. The British proposals on
the establishment on a regular basis of a list of
resources, both available and lacking, and of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations's priorities are
also, we believe, on the right track.

Lastly, we must also consider ways to improve
the political follow-up of missions. Not only is such
follow-up important in and of itself for the Security
Council's credibility and the effectiveness of missions,
but it could also contribute to better resource
management.

My delegation thanks you, Sir, for having
convened this debate. In addressing the new demands
before it, it is indeed important that the Security
Council take the time to think, independently of the
consideration of any particular conflict, about the
conditions in which it organizes its peacekeeping
activities and about how it is to meet these new
challenges.

