Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence here this morning and for presiding
over this important meeting, which is very much
appreciated. I also thank Special Representative
Salame for his valuable and informative briefing and,
even more importantly, for his commitment and that
of the Secretary-General to actively leading as well
as coordinating the international community's efforts
in support of peace and security in Libya. I also want
to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Mohamed Siala,
Libya's Minister for Foreign Affairs, and to thank him
for being here today. I look forward to hearing his
statement later on.

We have consistently advocated for the United
Nations to play the leading role in the mediation and
support efforts in Libya. The Secretary-General's
vision for a reinvigorated and long-term United Nations
approach has provided a blueprint for our concerted
action. Mr. Salame' can count on our continued and full
support for his efforts to implement the action plan for
Libya. We will continue to support efforts to amend
the Libyan Political Agreement, which is the only
viable framework for the transitional period into 2018,
and to agree on a reformed Presidency Council, with a
View to preparing for elections and promoting national
reconciliation. To that end, we welcome the proposed
next steps that Mr. Salame outlined for us today and,
as others have, we call on all the parties to engage
constructively with him in that process.

We welcome the participation of women in the
drafting committee sessions in Tunis. Going forward,
we emphasize the critical importance of women's
representation and full and equal participation in each
step of the process, and of ensuring that upcoming
committee gatherings, as well as the national
conference, will provide opportunities for their
concerns to be addressed, including with regard to
security and mobility.

We took careful note of Mr. Salame's pertinent
observations on the depletion of funds and the
management, or perhaps mismanagement, of Libyan
assets. Like him, we are deeply concerned about the
widespread abuses and violations of human rights and
violations of international humanitarian law being
perpetrated by all sides, from Derna and Al-Abyar in
the East to Warshefana in the West, almost always with
complete impunity. Summary executions, kidnappings,
torture, rape and other forms of sexual abuse must
stop and be investigated, and those responsible must
be brought to justice. In the absence of accountability,
those crimes also contribute to a dangerous spiral of
revenge and retaliation that threatens the promise of
peace in Libya. I thank Mr. Salame for stressing those
issues today, and we encourage the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya to step up its human rights
monitoring. I also took careful note of his thoughts
on how justice can be improved, including through
international joint mechanisms.

We welcomed the first visit to Libya by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
October. That was significant, and we share his grave
concerns, which others here today have echoed, about
the suffering of migrants and refugees and about the
conditions in detention facilities. Clearly, further efforts
are needed to turn them into open-transit centres that
meet international standards. Support is also needed
for the important work being carried out in Libya by
the International Organization for Migration and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and to find sustainable alternatives to
detention, especially for vulnerable groups.

In conclusion, as all the speakers before me have
stressed, we must now seize the window of opportunity
that exists to advance the political process in Libya
and lay the foundations for long-term peace and
stability. It is essential that all Libyan stakeholders
engage constructively and for the good of the Libyan
people and that the Council and the wider international
community come together in support of those efforts.

