Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing and for
reaffirming the international community and United
Nations positions, which are in line with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. Those
positions state that the Golan is Syrian Arab land
occupied by Israel. We also commend the briefing by
Mr. Jean-Pierre LaCroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, on the work of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF).

Whether at meetings of the Security Council
or by way of official statements, the State of Kuwait
has repeatedly stressed over the past two days that
the Golan is Syrian Arab land occupied by Israel, the
occupying Power. Occupation and annexation of land
by force is a matter that is rejected and violates the
Charter, principles of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The decision by Israel,
the occupying Power, to impose its laws, authority and
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan is null
and void and has no legal effect at the international
level. What I have just stated is not only the position
of the State of Kuwait or that of the League of Arab
States, it is also the position of the Security Council, as
set out in resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously
on 17 December 1981.

We have all seen the international rejection of any
effort to illegitimately acquire territory by force, as
well the rejection of any illegal measure that escalates
tensions in the Middle East. We regret the decision by
the United States to recognize Israel's sovereignty over
the Golan. We underscore our support for Syria's just
demand and right to recover the entirety of the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan. We recall that the Security Council
always stresses its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.

With regard to UNDOF, I would like to commend
the Force for its efforts and work in such a critical
security situation, given the risks of landmines and
improvised explosive devices, as well as the threat of
sleeper terrorist cells in its area of operation. We fully
believe that the Force is among the very few remaining
sources of stability in the region. It is therefore important
to maintain its presence and for the Council to support
its work so that it can undertake its responsibilities. We
reiterate the need to free the area of separation of any
military presence except UNDOF troops, as provided
for in resolution 2450 (2018). We call upon all parties to
exercise self-restraint and avoid escalation in order to
maintain security in the region.

In conclusion, the Security Council has always
stressed the need to address the root causes of conflicts.
We therefore emphasize once again that the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Arab Golan for more than 50 years, is the root cause
behind this conflict. We reaffirm that the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories poses a continuing threat
to peace and security in the region and the world. The
solution to establishing stability in the region would not
be through entrenching occupation or imposing a fait
accompli. It would be through Israel's withdrawal from
all occupied Arab lands, and the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).

