Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French): I have the honour to speak before the Security
Council on behalf of the Benelux countries: Belgium, the
Netherlands and my country, Luxembourg.

I wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
December 1995. I express my appreciation to you for
having convened a formal meeting of the Security
Council to consider ways to strengthen the current
procedures for consultations between the Council and the
countries that contribute troops to peace-keeping
operations. In this respect, the Benelux countries fully
endorse the statement made this morning by the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, Ambassador
Cardenas.

We recognize that the consultation mechanism
launched by the adoption of the presidential statement of

 

4 November 1994 has made possible improved transparency
in the Council's decision-making on peace-keeping
operations.

We believe, however, that the modalities of these
consultations can and must be improved to achieve a more
representative character and greater transparency and
efficiency in the decision-making process. The troop-
contributing countries should be consulted on a systematic
basis, from the very moment a mandate is conceived,
before the Council takes any decision on the establishment
of a peace-keeping operation. Indeed, peace-keeping
operations established by the Security Council will be
adequately supported by the contributor States only if their
concerns are sufficiently taken into account when mandates
are defined and the operations are deployed in the field.

Greater transparency in the Council's decision-making
process would have a positive effect on the political
commitment of current and future troop contributors. It
goes without saying that there is no question of infringing
on the Council's spheres of competence or prerogatives.

To our mind, a certain number of improvements would
help to make the meetings with the troop contributors more
effective. We are thinking of the following measures,
inter alia: first, meetings should be announced in the
Journal early enough to allow delegations to prepare
themselves adequately. Secondly, the necessary
documentation should also be made available to delegations
before meetings. Thirdly, the Secretary-General' 5 reports on
an operation under consideration should be distributed to
the delegations concerned to enable them to study the
options suggested by the Secretary-General. Fourthly,
consultations with troop contributors should take place on
a systematic basis, and early enough to be useful, every
time a peace-keeping operation is created, modified,
expanded or terminated. Fifthly, records of the meetings
with troop contributors should be circulated among all the
members of the Council. In order to formalize these
modalities for consultation and cooperation, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Luxembourg believe that the adoption of
a formal Security Council resolution would be appropriate.

The Benelux countries hope that this appeal for more
institutionalized, effective and representative consultations
between troop-contributing countries and the Security
Council will be heeded by the Council.

