Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would like to thank you, Sir,
for your initiative in holding this open debate in a very
timely manner. It is indeed encouraging that the
Security Council remains engaged with this important
issue, which has such profound implications for
international security.

I would also like to express our appreciation to
the Government of Colombia, and particularly
Ambassador Camilo Reyes, for the constructive role
they played in leading the United Nations Conference
on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects to the adoption of the Programme of
Action.

The Japanese Government has actively
participated in international efforts to address the issue
of small arms ever since former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali first brought the problem to the
attention of the international community in 1995.
Building upon the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts and the Group of Governmental Experts on
Small Arms, both of which were chaired by
Ambassador Mitsuro Donowaki, the Japanese
Government introduced the General Assembly
resolution that led to the convening of the Conference
on small arms. The Conference on small arms yet again
impressed upon all those associated with it the tragic
suffering that small arms have inflicted upon people all
over the world and reaffirmed the urgent need to halt
the excessive accumulation and illicit transfer of these
weapons.

The Programme of Action adopted at the
Conference will certainly prove to be an historic first
step in addressing the complicated issue of small arms,
although we are aware that not all of the participating
countries are fully satisfied with the measures
contained in it. In this context, we would like to take
this opportunity to recognize the significant
contribution that African countries made to the success
of the Conference, both at the preparatory stage, under
the able leadership of Ambassador Dos Santos of
Mozambique, and, most importantly, at the closing
moments of the Conference, when they displayed the
commendable political will to agree to a painful
compromise in order to ensure the adoption of the
Programme of Action by consensus. It is now
incumbent upon the international community to make
the Programme of Action truly meaningful for the
countries in Africa severely affected by small arms.

I must hasten to add that the countries suffering
from the scourge of small arms are not confined to
Africa. As Japan's Senior Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Seiken Sugiura, stressed at the Conference,
it is the responsibility of the international community
to extend support and assistance in response to the
aspirations and will of the people in all the affected
countries and regions.

It is now up to all of us to ensure that the
Programme of Action is effectively implemented and to
foster even greater international cooperation to free the
world from the threat of small arms. The Japanese
Government, for its part, plans to host a meeting of
experts at the beginning of next year with a view to
furthering cooperation with countries that are
committed to resolving this issue. The Japanese
Government is also planning to expand, possibly in
cooperation with other donor countries and United
Nations agencies, weapons-for-development projects to
Africa, the Balkans and the Asia-Pacific region, based
upon the pilot project Japan has developed with the
European Union in Cambodia. Furthermore, we are
planning to conduct research on past small arms
collection projects with a View to establishing
guidelines for future efforts. Japan's additional
contribution of $900,000 to the trust fund of the
Department for Disarmament Affairs is aimed at
promoting such projects for resolving problems related
to small arms.

I would like to add that, for the purpose of
ensuring the effective implementation of the
Programme of Action and of further improving the
regime, it is important that a review conference be
convened within the next several years.

In closing, I would like to call upon the Security
Council, which has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to pay
particular attention to the issue of small arms when it
considers concrete conflict-prevention measures. The
mandates of peacekeeping operations established by
the Council address small-arms issues in various ways,
such as the collection and storage of weapons.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
too have become typical features of recent
peacekeeping operations. More important, the
establishment of peacekeeping operations provides the
international community with valuable opportunities to
improve and develop the way it deals with the issue of
small arms.

That issue must inevitably be addressed on a
case-by-case basis, taking into account the local
conditions involved. In that context, due consideration
should be given to the issue of small arms when the
Security Council sends a fact-finding mission to an
area of conflict.

Because the Council can be a driving force in
efforts to overcome the threat of small arms, we
encourage it to remain mindful of its responsibilities
and to continue to pay careful attention to activities
undertaken by various countries and organizations to
the same end.

