Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, allow me to add our voice to the
expressions of solidarity and condolences that have
been expressed you, Mr. President, and by Council
members, to the family members and the countries of
origin of United Nations experts, Michael Sharp and
Zaida Catalan, who, together with their Congolese
interpreter, Betu Tshintela, tragically lost their lives
while seeking to carry out their tasks in a dedicated,
thoughtful and responsible way. We convey our sincere
condolences to their families.

Uruguay commends the Security Council for
its unanimous adoption of resolution 2348 (2017),
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The majority
of Uruguay's peacekeepers are deployed in this
peacekeeping operation. For that reason, the text we
that we have just adopted is of particular importance
to my country.

The current situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is complex, and the contingents deployed
there, as well as the defenceless civilians, are faced
with difficult circumstances that have shown no sign of
improving. In that connection, Uruguay would like to
express its robust support for the recommendations of the
Secretary-General contained in his report S/2017/206,
wherein he requests that the number of deployed staff
not be reduced and that the number of formed police
units be increased. We would like to underscore that
the reduction in MONUSCO personnel provided for
in this resolution clearly does not correspond with the
situation on the ground.

Uruguay believes it essential that United Nations
resources be used in the most efficient way. However,
in this particular case, we are skimping on resources
in a peacekeeping operation whose circumstances
still show no signs of improving. It is therefore vital,
as far as Uruguay is concerned, that the reduction in
the number of troops deployed not affect the essential
protection-of-civilians tasks that are currently carried
out by MONUSCO. It is worth highlighting that the
Security Council has already recently made cuts to
peacekeeping operations and has concluded some
sanctions regimens, but it has done so in places where
the situation on the ground has shown progress.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, we congratulate
the penholder and all delegations for their constructive
approach, as well as forthe spirit ofcompromise that was
evident in the negotiations surrounding this resolution.

