Mr. Shen Guofang (China)(spoke in Chinese): Mr.
President, like other delegations, the Chinese delegation
warmly welcomes you as you preside over this important
meeting of the Council today. We express our appreciation
for the efforts made by the Namibian delegation for
arranging this open debate. The Chinese delegation would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu, for his briefing to the
Council on the question of children and armed conflict.

The question of children and armed conflict has
always been a concern of various countries and relevant
United Nations agencies. At present, armed conflicts exist
in many parts of the world, affecting not only international
peace and security, but also causing great harm to the
countries and peoples concerned. As one of the most
vulnerable social groups, children are the hardest hit in
armed conflict. Some of them have become homeless
refugees, wandering in the streets. Some have been
recruited as child soldiers, living from day to day. Not only
can they not lead a normal life and receive the education
they deserve in situations of armed conflict, but they are
also constantly exposed to the danger of death. Their
psychological and physical health are greatly impaired.

Children are the future of the world. However, the
predicament of children in situations of armed conflict, with
all its implications, has received widespread attention
among the international community. The fundamental
approach to protecting children in armed conflict is to
effectively prevent, stop and eliminate armed conflicts.
However, it is very regrettable that we have not been able
to achieve that. In this regard, we believe the United
Nations should provide greater input. Under such
circumstances, we should also adopt measures and urge the
parties to conflicts to expeditiously end conflicts through
peaceful means and demand that the parties abide by
various international laws, including international
humanitarian laws. Various types of violence committed
against children in armed conflict should be prevented and
prohibited, and the necessary protection and assistance
should be provided to them so that they can resume their
normal life and education as soon as possible.

We call upon the international community, relevant
international organizations and relevant United Nations
agencies in particular to further strengthen their
coordination and cooperation and to join hands in a greater
effort to solve the problem of children and armed conflict.

We would also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Mr. Otunnu for his active efforts over
the years in seeking a solution to the problem of children
and armed conflict. China would like to continue its
support for his work.

China has always attached great importance to the
question of the protection of children and has always
actively taken part in deliberations on this issue, both in
the General Assembly and in other agencies. We believe
that the question of the protection of children involves
many aspects and is highly technical in nature. Therefore,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council are appropriate forums where more
comprehensive, adequate and in-depth deliberations can
be conducted.

Recently, the Security Council has time and again
taken up the issue of humanitarian situations in regions of
conflicts. Many members have emphasized that, as the
main organ bearing primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
should focus more of its attention on eliminating the root
causes of humanitarian crises. We fully concur with this
opinion. On the basis of that understanding, we believe
that while deliberating on the issue of children and armed
conflict, the Security Council should also hold discussions
on issues such as how to end conflicts and defuse crises
that are at the root of this problem. It should also propose
practical and effective measures and recommend an
effective monitoring mechanism. The Security Council
should be capable of making these contributions on the
issue of children and armed conflict.

