Mr. Danon (Israel): On behalf of my delegation, I
congratulate the Kingdom of Sweden on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month.

Before I begin, I must address the events that
took place ts morning. A short while ago, two Patriot
missiles were launched at a Syrian Sukhoi fighter jet
that infiltrated Israeli airspace. The Israel Defense
Forces monitored the advance of the fighter jet, which
infiltrated approximately 2 kilometres into Israeli
airspace. It was then intercepted by the Patriot missiles.
Israel warned Syria not to breach the 1974 Separation
of Forces Agreement. Israel will not allow any violation
of its sovereignty.

Over the weekend, at the request of our allies,
Israel completed a humanitarian effort to rescue 422
members of the White Helmets and their families. The
Israeli Government approved their passage through
Israel as an important humanitarian gesture. We
would like to thank the countries that took part in that
humanitarian operation. Israel will continue to provide
the Syrian population with humanitarian aid, such as
food, medicine and clothing, as it has since the earliest
days of the war.

Enough is enough. Too many in the international
community continue to criticize our actions while
Hamas terrorizes our southern border. This past
weekend, an Israel Defense Forces soldier was shot and
killed by a Hamas terrorist squad. Hamas terrorists
fired more than 200 rockets and mortars into Israeljust
over a week ago. A 17-year-old girl suffered wounds
to her face from a rocket attack. Another rocket struck
the courtyard of a synagogue in the Israeli town of
Sderot. A balloon filled with explosives landed on the
roof of a kindergarten. Sirens blare day and night, and
the residents of Israel's southern communities are told
to remain within 15 seconds of bomb shelters - 15
seconds. More than 7,400 acres of land in southern
Israel - half the size of Manhattan - have been
destroyed by Hamas arson attacks. Just imagine if half
of Manhattan were set on fire, if eight Central Parks
were to burn to the ground by flames set by terrorists.

Israel continues to defend itself. We have destroyed
Hamas terror tunnels, one of its training facilities
located in a city centre and military targets. We took
such steps to protect our people, just as Members
represented here would do to protect their people.

Hamas is responsible for those acts of terror. Yet,
too many in this building seem to have forgotten what
Hamas truly is. Hamas is a terrorist organization. Hamas
is to be blamed for holding hostage the entire population
of Gaza. Hamas is working closely with the terrorists of
Hizbullah in Lebanon and the Iranian regime. Hamas
is a regional threat that requires a regional solution.
Hamas is also an international problem that calls for
international designation. The fanatics of Hamas who
terrorize Israelis and Palestinians are sophisticated
cold-blooded killers. It is time this body acknowledges
that Hamas is no different than Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The Council
must designate Hamas as a terrorist organization once
and for all.

Founded by a group of Muslim Brotherhood
activists in 1987, Hamas remains committed to a
violent assault against Israel. Its stated goal is creating
a Palestinian State "from the river to the sea". Hamas
preaches the destruction of Israel and its entire people
through suicide bombings, stabbings, kidnappings and
any other means of terror it sees fit. From 2000 to 2005,
Hamas killed over 1,000 innocent Israelis. It wounded
thousands more. Suicide bombers boarded buses and
entered restaurants only to blow them up moments later.

In 2005, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon ordered
the entire withdrawal of all Israeli presence in Gaza.
That meant the complete removal of every pre-existing
Jewish community in Gaza, every Israeli Defence
Forces soldier and even the bodies from our cemeteries
in Gaza. Israel left so the Palestinians could govern
themselves in Gaza. They had the opportunity. Israel
had removed itself completely - no settlement, no
occupation - but Hamas remained. In fact, Hamas
grew only stronger.
In 2006, Hamas violently overthrew the Palestinian
leadership. It literally threw Fatah leaders off their
rooftops. Since then, for 12 years Hamas has done
nothing but exploit the Palestinian people and attack
Israel. Hamas has built countless terror attack tunnels
from Gaza into Israel to kidnap and kill innocent
Israelis. This year alone, Israel has destroyed at least
10 of those terror tunnels that crossed into Israel,
ending just metres from our communities. In 2017,
Israeli security forces stopped over 400 Hamas terror
attacks, including 13 planned suicide assaults and eight
attempted kidnappings.

It has been 12 years since Hamas seized control
of Gaza, and peace in our southern region remains a
figment of the imagination. That is because Hamas
values death over life. If the Council does not believe
me, it should listen to Hamas' leaders themselves.
During the recent violent riots, Yahya Sinwar, the
leader of Hamas in Gaza, addressed the mob next to the
fence - delegations can look it up on Google - and
demanded that they, the people he sent to the fence,
charge the fence into Israel, find innocent Israelis
and tear out their hearts from their bodies. The
international community must accept that Hamas' true
colours are the bloodiest of reds. There is only one
remedy - the international community must designate
Hamas a terrorist organization.

For many years, Hizbullah in Lebanon has
terrorized northern Israel as it pretends to be a political
organization, but Hizbullah is not alone today in
Lebanon. Hamas has widened its efforts to collaborate
with Hizbullah and to cause innocent Israelis as much
pain as possible. Both Hamas and Hizbullah are guilty
of placing innocent people - whether Lebanese,
Palestinian or Israeli - in grave danger. Like Hamas,
Hizbullah commits the crime of exploiting civilians
as human shields and both terrorist organizations
enjoy tremendous resources, equipment and training
from Iran.

Hamas leaders boast about those terror ties
themselves. Yahya Sinwar bragged that Hamas has

"excellent relations with our brothers in Hizbullah.
We work together and coordinate and we are in
touch almost on a daily basis".

Over the past few months, Hamas has amplified its
activities in Lebanon. We have warned the Security
Council about this, but nothing has changed. Hamas
is part of an international operation, one that crosses
borders from Turkey, to Lebanon, to Syria and finishes
in Iran. Through this network and with the funding
and sponsorship of Iran, Hamas has established missile
and unmanned aerial vehicle factories in southern
Lebanon. It has built training camps to teach thousands
of Palestinian terrorists in Lebanon.

The scale of Hamas activities would not be possible
without the unwavering support of the Iranian regime.
Despite clear Sunni/Shia differences, Iran provides
nearly $100 million annually to Hamas and Islamic
Jihad. Hamas leaders, including the prominent Saleh
Al-Arouri, have met with Iranian officials on many
occasions. Ali Akbar Velayati, a top aide to Iranian
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei, stated:

"We are proud of supporting the Palestinian
resistance and Hamas movement. The Iranian
leadership and our people will continue to support
the resistance led by Hamas and Islamic Jihad."

Just this month at the so-called Wet Gunpowder
Festival - apparently, it is festival - Qasem
Soleimani, Commander of the Quds force of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard, was scheduled to address the
entire population of Gaza through a live broadcast from
Tehran. A technical malfunction stopped the speech
from taking place, but that type of direct communication
to all of Gaza shows only one thing - that the ties
between Hamas and Iran are stronger than ever.

With Iran's support, Hamas is becoming a regional
and international threat. Iran has already built a strong
influence in Lebanon, giving $700 million a year to
Hizbullah. Iran already has near control over Syria.
It provides the regime with $4 billion per year and
thousands of fighters. We simply cannot allow Gaza to
become another Iranian outpost. Designating Hamas as
a terrorist organization would reaffirm the international
community's obligation to combat terrorism.

Terrorism knows no borders, colours or creeds.
Terrorism strikes the cafes of Paris, the towers of New
York and the streets of Tel Aviv. Hamas, Al-Qaida and
ISIS share the same immediate goal of killing innocent
people and disrupting international peace. Therefore,
designating Hamas as a terrorist organization should
be no less obvious than designating Al-Qaida and ISIS.
The United Nations should designate as terrorists to
be sanctioned Hamas leaders, such as Yahya Sinwar,
who is guilty of committing over 50 terror attacks;
Ismail Haniyeh, who is responsible for countless
innocent deaths and is a supporter of Osama bin Laden;
and Khaled Mashal, who is guilty of executing 38
Palestinians who tried to resist Hamas.

Hamas continues to hold hostage two Israeli
civilians and the abducted bodies of two fallen Israeli
soldiers, Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin, and refuses
to return them. They also refuse to allow visits by
the International Committee of the Red Cross or any
other third party and to provide information about their
fate or conditions. It is inconceivable that it has been
over four years since our two soldiers were killed and
their bodies are still being held by Hamas terrorists.
I remind members of the Council that Hadar Goldin
was killed after a United Nations sanctioned ceasefire
was implemented. It is the responsibility of the United
Nations to ensure the return of their bodies for proper
burial in Israel. Failure to do so is a standing violation
of international humanitarian law. One cannot demand
humanitarian assistance to Gaza, which we support,
while refusing to ensure the basic humanitarian rights
of returning our captive and fallen.

Hamas directs violent attacks of rockets and
flaming kites at Israeli civilians. It diverts supplies
that go to Gaza to build terror tunnels. It uses
civilian buildings and objects to launch attacks,

and it uses Palestinian civilians - men, women
and children - as human shields. Hamas - the
organization that is responsible for the suffering of
so many Israelis and Palestinians - fundamentally

violates co-obligations of international humanitarian
law. Hamas continues to display total disregard for
all the values that the international community holds
dear, including humanity, the protection of civilians
and respect for international law. The international
community cannot stand by idly.

Before I conclude, dozens of countries have
designated Hamas as a terrorist organization. They did
not do it out of sympathy for Israel. They did it because
they understand that Hamas is a worldwide terror
threat. By calling Hamas anything other than what it is,
one becomes the launch pad for its rockets. In the last
debate in the Security Council about the conflict (see S/PV.8244), here in this Chamber, a majority ofSecurity
Council members could not condemn Hamas. The
majority of States members of the General Assembly
had the courage to support the United States. Therefore,
if this organ is serious about peace and security, it will
designate Hamas as a terrorist organization once and
for all.

