Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should like
first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and to thank you in particular for
your timely initiative to place the important issue of
conflict prevention, and the role of the Council in this
respect, before the Council for consideration.

Since the creation of the United Nations, the
subject of conflict prevention has, because it is an
essential element in the preservation of international
peace and security, continued to remain at the heart of
the international community's concerns, even though
the subject has undergone a considerable evolution as
circumstances have changed.

As I said last November here in the Council,
when the concept of preventive diplomacy was
introduced it was closely linked to the threat of a
nuclear escalation between the two super Powers. Over
time the scope for such action has considerably
expanded, following the proliferation of inter-State and
internal conflicts, which today are the main cause of
the destabilization of States.

More recently, the terrible and tragic events in
Rwanda and, to a lesser extent, in Somalia, have
contributed to raising the awareness of the international
community about the urgent need to attach priority to
conflict prevention so as to avoid a recurrence of these
tragedies and at the same time create conditions for
lasting peace in Africa and throughout the world.

To that end, aware of the fact that armed
intervention means a failure of prevention, the
international community then came out in favour of a
strengthening of the prevention capacity of the United
Nations. Today, the tribunals for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia are considered here as new,
powerful instruments for deterrence. Tomorrow, when
the International Criminal Court is operational, it will
mark a particularly decisive turn in our common effort
to reject further faits accomplis, injustice, indifference
and impunity.

In this untiring search for a solution to what
seems to be a global threat, for the countries of the
North as well as for those of the South, the question
which continues to occur is whether today it is possible
to give thought to an effective policy for the prevention
of conflicts without first tackling head on other
significant issues which are organically linked to it.

In his report of 13 April 1998 devoted to the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa, the Secretary-
General rightly and relevantly recognized that
prevention of conflict is not an end in itself and that it
must take into account, by combining them, the
different functions of post-conflict peace-building and
of political, economic, social and humanitarian
activities designed to eliminate the underlying causes
of conflicts, in particular economic destitution, social
injustice and political oppression.

It is in that context that I would like to make
several comments. First, that today the Security
Council should unanimously acknowledge that there is
a close relationship between the need for peace and the
demands for sustainable economic development. The
Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs recently stated,
and very much to the point, that poverty fuels war.

Unfortunately, poverty, illness and epidemics
such as AIDS, hunger and oppression, violations of
human rights are raging today throughout the world, as
is demonstrated by millions of refugees, people who
are ill or displaced. These numerous problems, which
are both a source and a consequence of armed
conflicts, require unflagging attention by the Security
Council and that the efforts devoted to them be of the
highest priority. Allow me to emphasize here that we
are gratified by the leadership you have demonstrated
at the beginning of this week, Mr. President, by
allowing for an important debate within the Security
Council on the subject of AIDS in peacekeeping
operations.

My second comment is that the Security Council
can play a leading role in the question of the illicit
trade and spreading dissemination of light weapons and
small arms, which is of concern to all of us. Today,
unquestionably, the mass flows of such weapons is
fuelling and magnifying insecurity and helps to trigger
conflicts. To control, restrict and eliminate the illicit
trade in light weapons is, therefore, in our view, a high
priority objective for conflict prevention.

But for there to be genuinely effective conflict
prevention, there is a need not only to control a
dissemination of weapons, but above all to eradicate
the source of weapons in order to do away with these
weapons once and for all. This is why the Council
should support the efforts of numerous countries or
groups of countries that have taken bold and timely
action to this end, and here I would like to cite the
example of the States of Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), which in November 1998,
fully aware of the extent of this scourge, decided to
impose a moratorium on importing and exporting these
types of weapons.

More, however, should be done, by finalizing
within the United Nations a binding legal instrument
for the elimination, or even a total ban, on illicit
transfers of light weapons. This is one of the great
goals at stake for the United Nations conference
planned for next year on the illicit trade in light
weapons and small arms in all of its aspects.
Preparatory work for this conference has already
begun.

My third comment proceeds from a logical
assumption that the Council needs to establish a special
fund designed solely to support strategies for
preventive diplomacy and which would finance
mechanisms for prevention that are already in
operation in other regions in the world. This fund
would avoid obliging the United Nations to sink
enormous sums into peacekeeping operations or post-
conflict peace-building.
The Organization of African Unity (OAU),
believing that Africa now is paying a heavy price for
armed conflict, decided as of 1993 to establish a
conflict prevention, management and settlement
mechanism which has a fund for peace, designed
specifically to finance the strengthening of the African
capacity in conflict prevention and settlement.
Moreover, at the OAU summit in Algiers in 1999, the
Heads of State of Africa wished to lay down the first
bases for a culture of conflict prevention in Africa,
declaring the year 2000 the year of peace on the
continent. This unprecedented determination and this
effort at peace deserves to be supported by the
international community. Here, therefore, we would
like to thank France, the United Kingdom, the United
States and several other developed countries for their
initiatives to strengthen the African capacity for
conflict prevention and management.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that one
of the major challenges to be met over the next few
years is that of the capacity of the United Nations and
its various bodies to establish a flexible mechanism
entrusted on a standing basis with warning the
international community of potential crisis situations
throughout the world and recommending appropriate
emergency responses. Thus, we could replace our
culture of responding to crisis with another culture, that
of preventing crisis.

In our joint efforts to build this culture of
prevention, the Security Council, endowed with
primary responsibility for maintaining peace and
security in the world, should for its part respond more
expeditiously in the future to tragic situations which
clearly can spawn humanitarian disasters.

There are several areas, specifically, in which the
role of the Security Council in preventing armed
conflict could be strengthened: the sending - and the
more frequent sending- of good offices missions
made up of members of the Security Council, as was
recently the case in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, or of outstanding individuals having great
political and moral prestige, to draw the attention of
the parties to the conflict to the need for restraint in
situations which can be more or less explosive;
increased cooperation of the Council and of the bodies
involved in the United Nations system with regional
organizations, in order to set up an integrated warning
system under Chapter VIII of the Charter; and finally,
consideration and adoption by the Security Council of
a series of measures allowing countries which have
emerged from an armed conflict to set about forging a
culture of peace and reconciliation in order to prevent
the outbreak of further conflicts.

The resources provided to the Secretary-General
through Article 99 of the Charter should also be often
used in situations which could imperil peace and
security throughout the world. In our View, the Council
should encourage and more firmly support future
initiatives of the Secretary-General in this area.

Today's discussion and the document which
doubtless will crown this debate should allow us to lay
the foundations for a mechanism without which no
system of prevention worthy of that name would be
able to function properly.

