Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan): I would like to
express our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening this
open meeting. Your great experience and knowledge
about Afghanistan and the Afghanistan problem will be
very helpful in guiding this meeting and also for the
drafting and approval of the Presidential statement to
be delivered at the conclusion of this meeting.

This debate will allow Security Council and other
United Nations members to express their views on the
subject. Furthermore, such an open debate presents an
occasion to evaluate and assess the politico-economic
developments of the country and the implementation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions. The views
expressed by Member States could also be applied to
the formulation of new strategies and policies to
promote and consolidate peace and stability in
Afghanistan and in the region.

Last month, on 6 May 2003, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Ambassador Brahimi, presented a
comprehensive report on the situation in Afghanistan. I
am very grateful to Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno for his briefing today. I also thank
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Director-General of the
United Nations Office at Vienna and Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC). Their statements were very
interesting and essential. Mr. Brahimi described the
continued implementation last month of the Bonn
Agreement by the Transitional Afghan Government
and the challenges facing the Government in
discharging its functions. Since his briefing was
comprehensive and covered a broad range of issues, we
would like to pinpoint some aspects of the
developments in Afghanistan between the last briefing
and that of today. We would like to highlight some
major problems that need the sustained attention of the
international community.

First of all, there is the recovery and
reconstruction and its impacts on peace and security.
The United Nations General Assembly, in its resolution
on Afghanistan adopted on 6 December 2002
(A/RES/57/ 113 A-B), underscored the interrelationship
between reconstruction and the consolidation of peace.
The fourteenth preambular paragraph of Part A of the
resolution recognized the need for continued strong
international commitment to rehabilitation and
reconstruction programmes and indicated that visible
progress in this regard could further enhance the
Government's authority and greatly contribute to the
peace process. The same resolution, in the sixteenth
preambular paragraph of Part B, clearly indicated that
economic recovery and reconstruction in Afghanistan
and the security and improvement in the lives of the
Afghan people are closely interrelated.

Furthermore, the United Nations Secretary-
General, in paragraph 7 of his report (S/2002/737)
dated 11 July 2002 concerning the enhancement of
security in Afghanistan insightfully refers to the drastic
impact of limited resources on the efforts of the
Transitional Government to widen its authority:

"The Interim Administration's efforts to
extend its influence and control have been
hampered by the limited resources at its
disposal. These limitations have affected its
ability to provide services, build roads and create
jobs".

Again, in paragraph 70 of his recent report dated
18 March 2003 (A/57/762-S/2003/333), the Secretary-
General rightly reiterates the importance of
reconstruction in the country:
"Too many Afghans remain dissatisfied at
the pace of reconstruction and economic
development, and await their 'peace dividend'".

We strongly believe that the consolidation of
peace, security and stability largely depends on the
international community's sustained engagement in
providing the necessary assistance for the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of Afghanistan's social and
economic infrastructure. It is worthwhile mentioning
before the Council the two major lessons learned
during the past 18 months since the establishment of
the new Government in Afghanistan.

First, it is imperative that the international
community channels its assistance through the national
development budget of the Afghan Transitional
Authority and focuses its attention on building the
capacity of the Afghan Government. A relevant
mechanism for the monitoring of the expenditures
could be established.
Secondly, additional resources are needed,
beyond the pledges made in Tokyo in January 2002. In
View of the level of destruction caused by 23 years of
conflict and based on the in-depth evaluation carried
out by the Afghan Government, President Karzai,
during his recent official visit to the United Kingdom,
renewed his plea for an additional $15 billion for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. In that regard, a new
pledging conference should be considered.

With respect to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR), the Afghan Government is of the
View that effective DDR is a central element of long-
term peace-building and conflict prevention in
Afghanistan. It was with that conviction that
Afghanistan attended the second Tokyo conference,
hosted by the Government of Japan on 22 February
2003, which aimed to mobilize international support
for the process of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants. In that regard, we
will launch the DDR process by the end of this month,
in accordance with a timetable and appropriate plan.
The Afghan Ministry of Defence and other ministries
concerned are deploying major efforts in that field.

It is obvious that disarmament entails the
collection of arms and ammunition; demobilization
implies the separation of combatants from military
service or armed troops. Unlike disarmament and
demobilization, which can be described as being time-
bound, reintegration is a process. As such, it demands a
sustainable reintegration programme encompassing the
immediate and long-term social and economic
inclusion of former combatants into their communities
as productive and law-abiding citizens. The viable
creation of economic growth and development, the
establishment of income-generating projects, the
provision of education and training programmes and
the response to the psycho-social impact of war should
all be part of that programme. This requires the
launching of major projects, such as the reconstruction
of highways, providing employment for workers. It
also requires the construction or reconstruction of
major installations such as textile and cement factories.
However, if DDR is to be an integrated process, there
can be no gaps or delays as a result of slow funding.
The success of DDR has major implications for the
security of the country. It is fundamentally dependent
on economic growth and on the creation of
employment. Ex-combatants must be able to earn a
living by legitimate means.

We would like to avail ourselves of this
opportunity to express the gratitude of the Afghan
Government to the Government of Japan, as the lead
nation, for its generous contribution in funding the
DDR process in Afghanistan.

With respect to narcotics, which has been the
main topic of discussion today, poppy cultivation and
the production and trafficking of illicit drugs remain a
major national concern. Afghanistan's opium economy
grew as a consequence of the degradation of
agriculture and economic infrastructure due to more
than 23 years of war. There is a strong political will for
the eradication of poppy cultivation in Afghanistan. To
that effect, the Afghan Government has issued two
decrees banning the cultivation, production, trafficking
and consumption of narcotic drugs. However, the
practical success of the implementation of those
decrees depends to a large extent upon credible law
enforcement and the availability of alternative sources
of livelihood for farmers. Supporting the central
institutions of Afghanistan in establishing and
consolidating effective Government control over the
opium-producing areas is essential for any drug control
strategy. Likewise, other initiatives should focus on
re-establishing a sustainable rural economy not only
for landowners but also for seasonal labourers and
labour forces involved in the opium economy. We feel
that much attention is given to the cultivation of poppy
in Afghanistan. Giving attention to the cultivation of a
few alternative crops with an international market
value is vitally important.

To that effect, the Afghan Government has
prepared the Afghan national drug control strategy.
That strategy encompasses programmes for alternative
livelihoods, the enhancement of the capacity of law
enforcement agencies and the improvement of national
legislation. My Government, with the support of the
international community, is committed to eliminating
opium production through the implementation of the
national long-term drug control strategy by the year
2013.

We are thankful to the Government of the United
Kingdom, which, as lead nation, is working closely
with Afghan authorities, donors and the United Nations
to integrate provincial anti-drug activities and to
identify quick-impact and long-term alternative
livelihood programmes and infrastructure projects.

We would also like to thank France for convening
the conference on drug routes from Central Asia to
Europe, held in Paris on 21 and 22 May. We are
committed to cooperating closely with all regional and
international efforts to combat the cultivation,
production, trafficking and consumption of illicit
drugs. The Afghan authorities welcome the decision
taken by the Group of Eight to assist Afghanistan in its
effort to combat the cultivation and trafficking of
opium.

On 18 May 2003, in order to strengthen and
consolidate the Afghan structures and to improve
financial and administrative systems in Afghanistan,
the National Security Council of Afghanistan held a
meeting and took a number of important decisions in
the presence of the governors of provinces that
generate customs revenues. Under article 2 of the
outcome, all the income of the provinces should be
deposited in the central treasury. This effort by the
Government to centralize revenue collection was
welcomed by the Afghan people and by provincial
governors and has yielded tangible results.

Work on the new constitution is progressing, and
the Government remains engaged in the formulation of
the new constitution. Work on the constitution has
entered a new phase of public consultation. The
process will take up to 50 days to complete with the
help of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Constitutional Review
Commission. The first office of the Commission has
now been opened in Kandahar, and field offices will be
opened in Kunduz, Mazar-e-Sharif, Bamyan, Herat,
Gardez and Jalalabad. The main purpose of these
offices will be to lay the groundwork for public debate
on the new Afghan constitution. This will provide the
opportunity for every Afghan, regardless of ethnic
origin, language, sex, religious sect or political
affiliation, to express himself or herself freely and
openly and to voice opinions on what will become the
constitution of Afghanistan.

Let me express our sincere gratitude to the United
Nations, to the United States of America, to all
countries members of the International Security
Assistance Force - especially the lead nations: the
United Kingdom, Turkey, Germany and the
Netherlands - and to the anti-terrorist coalition forces
for their remarkable performance in assisting Afghans
to create a more stable and peaceful environment
following the collapse of Al Qaeda and Taliban forces
in 2001. We welcome NATO's decision to provide
leadership and expanded logistical assistance for the
United-Nations-mandated ISAF in Afghanistan starting
in August 2003.

Afghanistan supports and welcomes the
establishment of the provincial reconstruction teams.
That initiative contributes much to the cause of security
and to the development of various parts of the country.

Afghanistan endorses and supports the statement
prepared by the President of the Security Council and
would like to stress its recognition that Afghanistan
continues to need considerable political and financial
support from the international community and the fact
that it urges donors to meet their commitments.

Last but not least, allow me to express on behalf
of the Government and the people of Afghanistan our
deepest condolences to the Government and the people
of Germany on the death of German members of the
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
The cowardly suicide attack which took place on 7
June was carried out by terrorists who are against
peace, stability, development and prosperity for the
Afghan people. In the face of such a threat, the
countries in the region should extend and reinforce
their cooperation against terrorism, extremism and
fanaticism within the framework of Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001). For the same purpose, the forces engaged
in combating and containing the spread of terrorism in

Afghanistan and the region should be further
strengthened. To that effect the Afghan Government
renews its request to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
of the Security Council to consider the provision of
adequate resources, equipment and training [or
professional personnel for the effective combat against

and annihilation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations in and around Afghanistan.

