Mr. Rabbani (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
thanking Ethiopia for convening today's debate on the
situation in Afghanistan.

I am also delighted that Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto is here with us today. I thank Ambassador
Yamamoto for his briefing, but more specifically for
his dedicated efforts as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

I am pleased to address the Security Council
for the first time as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan. This is a fitting opportunity to convey
my appreciation for the Security Council's support and
attention to the situation in my country, since the start
of its journey towards a new Afghanistan in 2001. The
people of Afghanistan look to the Council with high
expectations as the guardian of international peace
and security. Amid all of the challenges, Afghans are
hopeful that the international community, the United
Nations and the Council, in particular, wi11 respond
appropriately to help them achieve what has long eluded
them - their right to live normal and dignified lives, in
peace and security.

The time has come for the international community
to take a fresh look at its engagement in Afghanistan.
As President Ghani stated in his address to the General
Assembly last week,

"For too long, the conflict in Afghanistan has been
viewed through the prism of civil war; but the war
is not within our soil, it is over our soil" (A/72/ PV.6).

The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism that
affects Afghanistan is the product of a long-standing
policy by a neighbouring State to keep Afghanistan
unstable. It has menaced Afghanistan for several decades
now, with its roots located in terrorist sanctuaries and
safe havens outside of my country.

A bigger picture of the security situation reveals
that our security forces are engaged in a comprehensive
fight against the elements ofmore than 20 internationally
recognized terrorist organizations. Thanks to the
dedicated support of our international partners, our
security forces are leading that fight more efficiently
and with great valour and courage.

The Taliban is suffering major setbacks in
manpower and morale and failing to hold ground over
any territory. That is why its modus operandi draws
mainly on suicide bombings and other unconventional
criminal attacks on our people, infrastructure, public
figures, mosques and international humanitarian
personnel. Such barbarity constitutes crimes against
humanity - the most recent being the massacre
committed jointly by the Taliban and Da'esh in Mirza
Olang village in Sari Pul province and the attacks on
mosques in Kabul and Herat provinces.

I also wish to highlight that the exaggerated claims
of Taliban control over some percentage of territory
is being used as psychological warfare. Our security
forces have the upper hand against terrorist and
extremist groups throughout the country. That trend
will continue in a positive trajectory with sustained
assistance from international partners to further
strengthen the capabilities of our national security
forces and improve service delivery for our people.

We in Afghanistan have long called for an
international focus that would address the fundamental
sources of insecurity in our country. We are pleased
that, as of late, there is a growing recognition of that
imperative in the international community. The new
dynamic presents an unprecedented opportunity, which
must be seized. In that regard, I can say with confidence
that the new strategy of the United States for South
Asia has generated new hope among our people across
the country. Afghans from all walks of life are looking
to the future with renewed optimism that finally the
threats of terrorism and extremism in Afghanistan and
the wider region will be tackled appropriately.

In that connection, we welcome the fact that the
new strategy recognizes the critical need to address
the lingering problem of terrorist safe havens and
sanctuaries in our region, and for more determined
efforts to end the political, logistical and financial
support enjoyed by terrorist groups. Furthermore, the
strategy's conditions-based approach has addressed
some uncertainties by reinforcing the right message
that the international community's engagement will
endure until Afghanistan becomes stable and secure.

We urge all partners in our region and beyond to
recognize what is at stake. We now have a chance to
fundamentally change the status quo for our common
benefit. The support of the region, in that regard,
will be of paramount importance. Collectively, we
should seize this opportunity to strengthen consensus
and partnership, in a spirit of cooperation to buttress
Afghanistan's rightful status as an asset and platform
of cordiality for all.

Despite being on the receiving end of provocative
actions, including continuous violations across the
Durand Line, Afghanistan has maintained a principled
position in seeking to resolve differences through
dialogue, diplomacy and peaceful means. This is
particularly true in the case of our relations with
Pakistan, which, unfortunately, has so far failed to
respond positively, at its own cost, particularly in
relation to its global reputation and standing.

Recently, we presented Pakistan with yet another
opportunity to engage in comprehensive State-to-
State discourse on peace, security and prosperity. This
time around, we hope that we will see constructive
engagement instead of plausible deniability and
attempts to change the narrative. Even if embraced
late, an opportunity seized is nevertheless better
than one lost. There are various existing initiatives
in which productive talks could take place. By the
same token, we will spare no effort whatsoever in the
defence of our country, people, territorial integrity and
national sovereignty.
Ending violence means ensuring the security
and well-being of our citizens. The Government
of Afghanistan has gone to great lengths to secure
sustained and durable peace for our people. The prospect
of peace with the Taliban is dependent on genuine and
constructive regional engagement in support of an
Afghan-led process. In that regard, we believe that a
paradigm shift could profoundly impact peace efforts
with the Taliban in a positive way. A successful outcome,
modelled on the agreement being implemented with
another armed opposition group can be possible. We
believe that the international community should take
the necessary measures to achieve that aim.

Democratic institutions, values and principles
provide the foundation for all progress made over
the past 17 years in Afghanistan. We believe that a
democratic society in which people are able to express
their ideas, grievances and aspirations is not just a
privilege, but also an imperative for social stability. The
consolidation of democracy and institution-building
will remain a priority of the National Unity Government.
Our people are already anticipating the upcoming
parliamentary and district council elections next year.
The transparency, inclusivity and credibility of the
polls will be crucial for our overall political stability.

In the area of reform, we are standing by our
commitment to ensuring more accountable and effective
institutions. A number of senior-level officials have
been prosecuted and held to account for violating the
rule of law. These cases have reaffirmed our promise
to root out corruption in all its forms, and enhance
public confidence in our reform commitments. This
effort will continue with priority, and we look forward
to highlighting recent achievements in this area at the
upcoming senior officials meeting in Kabul to review
reform commitments made in Brussels.

We consider the strategic review of the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
to be an essential initiative for ensuring an adjusted
United Nations role that is more responsive to the
current needs of the Afghan people and better aligned
with our national priority programmes. We are pleased
that the imperative of a One United Nations model
concerning the delivery of development assistance has
been recognized. We hope to have, by the end of this
year, an outcome that will enable the United Nations to
deliver on its tasks more efficiently.

Our stabilization endeavour is based on an effort
for simultaneous progress in the security, social and
development spheres. Despite our challenges, we are
making steady progress in protecting and upholding the
rights of all of our citizens, especially women, girls and
children. Our resolve in this important area is reflected
in our candidacy to the Human Rights Council. For us,
a commitment to human rights means enabling people
to live in peace and security, achieve success and meet
their aspirations. Above all, it means enabling people to
live in honour and dignity.

These are ideals to which we are firmly committed.
Our membership in the Human Rights Council will have
many benefits. It will enable us to consolidate human
rights gains at home. It will also enable us to be a voice
for victims ofterrorism and the dozens of countries that
are in conflict and post-conflict situations. We kindly
urge all United Nations Member States to support
our candidacy.

In conclusion, let me convey the deep appreciation
of Afghanistan to the Security Council and the
international community for all that they have done
and continue to do in support of Afghanistan's security
and stability. We stand at the crossroad of our shared
endeavour. As we approach the new year 2018, it is
imperative that all of us seize the opportunity before
us, brought about by the new spirit of the international
community's engagement in my country.

