Mr. Holliday (United States of America): First,
let me express my delegation's appreciation to you,
Madam President, for leading the Council's
deliberations on a topic of complexity and genuine
importance and for providing us with the non-paper
that has formed the basis for our discussion. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, who was here
earlier; Ambassador Rasi, for her contribution; and Mr.
Denis Caillaux and Mr. Ian Martin, who represent two
of the key players in this important endeavour. Their
presence adds significance to our debate and is clear
evidence of their personal commitment to finding
creative ways for civil society organizations to engage
with the United Nations to better meet future
challenges.

In his inauguration speech, President Bush said,
"A civil society demands from each of us goodwill and
respect, fair dealing and forgiveness". It is up to each
of us, as individuals, to embody those traits within civil
society organizations. In the United States, of course,
civil society plays a vital role in complementing the
efforts of Government or even in taking the lead in key
issues, particularly at the local level. It is up to us, as
Governments, to tap into the power of civil society to
help achieve international peace and security.

Civil society organizations can flourish in
societies where good governance and the rule of law
are applied; where political institutions are strong;
where civil and political rights are fully recognized;
where participation in electoral processes is
guaranteed; and where human rights, freedom of
expression and independent media are respected. The
presence of a healthy civil society is more likely to
create a lasting peace. Hence, it is important that the
United Nations support the growth and inclusion of
civil society organizations, particularly in post-conflict
situations.

The importance of civil society in those scenarios
as a source of information, but also particularly as a
check on the abuses of power and as a guarantor of
democratic institutions, has been underlined as a
specific illustration in the recent preparations for the
Council's West Africa mission. The Council held an
Arria-style meeting to foster the dialogue between civil
society organizations and the United Nations. Non-
governmental organizations were able to highlight
concerns for the region and for individual countries,
and Council members will follow up with meetings
with civil society organizations while they are on the
ground.

Of course, we look for a back-and-forth
interaction with civil society organizations not just
when we need to discuss a particular issue - such as
the mission - but over a regular period of time, and
we find it very valuable to listen to the views of those
who are on the ground and who have the expertise in
shaping our positions and our opinions. In addition to
the Arria-style meeting, the Council mission will
benefit from the contributions of civil society
organizations in informing their future deliberations on
these issues, and it will ensure that they are familiar
with a full range of voices within the countries,
including the voices of those who may not yet be
represented at the political level in countries in
transition and of those who may have useful critiques
of the political leadership.

Having a home to return to is a great task for any
post-conflict peace-building society. Among the most
significant potential resources now available to assist
nations in their efforts at post-conflict peace-building
is the United Nations itself. In its deliberations two
weeks ago, the Council focused on civilians in armed
conflict. Finding homes for such displaced persons
poses a unique and special challenge. In addition,
finding a home to return to plays a role in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and activities, in which civil society
organizations play an integral role.

The strong presence that civil society groups
maintain on the ground has provided us early warning
signals with regard to the crisis in Darfur. That crisis is
an example of how civil society groups such as CARE
and Doctors Without Borders, as has been mentioned,
can assist in addressing that very serious problem. The
situation in Darfur has rightly been called the greatest
humanitarian disaster today. Civil society organizations
have played an important role in increasing attention to
the crisis, and they will continue to play a vital role in
bringing an end to violence, saving lives and helping to
rebuild a shattered society.

In closing, I would just like to point out that
Ambassador Rasi mentioned that there should be an
active role for the Economic and Social Council. We
also believe that the Economic and Social Council and
its various ad hoc advisory groups provide an
important link with civil society and will allow us to
benefit from their expertise as we move forward. We
also share Ambassador Thomson's view that early
warning from the field and dialogue on an ongoing
basis in the field between civil society organizations
and the United Nations are absolutely vital. My
delegation looks forward to hearing from others,
particularly the Secretary-General's high-level panel,
on the role of civil society organizations not only in
peace-building but also in conflict prevention.

Lessons learned from the past may help us
address ways to better support future peace-building
efforts. Our challenge is to instil confidence in the
proposition that conflict, no matter how tragic, can
give way to human and social betterment, and civil
society organizations can effectively contribute to that
noble end.

