I would like to thank Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic, for his statement. I commend the President for convening this very important meeting on protecting civilians from conflict-induced hunger. I also thank the briefers for their insightful, but very solemn, remarks. Today human civilization stands at an important crossroads as we face the greatest challenges of our lifetime - some of which will inevitably have repercussions for generations to come. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the likes of which we have not seen for over a century, continues to wreak havoc on our societies and economies, while the ever-growing climate crisis casts a precarious shadow over our lives and livelihoods. In addition to the immense challenges posed by those emerging threats to international peace and security, our fight against hunger persists and the number of people affected by acute food insecurity continues to rise. We can and must do better to protect the most vulnerable. In the struggle for lasting peace and prosperity, we can claim no easy victories. Yet, it is in our darkest hour, when our struggles seem insurmountable, that we must work together - not in spite of our distinct interests, perspectives and priorities, but precisely because these demand constructive forms of engagement that yield creative and people-centred solutions. Let us remember that our entire multilateral system was designed by our forebears to serve the interests of people. While our individual nation-States remain the primary medium through which our geographically dispersed societies interact, those constructs are merely products of human progress. To finance the eradication of hunger in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, our Government has worked with various partners and donors to implement a mechanism called the Zero Hunger Trust Fund. That initiative combines a number of social programmes that span education and training, health and wellness, housing, employment and productivity to create a social safety net for the most vulnerable groups, and has significantly reduced levels of undernourishment in our Vincentian society. Our delegation proposes that a similar trust fund be designed and implemented, under the auspices of the World Food Programme (WFP), to cover budgetary shortfalls that stymie the assistance offered to conflict-affected and food- insecure populations. The recent announcement by the WFP to reduce by half food aid to Houthi-controlled areas in Yemen due to reductions in donor support is an absolute tragedy. We must work swiftly and resolutely to ensure that all vulnerable populations in Yemen and elsewhere are afforded that much-needed support. We must be mindful, however, that, while conflict is a primary driver of acute food insecurity in some contexts, the hazards of climate change - including erratic precipitation, floods, drought and sea level rise - also serve to undermine agricultural productivity and create food insecurity. In addition, economic recessions and disruptions in supply chains lead to food crises for many vulnerable groups across the world. If we are to end hunger by 2030, a whole-of-system approach is required to tackle food insecurity both within and beyond situations of conflict. That means that the Security Council must make a greater effort to work alongside the Peacebuilding Commission and other entities such as the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations Development Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the WFP to tackle the root causes of insecurity across the peace, security, development and humanitarian nexus.
