Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by conveying our condolences to the
Government of the Russian Federation. We condemn
the terrorist attack carried out in Grozny on 9 May. We
extend our sympathy to the bereaved families.

We also wish to welcome here the Minister of
State of Timor-Leste, Ms. Ana Pessoa Pinto.

Like preceding speakers, we thank the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the situation in Timor-
Leste (S/2004/333). We also thank his Special
Representative, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, for his
excellent briefing and his personal account. Having
listened to Mr. Kamalesh Sharma's briefing and read
the report, we indeed welcome the ongoing progress
made by the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste in establishing democratic institutions and
building the structure of a viable State. We welcome
the adoption by the national Parliament of the Organic
Law on the Office of the Presidency, which opens the
way to establishing two new constitutional bodies -
the Superior Council of Defence and Security and the
Council of State.

Recent progress made by the East Timor national
police augurs well for the upcoming transfer of police
authority to the Timorese Government, despite the
shortage of capacity and available resources. It is
important that the instruments regulating the police be
adopted soon in order to create a republican institution
that will ensure the rule of law and freedom for all
citizens. Special attention must be given to efforts
aimed at avoiding excessive use of force and at
ensuring greater respect for human rights.
We moreover welcome the improved security
situation, as well as the work done by the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
in the area of transferring competences. We fully
support the modification of the composition of
UNMISET in order to deal with the problems
identified in that regard. We believe that that will
enable Timor-Leste ultimately to assume full
responsibility for security and stability throughout its
national territory.

The Government of Timor-Leste's control of that
sovereign function will also depend on maintaining
good relations with its neighbours, which means
dealing with many pending issues such as finalizing
border demarcation, the return of refugees from the
western part of Timor and establishing maritime
crossing points. We therefore urge Timor-Leste,
Indonesia and Australia to intensify their cooperation
to make progress in these matters.

Regarding public administration and justice, we
welcome the efforts aimed at adopting a law on the
establishment of an Office of the Provedor for Human
Rights and Justice. Given the crucial role that Office
will play in monitoring respect for human rights, it is
necessary that the international community provide
Timor-Leste with greater support for its establishment.
Like the Secretary-General, we stress the need to
continue efforts to fight impunity and to promote
national reconciliation.

As I said in my statement on 20 February 2004,
Timor-Leste is now among the least developed
countries. The assessment of the economic and social
situation of the country contained in the Secretary-
General's report indicates the magnitude of the
challenges to be addressed. In that regard, we believe
that the problems of unemployment and difficulties
encountered in the reintegration of ex-combatants are
of real concern and merit the special attention of the
international community. In that regard, UNMISET's
exit strategy must be coupled with a strategy for
strengthening Timor-Leste's public administration and
productive capacity.

In the final analysis, we can state that the many
problems noted in Timor-Leste argue in favour of
supporting the Secretary-General's recommendation to
extend the UNMISET mandate for one year. Therefore,
we anticipate with great hope the upcoming conference
of Timor-Leste's development partners, scheduled for
19 May 2004. We are convinced that the international
community will take that opportunity to step up its
support to the Timorese people, who are so resolutely
committed to sustained economic growth and
sustainable development.

