Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Middle East question - i.e, the most
prolonged regional conflict since the Second World
War - has been a worldwide concern. Recent years have
witnessed the settlement of some regional conflicts, a
trend that has been reflected in the Middle East too. The
Declaration of Principles signed by the PLO and Israel at
the end of 1993 marked a breakthrough in the Middle
East peace process. It was an important step towards a
comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East and
towards harmonious coexistence between the Arab and
Jewish nations. It has paved the way for a final,
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the conflict
between Palestine and Israel.

There have been some new developments in the
Middle East peace process since then. Four Middle East
countries held a summit meeting in Egypt not long ago.
The Chinese delegation welcomes and is grateful for these
positive developments, and for the wise and pragmatic
approach adopted by the Palestinian and Israeli leaders in
their search for peace in the region.

It should be pointed out that the Middle East peace
process has recently suffered another setback. The discord

 

between the parties concerned over Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories has suddenly sharpened. The Chinese
delegation is very much concerned over this development.
The Middle East peace process is now at a very sensitive
and critical moment. We hope that the parties concerned
will exercise restraint, be calm and reasonable and try their
best to create appropriate conditions to continue to promote
the Middle East peace process rather than undermine it.

At present it is essential for Palestine and Israel to
build mutual trust and persist in settling disputes through
consultation and negotiation. The leaders of the two sides
should, proceeding from consideration of the long-term
interests of all nations in the region, continue to remove
obstructions and work together to promote the peace
process in the Middle East. As a Chinese saying goes, the
road to success is strewn with setbacks, and long is the
road to accomplish an arduous task. There will certainly be
many a challenge in the efforts to achieve a comprehensive
and fair settlement of the Middle East question, which has
been with us for several decades. As long as we bear in
mind the philosophy that peace is the most precious thing
and persist in working for peace, it is possible to overcome
all difficulties, setbacks and contradictions. The
international community should make the best of the
situation and work to maintain the momentum of the
Middle East peace process.

China has throughout supported the Middle East peace
process and has stood for the political settlement of the
Middle East question on the basis of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations. We will, as always,
continue, together with the international community, to
promote the Middle East peace process and make our due
contribution to a happy life of lasting peace for the people
of the region at an early date.

