Mr. J agne (Gambia): Mr. President, let me begin by
commending you for your foresight, which led you to
include this important issue in our programme of work for
the month. Our meeting today takes on particular
importance for a number of reasons. First and foremost,
the presence among us of The Honourable Lloyd
Axworthy is a clear demonstration of the significance that
Canada attaches to humanitarian issues generally. At a
time when there are so many theatres of conflict in
Africa, and worse still, when such conflicts target
civilians more than combatants, there could not have been
a better time to discuss the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We are also honoured to have the
Secretary-General with us today. In the same vein, we
would like to salute the presence of the representatives of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, and the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in the persons of
Mr. Sommaruga, Ms. Carol Bellamy and Ambassador
Olara Otunnu. This is indeed a unique experience.

These three briefings, we hope, will complement the
ones that were held before on related issues. We now
have a global picture of the magnitude of the problem.
While admitting that there are no easy solutions, we
should begin by attacking the evil at its roots. I am
referring to the causes of conflict, the main culprit being
poverty. In fact, all three briefings we have heard
underscore the need to look into the causes of conflict. It
is becoming increasingly clear that poverty has the
potential to constitute the single most important threat to
international peace and security. It is not a mere
coincidence that all three speakers drew attention to this
fact. The writing is on the wall. Let us therefore act
before it is too late.

The urgent need to act now is made most acute by
the fact that children, who are the future of any society,
are the most affected. This is why we are not surprised
when, again, all three briefings clearly laid emphasis on
the plight of children. My delegation would therefore
invite the Council to consider seriously the peace and
security agenda for children being advocated by UNICEF.
Ambassador Olara Otunnu started by saying that children
deserve particular attention, and he went on to develop

 

similar aspects of the problem raised by both Ms. Bellamy
and Mr. Sommaruga.

These eloquent speakers not only posed the problem,
they also offered practical proposals for possible solutions.
We are convinced that through concerted international
effort, coupled with the necessary political will, we can
surmount these difficulties. The problem of access by
humanitarian actors to those in need is at the top of the list,
and we cannot agree more that we have to insist on having
access to the needy for the effective and efficient delivery
of humanitarian assistance. Most atrocities against civilians
in armed conflict are committed in places outside the reach
of the international community, and the mere presence in
the field of humanitarian workers, we have been told, just
to witness events, is a major deterrent and could contribute
greatly to the protection of civilians. This is why access to
those in need is crucial in every humanitarian endeavour.

Considering that the needy are often trapped in hostile
conditions, exposed to all sorts of dangers and difficulties,
it goes without saying that those who risk their lives in total
self-abnegation to reach out to others must be protected and
minimal guarantees established to create on enabling
environment for them to carry out their humanitarian operations.

The effects of sanctions on children is a cause of
grave concern. When designing sanctions, it is important to
contemplate the effects those sanctions might have on
children and on other vulnerable groups of society. It is
unacceptable that as a result of poorly targeted sanctions,
infant mortality rates in some countries have increased
dramatically.

One important feature in contemporary armed conflicts
is the indiscriminate use of anti-personnel landmines.
These, as we have learned, have accounted for an untold
amount of death and destruction among civilian
populations. For this reason, we welcome the coming into
force of the Ottawa Convention on anti-personnel
landmines. We hope that this Convention will yield the
desired effects.

As we think about protecting civilians in armed
conflict, the most effective protection that comes to mind
is the prevention of conflict itself. The international
community as a whole has an important responsibility in
this regard. As we have earlier pointed out, poverty
contributes immensely to the causes of conflict. The need
to eradicate poverty and establish early warning systems to
prevent conflict therefore needs no further emphasis.

As we are all aware, the Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols are applicable only to States
parties. The problem we face in warfare today is that
most conflicts involve groups that are not parties to the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols. How
do we deal with the situation? The establishment of
international norms to ensure individual responsibility for
atrocities committed in times of war and to ensure respect
for fundamental human rights is therefore crucial.

The international community has done a lot in recent
times to bring to an end the related problem of impunity.
The establishment by the Security Council of the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia and the recent adoption of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) are classic
examples. The coming into force of the Statute of the
ICC would indeed be a fitting tribute on the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.

Finally, what can the Security Council do to ensure
protection of civilians in armed conflict? Chapter 7 of the
Charter of the United Nations provides the Security
Council with the unique power to deal with conflict
situations. Effective use of its provisions, including, if
possible, the use of enforcement actions, can be of great
help. We hope that the Security Council in dealing with
conflict situations in the future will bear in mind the
problems of lack of respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights law in making its decisions. We
therefore agree with Mr. Sommaruga's idea of launching
an appeal for the strengthening of international
humanitarian law on 12 August this year. We hope that
on that auspicious occasion, the international community
will also do something for internally displaced persons by
adopting an appropriate framework.

