Mr. Auviiart (Estonia): I would like to thank
the Indonesian presidency for convening today's
open debate on a topic of such importance, as well as
Lieutenant General Martins Filho and Mr. Holmberg
for their briefings.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Additionally, I would like to make the following
few remarks.

First, I would like to underline that, in order to
build truly successful peacekeeping operations, we
need better prepared troops. Sufficient training that
is suitable to the conditions on the ground and the
right equipment and interoperability of forces is the
responsibility of us all. Predeployment training based
on consolidated standards is vital to meeting the
increasing expectations of the United Nations.

Secondly, let me highlight that Estonia fully
supports striving towards more realistic, robust
and tailored mandates for peacekeeping operations.
Realistic mandates are the baseline according to which
the performance of missions can be evaluated. Our
expectations of United Nations peacekeeping missions
are ever-growing. Missions are multidimensional and
their objectives are much more far-reaching than mere
peacekeeping. In order to meet multifaceted demands
and expectations, missions ought to be agile and capable
of constant adaptation. We continue to underline the
relevance of our shared commitments under the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.

Thirdly, on gender mainstreaming, peacekeeping
operations and uniformed personnel are the most
visible representatives of the United Nations, directly
working with communities each day. For that reason,
it is imperative to increase the number of female
peacekeepers and promote their full, effective and
meaningful participation in United Nations peace
operations. Estonia has increased training opportunities
for women in our armed forces. In time, that will have a
direct and positive impact on Estonia's ability as a troop-
contributing country to accelerate gender parity among
United Nations peacekeeping troops by encouraging
female military and police personnel to apply.
In addition to striving to increase the number of
female peacekeepers, we consider it paramount to
sensitize all peacekeepers on gender aspects in peace
operations. Thorough predeployment training on
human rights and gender-related issues, including on the
prevention of, and response to, conflict-related sexual
violence and the eradication of sexual exploitation and
abuse, is a must. Furthermore, gender advisers should
be an integral part of all United Nations missions, and
their activities should be further reinforced in settings
where conflict-related sexual violence is widespread

Estonia has contributed to peace and stabilization
operations around the world. We will continue to
contribute to making a difference for a peaceful world
and to promote those ideas throughout our bid for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the
period 2020-2021.

