Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We once again thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing. Above all, we thank him for his continued
work, for which he can and will continue to count on
the support of Uruguay, including when our term on the
Security Council comes to an end.

Unfortunately, as has happened on numerous other
occasions, we must begin our statement by condemning
a fresh attack. This time, we condemn the attack that
took place on 17 November on the West Bank, which
was carried out by a Palestinian assailant and left two
Israelis injured. Such violence and terrorist attacks, as
well as their incitement and glorification, do nothing
to advance peace, and they endanger the possibility of
reaching a two-State solution.

This year marks many anniversaries related to the
still unresolved conflict. This month marks 100 years
since the Balfour Declaration, which initiated a process
that ended with the partition of Palestine and was then
finalized three decades later through General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), exactly 70 years ago. It has also
been 50 years since the 1967 war and the occupation of
territories that followed.

Despite the numerous multilateral, regional and
unilateral initiatives to try to end the conflict, we
are still far from glimpsing a peaceful and mutually
acceptable solution. The two-State solution remains
the only viable option to end the conflict - there is
no alternative plan B. Direct bilateral negotiations
must be relaunched as soon as possible to clarify all
unresolved issues.

To achieve that goal, it is necessary to reverse
current trends on the ground. If not, it will be extremely
difficult for Palestine to consolidate its territory as a
State. Uruguay maintains strong ties with both the State
of Israel and the State of Palestine. We again reaffirm
the right of Israel and Palestine to live peacefully,
within secure and recognized borders, in an atmosphere
of renewed cooperation that is free of any threat or act
that might undermine peace.

Almost a year after the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), we regret that there has been little progress
in its implementation, and that Israel has continued
and intensified its settlement policy on Palestinian
territory. We condemn that practice and call for its
immediate cessation. We reject the explicit support of
the Israeli authorities for that settlement policy, which
continues to advance at full speed, despite resolution
2334 (2016) and the repeated calls of the entire
international community.

We reiterate that settlements are illegal under
international law and constitute an obstacle to peace
and the two-State solution. That policy is accompanied
by the ongoing demolitions of Palestinian homes
on the West Bank and in East Jerusalem and clearly
illegal initiatives under international law to annex
settlements under Israeli jurisdiction. Those actions
clearly exacerbate tension; other actions and measures
are necessary, which, to date, have not been taken.
Otherwise, it will be increasingly difficult to arrive at a
peaceful and mutually acceptable solution.

We await next month's presentation of the fourth
quarterly report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) by the Special Coordinator. We reiterate
our wish for the report to be circulated in writing
prior to the meeting, so that we are able to analyse its
findings and then voice our opinions following careful
consideration of the document.

On a more positive note, the reconciliation
agreement that was signed in October between the
Hamas and Fatah Palestinian groups undoubtedly
represents an important step towards achieving
Palestinian unity. We thank Egypt for its important
role in that successful process. The recent return of
the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip to retake
control after a decade is very good news, which should
be sufficiently highlighted and commended. The
reunification of Palestine under a single, legitimate
and democratic Government is essential to providing
for the aspirations of the Palestinian people, and could
substantially improve living conditions in an area that
has been engulfed in a serious humanitarian crisis since
the armed conflict of 2007.

For that agreement to be successfully implemented,
it will also be essential that those measures be
accompanied by agreements on security, the
disarmament of Hamas and the renunciation of violence
and the destruction of Israel as a declared objective.

In this still very complex scenario, in which there
is a glimmer of hope, it is necessary, more than ever,
that the Security Council and the entire international
community remain united in their desire to see apeaceful
resolution of all the aspects of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. Only then will we be able to exert due pressure
on the authorities to stop the trends that threaten that
process, and ask them to be sufficiently flexible and
reasonable, so that they understand once and for all that
peace is a much more valuable goal than the violence,
hatred and injustice that have characterized the region
over the past few decades.

