Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I wish
to thank Mr. Miyet for his excellent opening statement.
As he mentioned, I am just back from Africa, and I
would like to reply based on what I observed, building on
our excellent meeting of yesterday. I would like to try to
observe yesterday's five-minute rule again and reserve the
right to talk again later, because I believe that the most
valuable conversation we could have this morning would
be a real exchange of views on an issue which I believe
will be as important for the future of the United Nations
next year as Kosovo and East Timor were this year. I
might add, based on considerable personal experience in
Kosovo and East Timor, this one will be more
complicated by far than East Timor and no less
complicated than Kosovo.

With that as an opening remark, let me compliment
Mr. Miyet on his briefing and address the concerns of
many of my colleagues here in the Security Council on
this issue.

In our trip, we were accompanied by Senator
Feingold, the ranking Democrat on African affairs in the
United States Senate. I mention that because, as members
are aware, under our system of Government it is Congress
that pays the bills, and under our system of Government
we will need to have their approval for American
contributions to any peacekeeping efforts. We have
achieved that in Kosovo and East Timor with difficulty,
and in Sierra Leone and the Central African Republic. We
look forward to getting congressional approval next year
for an action in the Congo.

But it is important, as I have said repeatedly, to get
it right. We cannot repeat the tragedies of Bosnia,
Somalia and Rwanda. In that sense, I strongly endorse the
Under-Secretary-General's emphasis on Lusaka. Having
been involved in a few peacekeeping negotiations myself
and observed many others, I can say that the Lusaka
Agreement is a really superb agreement. It is well-written
and well-thought-out, and, most importantly, it was done
by the parties themselves, under their own leadership in
the region. This is a lot more than I can say for Bosnia or
East Timor.

Having said that, I think we need to recognize that
this agreement is being widely disregarded or even
violated, and we are delighted at the nomination of
President Masire as the facilitator. This was one of the

 

main efforts that I engaged in during my trip, and it is very
gratifying that he has been offered the job. We deeply and
profoundly hope that he will accept it and that movement
in that direction will be rapid.

As I said in my speech in Pretoria, the United States
would find it difficult to move forward in support of
peacekeeping absent a facilitator to work on the political
component, which is so critical.

On the Joint Military Commission (JMC), I want to
state again that during our trip last week, we delivered $1
million to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) for the
Joint Military Commission and had extended talks with
General Lallali, who is in charge of that effort. We would
like to repeat what was said so often yesterday - that the
JMC, the OAU, the United Nations and MONUC must
work more closely together.

The United States has been occasionally charged in
recent days with dragging its feet on peacekeeping in the
Congo. Let me state again, as I did quite openly to my
friends here in the Security Council and to the leaders of
the African States which I visited - and I spoke to every
person who signed the Lusaka Agreement - that the
statement that the United States is dragging its feet is true.
We are dragging our feet right now, but not because we are
opposed to peacekeeping in Congo. We are dragging our
feet because we want a peacekeeping operation, and we
want to get it right. We cannot afford an operation which
is not right, and there are many things to sort out here.

The Under-Secretary-General a moment ago said he
could not yet give us precision on the composition and
structure of the peacekeeping force. We really need to
know that, and with all due respect, I believe it is
imperative that we have a more intense planning effort
involving the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
nations on the Security Council and other potential major
troop contributors, and other countries that will be asked to
contribute money. This is very complicated - much, much
more complicated than Timor or even Kosovo, and once we
start down this path, the relationship between the JMC and
MONUC, or its successor, the relationship between the
OAU and the United Nations, the command and control
situation on the ground, the mandate, the size, the costs, the
backup all need to be known. We should not vote a
resolution until we know what we are voting for.

If members will bear with me a moment, I can assure
them that such an approach - and this will be our major
emphasis in January during the American presidency of the
Security Council - will better enable us to gain
international support for this process, domestic support in
our own countries, and, in my particular case, support
from the Congress of the United States.

I might add in that regard, and I can tell members
this morning what many of them have already heard
informally, that during the month of January we will be
visited in New York for the first time ever by the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, led by Senator Helms and
Senator Biden. They will come to New York, they will
hold meetings and hearings of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee here in New York for the first time
in history, and they will ask permission to come and visit
with Council members individually and collectively. And
because this issue - the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - will be so high on the agenda, it will be a
natural focus. So we have an opportunity to work together
in the next six weeks on this critical issue.
I also want to mention the Southern African
Development Community, which is playing a vitally
important role; I did not mean to neglect it. But the
organizational arrangements must be clearly worked out.
I would like to reserve the opportunity to respond in more
detail as this debate continues.

I am delighted that you, Mr. President, are still here,
and that you have spent two full days with us. I hope that
your schedule will permit you to rejoin us in January.
Your personal involvement and leadership, together with
that of Ambassador Greenstock, has been a signal
contribution to the placing of an absolutely essential
emphasis on Africa and on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which this Organization is obligated to do.

