Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): During
every era and nearly everywhere, natural resources
have been connected with war and violence. They have
inspired pirates and conquistadors in the search for
gold.

Today's debate on the maintenance of
international peace and security: natural resources and
conflict, also offers us the opportunity to address the
aspects of prevention as well as the management of
conflicts. Congo thanks the Belgian delegation in
particular, for that initiative. In addition, we wish to
welcome your personal presence, Mr. Minister for
Foreign Affairs, as the head of your country's
delegation.

Congo is convinced that, in the quest for more
effective prevention and enhanced consistency which
has led the various bodies of the United Nations to
evaluate their degree of effectiveness, the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council - we also welcome the presence of
their Presidents here - will focus jointly on the
fundamenta1 factors underlying peace, security and
development, which are part of their mandate.

The abundance of natural resources in Africa has
helped to shape its contemporary history, more often
than not to its detriment rather than to its advantage.
Since the era of triangular trade between Europe,
Africa and the Americas, the trade in what was then
called "ebony wood" provided the incentive for
colonial intrusion with agricultural and mining
concessions made to the major mining companies,
which were accountable only to their States and their
boards of directors. Struggles for influence among
transnational corporations and recurrent wars, which
continue today to affect the pace of change in that part
of the world, reflect striking continuity in both time
and space.

In the 1960s, Africa quickly took the measure of
this major issue affecting its accession to international
sovereignty. Thus, a quarter century before the Rio
Earth Summit, the 1968 African Convention on the
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources set out
conditions for the control and management of our
natural resources. At the same time, the Group of 77,
and the third world in general, were advocating the
establishment of a new international economic order
based on fair commodity prices and an equitable
trading system; they also worked to form associations
of countries that produced various commodities.

In this regard, my delegation wishes to state that
its views are in line with those to be outlined by the
representative of Tunisia on behalf of the African
Group.

The 1998 report of Secretary-General Kofi Annan
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
(8/1998/318) clearly showed that natural resources
were playing an increasingly important role in
triggering and sustaining conflict and that those
resources aroused greed among local and external
actors alike. States or companies were organized into
networks that control the entire process from
exploitation to marketing and simultaneously ensure
prosperity for the arms merchants who were well able
to benefit from that process.

Thus, oil, diamonds, timber, gold, coltan and
other commodities constituted the main stakes in the
wars in Angola, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea-Bissau,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere.
Increasingly, to those resources we must add those that
derive from the control of land and water resources in
heavily populated areas, such as in Rwanda and
Burundi, as well as in the Middle East. Given those
stakes, regional cooperation initiatives are beginning to
be established, such as the Congo Basin Forest
Partnership and the Stability, Security and
Development Pact for the Great Lakes region.

When natural resources are not the primary cause
of conflict their exploitation determines its duration. In
Angola, for example, it was diamond mining that
provided the Uniao Nacional Para a Independencia
Total de Angola with sufficient revenue to buy arms,
pay its soldiers and engage in combat for many years,
which destroyed the country and hampered its
development. And when, as in that case, external allies
are aligned behind each of the parties to the conflict,
external collusion is active and operates virtually in
broad daylight.

In many cases, rebels have taken over mining
activities and are thus self-financing. They sometimes
use a third financing mechanism: the sale of rights to
the future exploitation of resources they intend to seize
or which they already control. We have seen this in
Liberia and Sierra Leone.
More than previously, internal factors in African
conflicts are linked largely to control of the political
power that makes possible the control of economic
resources; the two are closely connected. As Kofi
Annan stated in his 1998 report, given the multi-ethnic
character of most African States, such competition can
lead only to an often violent politicization of ethnicity.
The external actors I spoke of earlier thus find it easy
to intervene - if not in triggering a conflict, then at
least in keeping it alive.

There is a new saying in Africa: oil is the source
of conflict and war. That assertion reflects the bitter
observation that, in some countries, natural resources
hinder the smooth functioning of the economy:
corruption and the squandering of revenues from
exploitation, even when exploitation is carried out with
seeming respect for State sovereignty. It has indeed
been noted that the countries most dependent on the
export of minerals or certain other products have also
been those with the weakest economic growth and with
the direst poverty. Such elements cannot fail to be of
concern, because they increase the probability of
conflict.

Thus, indicators of poor governance increase with
the weakening of the rule of law and the subordination
of administrative structures to the management of
commodity exports, rather than to the goal of
strengthening procedures for regulation and control.
Natural resources have even been able to advance
secession movements under the influence of certain
citizens obsessed with the concentration of such
resources in a part of the country with a particular
cultural, ethnic or geographical identity.

Indeed, the nature of political power in many
countries with natural resources has given rise to
patrimonial management giving the leaders exclusive
control over resources, to the detriment of development
goals. The absence of oversight of State bodies leads to
all manner of abuse, including the diversion of
capital- always towards countries of the northern
hemisphere. According to World Bank and
International Monetary Fund assessments, the African
continent - the very symbol of development
assistance - is in the paradoxical situation of being a
net source of capital for developed countries at a time
when the latter countries are experiencing donor
fatigue.

Moreover, foreign businesses operating in
countries in conflict or crisis situations often
exacerbate tension, not only because they have
sometimes been involved in the overthrow of a given
regime, thus creating instability that favours their
interests, but frequently also because of the meagre
interest they have shown in the negative consequences
of their activities with respect to human rights and the
environment.

Developing countries that produce or possess
natural resources must strengthen their democratic
systems, in particular political pluralism and oversight
mechanisms, and must promote the rule of law and
zero tolerance of corruption - in a word, good
governance. As regards external collusion, codes of
conduct should be established to bolster the social
responsibility of all in host countries to direct activities
towards the common good and the establishment of
policies of transparency in economic and financial
operations. And to ensure the credibility of sanctions
regimes, transnational corporations should not be
treated more leniently than local leaders when it comes
to economic abuses and crimes.

We welcome the Security Council's support of
the Kimberley Certification Process, which has helped
reduce the trade in what are commonly called blood
diamonds or conflict diamonds. That is a major
contribution that is restoring a certain degree of ethics
to this trade.

It is also important that States be encouraged to
abide by the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI). That initiative thwarts corruption in
that it lifts the veil off mining companies' payments to
host States - payments Whose opacity fuels corruption
and patrimonial management. Citizens must be better
informed about income derived from the exploitation
of their countries' natural resources in order to reduce
certain predatory behaviours that run counter to the
public interest and could lead to instability and even
armed conflict.

As for oil companies in particular, they would
benefit from publishing what they pay to the States in
which they carry out their activities. That is the idea of
the "Publish what you pay" campaign, which is
supported by many organizations throughout the world.

Finally, in the area of utilizing natural resources
for peacebuilding, insufficient financing has often been
mentioned. While peacebuilding requires considerable
resources, those resources could be provided by the
country concerned. That is the paradox of immensely
rich countries that are floundering in poverty - a
paradox that in itself challenges the international
system of economic relations and, at the same time,
poses the problem of peacekeeping operations and the
strategic prospects on which they depend. But that is a
different debate.

My delegation supports the draft presidential
statement to be prepared in the light of our
deliberations and reaffirms its interest in this debate.
We undertake to give it our particular attention and that
of the Security Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, over
which the Congo has the honour to preside.

