Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Our present debate within the framework of the
renewal of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) of the
Security Council. It provides my delegation with the
opportunity to congratulate Mr. Mike Smith, not only
on his briefing, but also on his assumption of the post
of Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, something we have not yet had
08-27612

an opportunity to do. Aware of the heavy burden of
responsibility and the complexity of the task facing
him, we would like to assure him of our full support.

It is with great interest that we have followed the
intensive consultations he has engaged in,
consultations which have allowed him to elaborate and
submit to the Committee a new organizational plan of
work for CTED, in conformity with paragraph 2 of
resolution 1787 (2007).

My delegation is satisfied that, in the new
proposals of the Executive Director, the issue of
appropriate technical assistance tailored to the needs of
the recipient countries was considered a priority. The
fight against terrorism is our joint responsibility, and
only international solidarity and cooperation will
enable us to deal with this scourge effectively.

We also believe that visits to Member States
should be better organized, more flexible and less
burdensome. This would allow us to engage in
exhaustive exchanges while focusing on the main
concerns of States visited. These types of visits should
be given priority over the systematic approach of
comprehensive assessments.

This is an opportunity to mention that CTED and
its Executive Director should interact more closely
with all Member States of the United Nations. This is
all the more important as only collective, concerted
efforts will enable us to eradicate the threat posed by
terrorism. A number of proposals have been presented,
and we especially endorse the concept of "public
briefings" by CTED.

The need for greater coordination in our efforts to
fight terrorism is an ongoing concern of the United
Nations and the international community as a whole.
Therefore, while we encourage initiatives that foster
the exchange of information and cooperation among
the three Security Council committees, namely, 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), we remain
convinced that, in this field, which is of interest to all,
the actions of the Council - which we would like to
be more transparent - should be united with those of
the General Assembly in order to involve all the
Member States of this Organization.

The United Nations cannot continue to ask
Member States to engage in concerted action against
terrorism while it itself engages in disparate actions.
This is all the more so as the various Security Council
5
resolutions in this field, as well as those of the General
Assembly, are addressed to all Member States of the
Organization without any exceptions.

The United Nations should also cooperate closely
with regional and subregional organizations, which
have, quite clearly, a better understanding of the
regional and subregional factors and influences that
need to be taken into account if we wish to fight
terrorism more effectively.

Finally, my delegation of course endorses the
renewal of the mandate of CTED, with the certainty
that the resolution to be adopted will take into account
all concerns, especially respect for human rights.

