I thank the Special Representative, Mr. Frangois Fall, for his briefing. His efforts demonstrate the added value of a regional approach in understanding the dynamics of Central Africa and strengthening the preventive approach of the United Nations in that region. I would like briefly to address three points. First, on the progress made in regional cooperation, I welcome the implementation of the institutional reform of the Economic Community of Central African States, which entered into force in August. The establishment of the new Commission demonstrates the deepening cooperation within the region. It complements the many recent cooperation initiatives in Central Africa in the field of security and cross-border cooperation. That dynamic must continue in the service of peace and development. Secondly, I draw the Council's attention to the region's fragilities, to which we must be attentive. Several political, security, humanitarian and human rights challenges remain. I am thinking in particular of the ongoing terrorist activities carried out by Boko Haram in Cameroon and Chad, which continue to claim many military and civilian victims. Despite some improvements, we must also remain vigilant against the activities of armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic, and maintain our commitment to fighting piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. On the humanitarian front, needs remain high and food insecurity is worsening. It is essential that international humanitarian law and human rights be fully respected. The critical fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic does not justify their violation. We condemn attacks against humanitarian and medical personnel. These acts must not go unpunished. The support of international partners is essential to help the countries of Central Africa overcome the humanitarian and health crisis. France has pledged €1.2 billion to support Africa in the fight against COVID-19. It has launched an initiative within the framework of the Group of 20 and the Paris Club for a moratorium on debt servicing for countries affected by the pandemic. In Central Africa, Chad, the Republic of Congo, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cameroon are benefiting from that measure. Thirdly and finally, I would like to stress the importance of inclusive electoral processes. With electoral deadlines approaching in several countries of the region - in the Central African Republic, where elections will be held before the end of the month, and in Chad and the Republic of Congo thereafter - it is essential that those elections take place in the best possible conditions and in a context that allows all stakeholders to take part. The full participation of women as voters and candidates is critical, as is that of youth, displaced persons and refugees. United Nations regional offices, such as the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), are essential to strengthen the effectiveness of the United Nations, particularly with regard to conflict prevention. In the spirit of strengthened partnership with African regional and subregional organizations, France will therefore continue to support UNOCA.
