Mr. Hamburger (Netherlands): We commend
Slovakia, Mr. Kubis and you personally, Sir, for taking
the initiative to put the important issue of security
sector reform on the agenda of the Security Council.
We appreciated our own close involvement in the
preparatory seminars that Slovakia organized.

The representative of Germany has already

spoken on behalf of the European Union, and we align

ourselves with his statement. Let me just add a few

brief points on the position of the Netherlands, while

trying to stay within the set time limit by shortening
my written text as distributed.

First, the phrase "no development without
security and no security without development" applies
to all countries, developing and developed alike.

Second, the security of people - and not only the
security of States - is a precondition for development.

Third, in our view, security sector reform is not
only essential in countries emerging from conflict; it
should also play a crucial role in conflict prevention
and should therefore be part of any peace negotiations.

Fourth, we recognize that security sector reform
is a sensitive issue. It is not only about the
effectiveness of security forces, but also about
accountability for power and democratic control. It has
to be part of a domestic framework of checks and
balances.

Fifth, since security sector reform deals with so
many actors - police, defence and intelligence
services, security management and oversight bodies,
justice institutions, customs and border control
agencies and, not least, non-governmental bodies and
local groups - a comprehensive approach is required.
Stakeholders cannot be left out.

Sixth, security sector reform is clearly not only
about training security services, or about bringing in
equipment, or about building courts, but even more so
about developing governance structures and democratic
processes.

Seventh, security sector reform must be a
nationally owned process, embedded in a tailor-made
and integrated national development framework.
International support will often be necessary, but the
modalities of such support should not be imposed and
should be carefully discussed with national
stakeholders.

Eighth, we welcome the Security Council's
request to the Secretary-General to submit a report on
United Nations-wide approaches to security sector
reform. The concept of integrated United Nations
missions, as we see for instance in Burundi and Sierra
Leone, could provide good examples, including

through the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in
fostering such a joint approach. The Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office can,
in our view, be instrumental in gathering relevant
players around the table and in creating coherence
between security and development strategies.

For my ninth point, finally, I would like to
comment on international financial support for security
sector reform. The possibility of such support will
depend to a large extent on the availability of funds not
part of official development assistance (ODA).
However, non-ODA funds are usually scarce among
donor countries. The Netherlands has developed
specific mechanisms for pooled funding for the nexus
of security and development. We believe that that is an
issue for further discussion among those concerned,
and we would be happy to share our experiences.

In conclusion, this debate shows that there is
momentum for a more focused and coherent approach
to security sector reform, in which the United Nations
has a key role to play. The Netherlands supports that
approach.

