Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to join others in expressing our condolences over the
passing away of the Force Commander of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

I thank you, Madam President, and your team for
your successful conduct of the work of the Security
Council during the month of August. Allow me to
address the following specific points.

The Nigerian presidency has focused on the same
issues this past month as did in April 2014, during its
prior presidency of the Council, including security sector
reform. We believe that has effectively contributed
to the follow-up on the subject and has ensured the
Council's effective involvement in, and a review of,
the practical implementation of its resolutions on the
subject. It is our hope that this will become a recurrent
method on the part of those members that are provided
the opportunity to preside over the Council for more
than one month.

The complicated conflicts and humanitarian,
security and political situations of the past decades have
regrettably led to the fact that issues in our region have
taken up a large part of the Council's agenda, without
any real progress in their consideration, particularly
regarding the question of Palestine, which represents
the core of the conflict in the Middle East. We reiterate
the need for the Council to shoulder its moral and legal
responsibilities in order to help the Palestinian people
to achieve their legitimate right to live in freedom and
dignity in an independent State.

Concerning the Syrian conflict, we welcome the
unity of purpose in the Council, as exemplified by
the adoption of the important presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/15, in support of the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, towards a political solution based on the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), as well as the
adoption of resolution 2235 (2015), which establishses
the Joint Investigative Mechanism to address the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. However, we wish to stress
that unity is not merely about the Council adopting
a resolution or a presidential statement. Unity is also
about the working methods of the Security Council,
in particular when it comes to the adoption of such
products. We also stress that the Security Council
should not concentrate merely on the political or
security issues related to the Syrian crisis. It should
also focus on the humanitarian ones - in the light of
the serious deterioration in the humanitarian situation
in Syria - as well as the grave, unprecedented
repercussions on neighbouring countries, owing in
particular to the outflow of Syrian refugees.

It is very important that the Security Council
remain informed about all of those issues in the Middle
East. We believe that the Security Council resolutions
and its meetings with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
provide a useful opportunity for members of the Council
to learn more about the plight of civilians in Syria and
Iraq, as well as about violations of human rights.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
delegation of the Russian Federation on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council next month, and we
pledge our full support and cooperation.

