Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Koenigs for his statement today and the Secretary-
General for the very thorough and comprehensive
report.

As we review the present situation in
Afghanistan, it is important to recognize how much
progress has been made since 2001 and the fall of the
Taliban. At the same time, I do not think anyone -
certainly not the United Kingdom - underestimates
the challenges ahead. The emergence of a new
democracy is always a fragile process. Democracy is
taking root in Afghanistan. The task of the international
community, led by the United Nations, is to nourish
and support it.

The United Nations is key to coordination of
international community, particularly in Kabul itself.
Some important progress has been made, as
Mr. Koenigs has set out, including through the work of
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board. There is
much more to do, including on the institutional
challenges that are so clearly set out in this report.

We also look forward to a further expansion of
United Nations efforts and presence in Afghanistan,
including to provinces of the south. Afghanistan also
needs the positive support of its neighbours. We
welcome the steps taken in the last few months on
Afghan-Pakistani cooperation, including August's
peace jirga.

As the report of the Secretary-General
acknowledges, international forces are playing a
crucial role in helping to bring about a stable and
secure Afghanistan. We pay tribute to those of all
nationalities, including many Afghans, who have lost
their lives in doing so. Like others, we are appalled by
the tactics used by the opponents of democracy,
including the increased use of suicide bombers. The
contrast between those risking their lives to allow
Afghans to build a better future and those determined
to return Afghanistan to its dark past is stark indeed.
The other element in the equation is building the
capacity of the Afghan security forces. The report of
the Secretary-General recognizes the work being done
by the international community in supporting the
increasingly capable Afghan National Army. The task
of building police capacity remains more of a
challenge. We welcome the conclusions of the
Secretary-General on the need for an effective civilian-
military strategy. We agree that, while we must
continue to ensure there is a coordinated military
response to the insurgency, that must go hand in hand
with development and reconstruction activity, as part
of an integrated approach to the challenges faced by
Afghanistan.

As we have made clear in this Council on
previous occasions, the United Kingdom considers
every civilian death in Afghanistan a death too many.
As the Secretary-General acknowledges, international
forces operating in Afghanistan have made real efforts
to minimize civilian casualties in an operating
environment in which the enemy forces take no such
precautions.

Delivering security is only part of the wider effort
on the rule of law. As the report of the Secretary-
General highlights, tackling the endemic corruption is
a prerequisite for a credible and effective police force.
The United Kingdom will continue to support work to
tackle that issue, in which the European Union policing
mission will play a key role.

We are all aware that the insurgency cannot be
defeated by military means alone. The United Kingdom
has given substantial support to the Afghan-led
"Strengthening Peace" programme. We fully support
efforts to bring disaffected Afghans into society's
mainstream, provided that they renounce violence and
accept Afghanistan's Constitution. We are also
supporting community-led solutions to the problem of
maintaining local security.

As the partner nation in the counter-narcotics effort,
allow me to say a few words about recent developments.
The increase in opium cultivation that Mr. Koenigs
described is clearly very disappointing. We should also
look at the wider picture, however. Where security and
the rule of law and good governance - and behind that,
diversification of the local economy - exist, we are
seeing progress on counter-narcotics. That is particularly
evident in the north, and we clearly need to do more, and
with more success, in the south of the country.

We agree with the report of the Secretary-General
that there are now clear and growing links between the
drug trade and the insurgency. We must focus on
keeping those separate. Our new package of measures,
released on 9 August, includes enhanced interdiction
efforts, improving the performance of eradication
forces, investigating the scope for new economic
incentives and integrating counter-narcotics into our
counter-insurgency efforts in the south.

As this is going to be Mr. Koenigs' last
appearance before this Council, I would like to join
others in expressing our heartfelt thanks for all the
work and commitment that he has shown over the last
two years. We are very grateful to him.

Finally, I associate myself with the statement to
be made shortly by Portugal on behalf of the European
Union.

