I want to thank our briefers for their presentations this morning. I have a relatively straightforward message to deliver today: the tenth report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/1177) provides an unmistakable indication of Iran's continued destabilizing behaviour. Take, for example, the Secretary-General's assessment that an anti-tank guided missile discovered in Libya has characteristics consistent with Iranian-produced anti-tank guided missiles. That demonstrates that Iranian weapons continue to proliferate in Iran's immediate region and beyond. Moreover, reports that an entity designated by the Security Council may have been involved in shipping valves, electronics and measuring equipment suitable for use in ground testing of liquid propellant ballistic missiles to Iran demand the Council's attention. Yet, as Iran continues to flout the Council's resolutions, too many Council members, unfortunately, are eager to ignore or overlook Iran's disregard for the restrictions that the Council has put in place, including those that the United States has reimposed through our legitimate snapback process. The Security Council has a responsibility to address Iran's destabilizing behaviour. A failure to do so, I fear, would call into question the credibility of this organ. A reluctance to act would also send a dangerous message to other rogue actors and despots around the world. Members of the Council must condemn Iran's behaviour, which threatens international peace and security, instead of rewarding the regime's dangerous gamesmanship with economic appeasement. If the Iranian regime seeks sanctions relief and economic opportunities, it must first demonstrate that it is serious about fundamentally changing its behaviour. Iran must cease its nuclear extortion and negotiate a comprehensive deal that includes enduring nuclear restrictions and addresses its development and proliferation of ballistic missiles, as well as deals with its continuing support for terrorism, the unjust detention of its citizens and its other destabilizing activities in the region. Finally, we recognize the report's attention to the snapback of previous United Nations sanctions on Iran. We regret, however, the decision of the Secretary-General to encourage the continued use of the procurement channel in resolution 2231 (2015), which is inconsistent with the snapback. We once again call on the Secretary-General and every member of the Council to fully implement all United Nations sanctions measures, including those reimposed through snapback. I also want to take a minute to note that the discussion of the waiver issued by the United States for activities related to the existing unit at the Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant pertains to a domestic administrative process that did not result in any sanctions designations. We believe that such matters should not be the focus of the Secretary-General's 2231 report. Iran's failure to abide by its Security Council obligations should be met with continued diplomatic and economic pressure and the further isolation of the Iranian regime. The United States will continue to work with our partners around the world, especially those in the region that face the devastating effect of Iran's destabilizing influence most directly, in order to jointly address Iran's reckless disregard for its Security Council obligations. We hope that the members of the Council will join us in those efforts, and we look forward to the Secretariat's continued reporting on this pressing issue. Second statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills Since this is the last scheduled meeting of the year, I would like, on behalf of my Mission and Ambassador Craft, to take a moment to thank the five outgoing members of the Council - Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Germany, Indonesia and South A frica - for their work over the past two years. I have been here only about two months, but during that time I have seen what I was told in Washington, D.C., before I arrived here - that these five elected members brought great commitment, great willingness to speak the truth to the Council and, every now and then, a bit of feistiness to the work. It has been a great pleasure for me to be a part of that over the past 60 days. All of us here at the United States Mission wish our departing colleagues continued success and look forward to working with all five delegations on other issues.
