Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I wish the delegation of China well as it takes up the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. I would also like to thank Mr. Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, PermanentRepresentative of Belgium, for the Belgian presidency of the Council in February, although we did not win a prize. With regard to today's topic, I welcome the Ambassador of Iraq. We are glad to have him in the Chamber today. We naturally recognize the difficult situation his country is facing. We heard Special Representative of the Secretary-General Hennis- Plasschaert's account, which was at the same time hopeful and sobering, and I very much appreciate her briefing. I would like to pick up on her theme of hope, which is a theme to which we can subscribe. We hope, first of all, that the country will be kept out of regional tensions. After the very dangerous escalation we all witnessed in January, it is, for us, very important that we now see a de-escalation. We appeal to all stakeholders inside and outside the country to exercise maximum restraint. Iraq must not be dragged into regional confrontations; rather, it should be allowed to focus on post-conflict recovery, reconstruction and growth and on utilizing the economic potential it has, as Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert has outlined. Speaking of hope, the demonstrations we witnessed were also a sign of hope. We witnessed that there is a very vibrant civil society. There are many women now active in the country, which we support. We also support and appreciate the mostly peaceful demonstrations. But it is really unfortunate that we also had to witness the excessive use of force. As Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert described it, we witnessed abhorrent human rights violations. I can only echo what she and the United States representative said before, the perpetrators have to be brought to justice. We cannot allow impunity. Returning to the theme of hope, we also hope that there will soon be a new Government. The responsible politicians have to overcome the political divisions and indecisiveness in their country. The country needs a united political class. As Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert has said, no prime minister can go it alone. Only when we have a new, strong Government will it be possible to rein in the criminal activities of armed groups, many of whom were responsible for the killings, kidnapping and violence against unarmed protesters and journalists. These criminal gangs have to be dismantled and reintegrated. In addition, I echo what the Special Representative of the Secretary-General said about the fight against corruption. It is unacceptable that it is, as she said, built into everyday politics. I also echo the call for providing access to humanitarian non-governmental organizations and relief workers. Let me end on the theme, again, of hope. If there is a new Government, if there is good governance, if the new Government allows civil society to flourish, if there is an inclusive electoral process, there is hope for the country and hope for an economic recovery. If the country is kept out of regional tensions, the fight against terrorism and extremism will also be successful. Let me end, having seen the Ambassador of Kuwait in the Chamber, by expressing appreciation for what he said about the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq on the Kuwaiti missing. It is very important that, even after so many years, this work continues to be conducted.
