Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank you, Madam, most especially for being
here with us today and for your guidance of this
important debate.

The delegation of Spain thanks the Philippines
presidency for having taken the very timely step of
convening this debate on the vital role of civil society
in post-conflict peace-building. It is a timely initiative
because only yesterday we received the report prepared
by the Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-
Civil Society Relations, chaired by Mr. Cardoso. We
know that the report will have a great impact on our
future thinking on this issue. It is timely also because
today, more than ever, the international community
needs the cooperation of organized civil society in
undertaking the most important tasks towards fulfilling
the principles and objectives of the United Nations.

We also thank the President of the Economic and
Social Council and the representatives of civil society
for their presence at and valuable contributions to
today's debate.

The Presidency of the European Union will be
taking the floor later in the meeting, and my delegation
of course endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Ireland on behalf of the Union. I
should like to summarize here the general thrust of that
statement.

First, we stress the importance of the
participation of civil society in developing effective
multilateralism. Secondly, we support the
establishment of relations of close and healthy
cooperation among all actors in peace-building, and
encourage civil society organizations to provide moral
support for the population and local structures. Thirdly,
we believe that we must further develop machinery to
govern United Nations interaction with the
representative organizations of civil society, which we
feel to be more necessary today than ever.

As to civil society and effective multilateralism,
we do not see this purely as an instance of international
institutions and the United Nations system's being
brought to bear to solve problems that cannot be
addressed solely by States. Multilateralism is effective
only if all forces in the international arena are brought
together, including an increasingly transnational civil
society that can often extend itself further and have a
more decisive impact than States or inter-State
organizations. Multilateralism will not be effective
unless all actors take part in an open and participatory
way in the establishment of values and norms and of
working mechanisms and methods that underlie such
international action. Such participation must, of course,
be present in political processes of peace and security
throughout the world.

Since the 1990s, we have been faced with an
increase in the number of conflicts with local or
regional significance that are both persistent and
recurrent. The effects of such conflicts do not
disappear upon the mere cessation of hostilities. Their
societal effects persist over time, with serious
consequences for the civilian population and an impact
on the stability of the States and the regions affected.
Only resolute and coherent action on the part of the
international community over long periods can prevent
or avert recurring conflict.

At the same time, the concentration of such
conflicts in certain regions may be a disincentive to
external peace-building initiatives. On many occasions,
external actors - essentially States and international
organizations - may be put off by complex situations,
particularly those in remote, isolated areas. Civil
society can meet such challenges, using its increasingly
global networks to go where others either do not wish
to or cannot go. We must therefore work to ensure
shared complementarity among all actors, beginning
with national actors themselves, who are first and
foremost responsible for post-conflict peace-building.
Together, we must find effective criteria for cases
where international organizations and States, as
external actors, abandon the field. Similarly, national
Governments are responsible for defining areas in
which civil society can become involved in peace-
building.

When civil society is properly organized, it can
go further, and frequently make room for more open
dialogue at the local level, than States and other
international actors. That is why protection and respect
for their activities are vital. Such dialogue and mutual
cooperation should in no way require civil society
organizations to become subject to governmental
actors. While sovereignty must be respected and non-
interference in domestic affairs observed where they
establish legitimate limitations to participation, there
must be free participation in the peace-building
process. Dialogue between civil society organizations,
Governments and international institutions must be
promoted and strengthened. If initiatives to build peace
have not been fully generated and supported internally
in the countries affected, and thus fail to generate
external support for local capacities, such action will
ultimately prove to be unproductive.

Civil society plays a function that we often deem
to be crucial in conflict prevention and solution, as
well as in meeting the humanitarian needs of
populations devastated by conflicts. Those functions
must be enhanced, as the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General, among others, have indicated, the
latter in his report on the prevention of armed conflict.
Also, in the context of the European Union we could
refer to the recent conference on the role of civil
society in the prevention of armed conflict, whose
action-oriented agenda was adopted on 2 April in
Dublin.
In addition to all that, and as important is it is, we
believe that civil society organizations have a moral
role. I refer to the moral function of focusing their
actions on direct support to civilians, promoting their
security, their social well-being and respect for their
identity and their fundamental rights and liberties. It is
a matter of acting not only in the immediate peace-
building phase, but of working for a post-conflict
transformation that would bring with it true peace. This
moral function must include support especially to the
most vulnerable persons, such as women and children,
so that they can be central actors in peace-building and
the most direct beneficiaries of its results.

We believe in the application of Security Council
resolutions that refer to women, to peace and security
and to the protection of children and generally the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That post-
conflict transformation, by which all of the actors must
work with one accord, will be more viable to the extent
that international civil society devotes its efforts to
complementing and strengthening organizations in
local civil society so that such objectives can be
attained. Improving the capabilities and resources of
civil societies in countries emerging from conflict is a
prerequisite for rectifying inequalities between civil
societies in the North and the South.

Together with this, we believe that in this moral
work civil society must direct its efforts towards the re-
establishment of justice and the rule of law. Following
a conflict situation, it is essential to try to provide, for
the populations that have been afflicted by the
confrontation, justice for what has occurred in the past
as much as justice for the present and the future. That
work must be tackled in coordination with local
organizations of civil society and government
institutions, as well as together with support from
States and interested international organs. It must also
be incorporated into the sphere of education as one of
the means for preventing the reappearance of the
conflict.

Civil society calls for a process of dialogue with
the United Nations system on how the shared
objectives can be achieved, particularly in post-conflict
peace-building. We trust that the thinking process and
the discussion that commenced with the publication of
the Cardoso report will shed further light and make it
possible to make concrete progress in this direction.

We believe that interaction between the United
Nations and civil society does not exclusively fall
within the purview of any of the principal organs in the
Charter. All have their own functions in this process.
The United Nations as a whole and its Member States
must give careful thought, starting now, to how we can
deal more effectively with the challenges of peace-
building and, in that context, how better to develop
dialogue with civil society organizations.

The Security Council, insofar as it is concerned,
without abandoning its primary responsibility to ensure
peace and security, must seek opportunities for
consideration, for action, with other principle organs of
the Organization, especially the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat. In
that meeting point, civil society can also participate to
the extent that it is considered that its contribution
would be productive.

Then the United Nations might define broad
parameters for common action in the field of peace-
building. Dialogue between the Security Council and
civil society actors should be made deeper, employing
existing informal machinery. Constructive dialogue
with Security Council missions in the field should also
be encouraged. The representatives and special envoys
of the Secretary-General and resident representatives
also bear particular responsibility in establishing
positive dialogue with representatives of civil society
in each situation in each affected country. Coordinated,
sustained work on the part of all should contribute to
progress in addressing post-conflict situations and
peace-building.

This discussion on the participation of civil
society in peace-building is making headway, largely
thanks to the activities undertaken by the Philippine
presidency. We are sure that from now on it will
continue to make progress and to take effective steps in
the direction that we all wish.

