Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): The
Government of Benin would like to express its deep
appreciation to you, Sir, for the very admirable way in
which your delegation has been guiding the work of
the Security Council during this month. We are grateful
to you for having organized this public meeting on the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict and for the special cachet that your Minister
conferred on it by presiding.

I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms.
Coomaraswamy, and to thank her for her dedication to
the cause of children in conflict situations.

Benin made this question one of the priorities of
its term on the Security Council in 2004 and 2005. In
this regard, the support of all Council members for the
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and for the Working Group responsible for
examining its reports made possible the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005), sponsored by Benin and
France.

We are pleased to note from our thorough reading
of the Secretary-General's report that the Security
Council and the Secretariat, as well as the programmes,
funds and agencies of the United Nations, in particular
UNICEF, have worked in concert with Member States
and non-governmental organizations such as Save the
Children and Oxfam to make the mechanism
operational and to run the Working Group effectively.
We note with concern the risks taken by mechanism
personnel in the field to gain access to conflict zones.
The parties concerned have a duty to ensure access to
children who are victims and not to block the efforts by
the international community for their protection.

The continuing violation of the norms of mankind
in armed conflicts distresses us greatly, especially with
regard to the information contained in the report of the
Secretary-General and the complexity of the horrible
practices of which children are the victim. The
international community must therefore become
organized, bringing into its ambit all actors who could
make a contribution to providing better protection for
children. The mechanism must rely more on civil
society in the countries concerned, in addition to
sending advisers on the protection of children.

The comprehensive nature of this issue means
that we must transcend the limits on Security Council
intervention. Benin believes that the Council must pay
equal attention to all of the countries concerned and to
all forms of violations of the rights of children in
conflict situations. We are, however, grateful to those
countries that have voluntarily cooperated with the
Council Working Group; that is entirely to their credit.
For the sake of the smooth operation of the mechanism,
and given the gravity of the facts described in the
report of the Secretary-General, the Council cannot
continue to be dependent on the goodwill of countries
that are not on its agenda.

We therefore call on Council members to
interpret the resolution in a positive manner in order to
ensure the more effective protection of children in
situations of conflict by recognizing the universal and
comprehensive purpose of the mechanism. The
Working Group should draw up its programme of work
for 2007 on that basis. It should examine all reports
produced by the mechanism and take appropriate
measures to ensure effective protection of the children
concerned.

The action plans for parties to armed conflict
called for in resolution 1539 (2004) must be insisted
upon in all the countries concerned. The parties must
be held responsible for implementing them. Parties that
submit action plans but do not implement them are just
as much at fault as those that do not have such plans.

Prosecutions by the International Criminal Court
should demonstrate to the parties the determination of
the international community to put an end to impunity
in this area. Therefore we are eagerly awaiting the
completion of the procedures that have begun. We call
on Governments to cooperate with the Court in the
execution of arrest warrants in order to strengthen its
credibility and its effectiveness as a deterrent.

We are pleased to see the positive developments
that have taken place thanks to the pressure applied by
the international community, in particular the ceasefire
agreements obtained in number of countries. The
United Nations should support that progress through
assistance measures and support for peace processes
already under way, because the return of peace is
essential for the protection of children. In this context,
it is of the greatest importance that the specific needs
of children affected by conflict be taken into account in
order to duly address the serious threats to their future
and the future of their countries because of their
unhappy experiences and the harm that they have
suffered.

In the specific case of West Africa, borders are
porous and children involved in a conflict in one
country can bring about the destabilization of other
countries because of their mobility and their re-
recruitment into transborder organized crime, or even
into non-State armed groups that serve interests
detrimental to international peace and security.

The Council must educate the international
community about the need to effectively and efficiently
take charge of children who have been demobilized by
the parties to a conflict. The establishment of
reception, rehabilitation and social reintegration
infrastructures and of programmes to manage them
cannot be left up to the affected communities alone.
The problems posed in this area must be taken up with
all due attention through efforts to consolidate peace
and assist refugees and displaced persons.
In conclusion, I should like to express my
country's support for the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General in his report calling for a
comprehensive study of all related issues, especially
those concerning the mobilization of human resources
and funding, with a view to providing an appropriate
response to the problem of children in situations of
armed conflict, because such a response requires
expertise and resources that are often lacking in their
communities of origin.

