Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Legal Counsel and Under-
Secretary-General, Ms. Patricia O'Brien, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for their briefings
and the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
on specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia and other
States in the region (S/2012/50).

In its resolution 2015 (2011) of 24 October 2011,
the Security Council determined that the incidents of
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of

Somalia constitute a threat to international peace and
security in the region. The Council emphasized in that
regard the importance of finding a comprehensive
solution to the problem of piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia and decided to continue its
consideration, as a matter of urgency, of the
establishment of specialized anti-piracy courts in
Somalia and other States in the region with substantial
international participation and/or support.

We take note of the clarification contained in the
report of the Secretary-General that the term
"specialized anti-piracy court" should be understood to
refer to a court operating under national law, with
international assistance and with a focus on the
prosecution of piracy offences.

We note different views of regional States as to
the proposed establishment of an extraterritorial
Somali anti-piracy court or a regional prosecution
centre in a third State. Whatever the advantages offered
by the possibilities mentioned, the consent of all
regional States is an essential prerequisite for
successful and effective anti-piracy cooperation.

It is encouraging that a combination of
measures - including actions by naval forces, improved
implementation of International Maritime Organization
guidance and industry-developed best-management
practices for protection against piracy, and the
imprisonment of more than one thousand suspects or
convicted pirates - contributed to a decline in the
number of attacks and a reduction in successful attacks
throughout 2011.

Apart from the mentioned actions, national
efforts of the Government of Somalia and other
regional countries, their commitment to combating
piracy, their important prosecution roles and the
measures they have adopted to effectively combat the
spread of piracy should be commended. At the same
time, it is important to ensure that national
commitments are matched by strong support and
assistance from the international community, including,
inter alia, through contributions to the Trust Fund to
Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia.
Furthermore, it is clear that a sustainable
response to piracy off the coast of Somalia requires the
re-establishment of peace, security and the rule of law
in Somalia and social and economic development for
the Somali people. International assistance to Somalia
remains crucial for overall success. Taking this
opportunity, I would like to express Azerbaijan's
support to the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia in its efforts to overcome difficulties, achieve
reconciliation and build a secure, stable, united,
democratic and prosperous nation.

