Mr. Rosales Dial (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): First, allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your leadership in the presidency of the
Council and to thank you for having convened this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine. Allow me also to express my
thanks to Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing to the Council this morning.

Nicaragua, as a member of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, fully associates itself with
what was stated by the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Egypt in his capacity as Chairperson
of the Movement.
Once again, Nicaragua reiterates its deepest
condemnation of Israel's illegal occupation of all
Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories and
demands its immediate withdrawal. We condemn the
Israeli policies and practices of building and not
dismantling settlements. We condemn the inhumane
blockade of Gaza and the policy of fragmentation of
the West Bank and other Palestinian territories.

On 31 May 2010, the world was astonished to
witness the cold-blooded, premeditated murder of nine
unarmed civilian activists at the hands of the Israeli
State's military forces, who, like terrorists, boarded
vessels in international waters. More than 40 people
were wounded, some so seriously that the death toll
could still rise.

The Government and people of Nicaragua stand
in solidarity with the families of the victims and join
their voices to the call for justice without delay. We
take this opportunity to express once again our
solidarity with the people and Government of Turkey.
We also call upon the other Governments whose
citizens were among the victims to demand that justice
be done.

With its customary impunity, the State of Israel
has refused an international investigation and has
described the murders of those individuals as self
defence. Can it be that the illegal boarding of a
humanitarian flotilla in international waters could be
deemed an act of legitimate defence? As if it were not
enough to attack a humanitarian flotilla in international
waters, the Israeli soldiers displayed the most
barbarous violence and were not content to merely
neutralize their victims, instead riddling them with
bullets. As proof, if it was necessary, the Government
of Turkey revealed the content of the forensic reports
and pictures of some of their citizens who were killed
at point-blank range and others who suffered multiple
bullet wounds, five of which were head wounds.

Fifty-one days have gone by since that attack.
The Human Rights Council approved a resolution to
undertake an independent international investigation,
and the Security Council issued a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/9). However, Israel remains
unpunished.

Nicaragua asks that, first, the Council demand the
State of Israel to immediately lift the blockade on
Gaza; secondly, an international investigative
commission be established under United Nations
auspices; thirdly, the State of Israel be required to
provide full cooperation with such a commission as
well as with the commission established by the Human
Rights Council; and fourthly, those who masterminded
the crimes and those who carried them out be brought
to justice and punished.

These are but the minimal measures required to
ensure legal security and justice. While lip service has
certainly been paid to such measures over recent
decades of violent Israeli occupation, they must now
take precedence as soon as possible. Nicaragua hopes
that such measures will bring a degree of peace to the
families of the victims and give meaning to the idea of
justice.

