Mr. Melendez-Barahona (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of El Salvador, may
I first of all convey to you, Sir, our congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July, and on joining your Minister for
Foreign Affairs in presiding over this meeting. We
welcome this good initiative to consider the question of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants in a peacekeeping environment.

On 16 January 1992, a new phase began in the
political history of El Salvador: the Government of El
Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la
Liberacion Nacional (FMLN), under the auspices of the
United Nations, signed the Peace Agreement in
Chapultepec, Mexico, putting an end to armed conflict.
Commitments were entered into to bring about peace and
national reconciliation, to foster democratization and
observance of human rights, and to start a programme of
reconstruction and economic and social development so
as to eliminate the root causes that gave rise to internal
conflict and avoid its repetition.

In order for us to draw lessons from my country's
experience, allow me first of all to make a few comments
about the peace process in El Salvador. The end of the
cold war, the disintegration of the Soviet Union and
progress in subregional detente were external factors that
bolstered the peace process in El Salvador, which had
long remained stagnant and without major progress.

 

The rejection of a continuation of the war by the
majority of the political forces in El Salvador; the
conviction of the parties to the conflict that none of them
could defeat the other militarily and that an armed struggle
would not resolve the serious and profound national
problems; and the lack of confidence and of a belief that
the parties to the conflict could reach agreement directly:
these opened up the way for the Government of El
Salvador and the FMLN separately to seek the assistance of
the Secretary-General to help them carry out uninterrupted
negotiations to resolve the conflict. From that time, the
Organization began to play a proactive, dynamic and
catalytic role in the peace process in El Salvador.

From the signing in 1990 of the Geneva Agreement,
which set out general objectives, until the signing in 1992
of the Chapultepec Agreement, the United Nations played
a key role in the entire negotiating process, doing its utmost
to facilitate rapprochement and understanding between the
parties, especially at times when disagreements developed
that might otherwise have jeopardized the continuation of
the process.

United Nations participation was not limited to
contributing to the success of the negotiations, which
gradually produced positive results and which led ultimately
to partial agreements and to comprehensive agreements: the
1990 San Jose Agreement on Human Rights; the 1990
Caracas Agreement on the timetable and agenda for the
negotiating process; the 1991 Mexico Agreement on
substantive issues relating to the agenda; and the New York
agreements of September and December 1991 and January
1992, when final agreements were entered into that
subsequently shaped the peace agreement signed in Mexico
in 1992. The United Nations also had to carry out the
delicate task of international verification on the ground to
ensure compliance with the agreed commitments.

It is important to note that before the final agreements
were reached, and at the request of the Central American
Presidents, in response to calls from the General Assembly
and the Security Council, and at the request of the
Secretary-General, interested parties outside the region
undertook to support the peace process and to seek actively
and constructively to attain a final solution to the armed
conflict in El Salvador, including through supporting and
assisting the implementation of the agreements entered into
by the parties to the conflict. Significant examples of this
support were the joint letter from the Secretary of State of
the United States and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and the
joint declaration issued by those two countries, both dated
1 August 1991, relating to the peace process and to
cooperation by those countries in Central America. In
addition to expressing firm support for the Secretary-
General and for the active participation of the Friends of
the Secretary-General aimed at achieving progress in that
process, they urged countries outside the region, including
Cuba, to step up their efforts to resolve the conflict in El
Salvador through peaceful means.

The signing of the peace agreements marked a new
and different stage in the process. With the authorization
of the Security Council by resolution 693 (1991), the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador was expanded. Initially, it had been
established with a limited mandate aimed at ensuring
active verification of compliance with the agreements on
respect for and guarantees of human rights. In its
expanded form, ONUSAL undertook a more complex,
multidisciplinary operation, assuming responsibility for
providing assistance and verifying the implementation of
the Peace Agreement, which included, among other
fundamental elements, a ceasefire, which was agreed upon
even before the signing of the peace agreements; the
separation of forces and the demobilization and
destruction of FMLN weapons; the reduction and reform
of the armed forces; constitutional reforms; the
subordination of the armed forces to civilian authority; the
elimination of the repressive forces and the creation of a
new national civil police force; the legalization of the
FMLN as a political party; the integration of ex-
combatants into the political, economic and social life of
the country; the reform of the judicial and electoral
systems; and economic and social reform, including land-
transfer programmes and programmes for the reintegration
of and financial support for ex-combatants. Mechanisms
were also to foster national reconciliation, such as the
Truth Commission, whose mandate was to shed light on
the most relevant cases of human rights violations, the ad
hoc committee responsible for purging the armed forces
and the Peace Commission (COPAZ), which was
responsible for safeguarding and ensuring compliance
with commitments undertaken to promote assistance and
community development, mainly in the agricultural sector.

In the economic and social sphere, it is important to
mention that our national efforts were complemented by
international cooperation through the establishment of a
special economic cooperation plan for Central America
adopted by the General Assembly and implemented and
coordinated by the United Nations Development
Programme with the cooperation of other specialized
agencies of the system. A regional development

 

programme for displaced persons, refugees and returnees
(PRODERE) was also established, and this was active
mainly in areas that were formerly involved in conflict. The
programme was developed with the financial cooperation of
the Government of Italy and with the coordinated
participation of four specialized agencies: the United
Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Labour Organization and the Pan American Health
Organization of the World Health Organization.

I should also mention that, like the negotiating phase,
the implementation of the commitments was not without its
difficulties - difficulties that might even have jeopardized
the fulfilment of the commitments. This was as much the
result of the resistance of the armed forces to accepting
change as it was to the violations of agreed obligations, and
it was overcome through the intervention of ONUSAL and
the political will and conviction of the parties, and their
determination to achieve peace.

In this context, it is important to emphasize that the
role of the United Nations was successful and effective
because of the efficiency and professionalism with which
the mandate of the Secretary-General and his staff was
carried out. They acted impartially, respecting the positions
and interests of the parties, and sought only to contribute to
the achievement of a peaceful solution to the conflict in El
Salvador.

On the basis of those considerations, we can learn
certain lessons from El Salvador's experience. It is possible
to establish cooperation between the world Organization
and a small country to resolve complex and sensitive issues
that, under certain circumstances, can go beyond national
borders. The involvement of the United Nations came about
through the sovereign decision of the Government of El
Salvador and its acceptance by the FMLN. In other words,
it was in keeping with the wishes of the parties to the
conflict. The parties to the conflict expressed the necessary
good faith and ensured that there was the political will to
conduct negotiations until peace was achieved. The parties
to the conflict accepted the active participation of the
United Nations and undertook to cooperate and to comply
with the commitments undertaken so as to consolidate
peace. It is also important to emphasize that the political
agrement reached between the parties on a firm and reliable
basis was fundamental to guaranteeing the role of
ONUSAL.

There was a delay in the time-frame for disarmament
and demobilization because the parties did not mass their
troops in the designated places; the Peace Agreement's
provisions relating to the dissolution of the public security
forces were not complied with; the reintegration of the
ex-combatants was delayed; and there was incomplete
information about the arms possessed by irregular forces.
Both parties made mutual accusations which led to
mistrust and delayed the implementation of the
commitments. However, the determination to achieve
peace made gradual progress possible in these areas, and
the commitments were finally observed.

The process of reintegration of ex-combatants was
slower, as it was directly related to a long-standing
problem related to land tenure and the concentration of
land ownership in El Salvador, and to the limited
financial resources available to support the land-transfer
programme and to provide financial and technical support.
It was not possible to complete this programme during the
mandate of United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador; it was completed during the period when the
United Nations had a final, limited presence in
El Salvador to verify compliance with outstanding
sensitive elements of the peace accords. This was at the
end of the former presidential Administration's mandate.

Verification of compliance with the human rights
agreement involved an unprecedented role for the United
Nations as, for the first time, such verification was being
carried out in a sovereign State. It is also very important
to note that the United Nations mandate was carried out
impartially and objectively, as a result of which the
parties had faith in the initiatives that the Organization, in
its role as an intermediary, put forward.

International support was fundamental, particularly
when the interested parties from outside the region
undertook to support the peace process and to avoid
taking any steps that might exacerbate the conflict.
Cooperation and international financial assistance
provided essential support for social development
programmes to attack the root causes of the conflict. They
complemented the political efforts aimed at achieving
peace.

We believe that there was close coordination
between the Government and the United Nations
specialized agencies, which on principle had to include
the international financial institutions, which are in a
position to provide the necessary financial support for
carrying out the reconstruction and national-development

programmes that contribute
conflict situations.

to peace-building in post-

 

Finally, it is important to note that despite the
complexity and the multidisciplinary nature of the operation
in El Salvador. it is clear that once there is political will,

and once there is agreement on a clear, precise framework
of commitments, as well as a defined mandate that sets
out the Functions and scope of the Organization's role. the
Organization is truly able to contribute to resolving a
conflict, as took place in the case of El Salvador.

We think that the experience gained by the United
Nations in various conflicts gives the Organization
sufficient capability to draw up guidelines in this area.

