Mr. Fowler: Mr. President, I should like to thank
you and the members of the Council who have agreed to
this morning's innovative procedure.

In briefly introducing the draft resolution, which will
shortly be formally issued, I would like to emphasize one
point: the Security Council's sanctions against the rebel
movement in Angola, UNIT A, are now having real
impact. The work of the Panel of Experts has contributed
significantly to this welcome development. Once again,
on behalf of the Council, I thank the Panel of Experts for
the enormous contribution that they have made to our
work. The Security Council's adoption of this substantial
draft resolution will demonstrate its commitment to
ensuring that the sanctions continue to have impact in
curtailing UNITA's ability to pursue its objectives
through military means.

The draft resolution would, among its many other
features, put in place a seven-month process, at the end
of which, in mid-November, the Security Council would
consider appropriate action in relation to States it believed
to be continuing to violate the sanctions against UNITA.
During these seven months, interested States, including
those mentioned in the report of the Panel of Experts,
would have ample opportunity to bring relevant
information to the attention of the sanctions Committee
and to demonstrate their adherence to all the exigencies
of the sanctions regime.

 

The draft resolution would also request the Secretary-
General to establish the monitoring mechanism proposed by
the Panel of Experts. It would be composed of five
monitors whose renewable six-month mandate would be to
collect relevant information, investigate relevant leads and
verify information provided from all sources.

In deciding who had violated the sanctions and what
to do about it, the Council would thus draw on three
substantial bodies of information: first, the report of the
Panel of Experts; secondly, the additional information made
available by States; and thirdly, the reports of the
independent monitoring mechanism.

The draft resolution before us does not name names or
take action against alleged sanctions-busters. This should
not be interpreted as any kind of exoneration of any State
or States referred to in the report of the Panel of Experts.
The purpose of the draft resolution is, instead, to provide
all States with an opportunity to answer the allegations of
the Expert Panel, to end sanctions violations where they
have occurred, and to bring their actions into conformity
with the clearly articulated will of the international
community. Equally clearly, this draft resolution stipulates
that the Council will not continue to stand idly by while its
decisions are flouted.

My own hope is that the Security Council will not
need to adopt such action. That said, the draft resolution
before us makes clear the Council's willingness to adopt
such measures if necessary.

A generation of Angolans has never known peace. The
purpose of the sanctions against UNITA is to promote a
durable political settlement of the three-decades-long
conflict in Angola by requiring UNITA to comply with its
obligations, which it freely undertook. The adoption of this
draft resolution will constitute a reaffirmation of the
Council's commitment to peace in Angola and a
demonstration of our determination to use all of the levers
available to us to bring about that peace.

