Mr. Motoc (Romania): Before I begin my
statement proper, I, too, would like to express our
sadness at the passing away of President Yasser Arafat,
a symbol of the fight for independence of the
Palestinian people. It is our hope that the memory of
President Arafat will constitute an encouragement for
the Palestinian people to maintain its national unity and
an inspiration to Palestinian leaders to advance towards
a peaceful and lasting settlement of the conflict in the
Middle East. In these very difficult moments, we
would like to offer our sincere condolences and
wholehearted support to the family of President Yasser
Arafat and the Palestinian people.

Romania associates itself with the statement that
will be made shortly on behalf of the European Union
by Ambassador Van den Berg of the Netherlands.

I would like to welcome with delight to the
Council the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Mladen Ivanie, and, later in the day,
the Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), Mr. Jaap de Hoop Scheffer. I
would also like to thank Lord Paddy Ashdown for his
report to the Council as well as for today's update.

The significant progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is highly commendable. We should give
credit for that achievement to the High Representative,
his Office, all international organizations supporting
the country - notably NATO, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union - and, last but not least, the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The full implementation of the Peace Agreement
in its letter and spirit and fostering genuine inter-entity
cooperation in Bosnia and Herzegovina still require
sustained efforts, but Bosnia and Herzegovina is laying
the proper foundation, every day more consolidated,
closer to European and Euro-Atlantic institutions and
further away from the tragic era of war.

The High Representative was right to base his
strategy on reforms on core issues such as the rule of
law, the economy, capacity-building and defence. They
are anchors of stability in a modern State and, not by
coincidence, important requirements on the road
towards the European Union (EU) and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

We support the efforts of the authorities in
Sarajevo to implement the European Commission's
Feasibility Study as a necessary step in launching
negotiations for signing an association and stabilization
agreement with the EU. We in South-East Europe are
heartened by every sign of success on this path, which
Romania hopes can be replicated and multiplied
throughout the area. Lasting stability is a long-held
goal in the western Balkans, and we have confidence
that it can be achieved with patience and willingness,
step by step, against the background of the European
and Euro-Atlantic integration processes.

We commend, in this context, the active role
played by Bosnia and Herzegovina in regional
cooperation. We would like, in particular, to
congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on its very
successful chairmanship of the South-East European
Cooperation Process, which Romania took over in
2004. We also welcome the recent informal meeting in
Ohrid of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and
Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, and France as a supporting country. That
meeting reiterated those countries' commitment to
further intensify their cooperation and reinforce joint
efforts to transform the region into an area of new
possibilities and economic prosperity.

Romania joins the High Representative in
encouraging the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to maintain the pace of reforms and assure their
adequate implementation. The work of the Srebrenica
Commission and the recent formal apology constitute
initial steps towards achieving satisfactory cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). We are still concerned about the
fact that the country is held back by the persistent
failure of the relevant authorities to cooperate fully
with the ICTY. When that task is fulfilled, it will
certainly be a cornerstone of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
secure future and of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement.

We will later congratulate the Secretary General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on a
successful mission by the Stabilization Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Romania continues to support a strong
international commitment towards the consolidation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The European Union is
already a driving force in this process, and Romania is
ready to support the authorization by this Council of
the future EU mission, which we are confident will be
as successful as its predecessor. Romania will continue
to contribute substantially to the EU-led missions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina by increasing its present
troops and police contribution.

