Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
has been consistently concerned over developments in
countries of the southern Slavs, and perhaps most of all in
Croatia, for it is precisely there that a Czech mechanized
battalion has been active for several years as part of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), which is
now being transformed into the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UN CRO). We have been
aware of the long-standing differences between
UNPROFOR and the Croatian authorities which eventually
led those authorities to give notice to the United Nations
peace-keeping Force. This difficult issue eventually got
resolved, to what appeared to be everybody's satisfaction,
with the authorization of UNCRO in resolution
981 (1995) and the provisions of its mandate in resolution
990 (1995).

One of the reasons for the intensive international
effort to keep peace-keepers in Croatia was that there was
indeed a peace to keep, certainly since the March 1994
cease-fire agreement. It was a difficult peace with very
slow progress towards national reconciliation;
nevertheless, progress there was, and the Economic
Agreement of December 1994 was one of its most
important manifestations. The alternative to a United
Nations presence, many felt, was an all-out war.

All the more surprising, therefore, was the Croatian
Government offensive against Sector West some two
weeks ago, and even this apparently limited military move
may have been only a part of a broader pattern, for in
other sectors too Croatian Government forces penetrated
the zones of separation and appeared to be digging in for
the long term. This move, among others, exposed our
peace-keepers to hostile fire and thus endangered them in
an absolutely unacceptable fashion.

Our resolution today focuses on securing the
complete withdrawal of Croatian Government forces from
the zones of separation with no further procrastination
whilst acknowledging the extent of the withdrawal
effected to date. It further calls for strict observance of
the human rights of Croatian Serbs in Western Slavonia.
It also pays due attention to the Economic Agreement,
and especially to safety and security along the crucial
Zagreb-Belgrade highway. All these points should drive
home one message: Zagreb should inextricably associate
itself with the logic of peace. Military adventures might
be tempting, but they will certainly not be condoned by
the Council.

This resolution reacts mostly to actions of the
Croatian Government and its forces. The Croatian Serb
party, however, has not lagged behind in taking control of
adjacent parts of the zones of separation. The resolution
has not forgotten this fact, and, therefore, paragraph 2
demands a complete withdrawal of both parties and
paragraph 10 demands that both parties refrain from
taking further military actions. The Council will be very
carefully following developments from now on.

 

