The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.

First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Bentiu
Keita, Assistant-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing. We urge her
and all the actors on the ground to continue their efforts
in the search for peace and stability in the Republic of
Mali. Those are the conditions that will make it possible
to lay the groundwork for the country's economic and
social development. We would also like to thank Her
Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali, for
being with us.

We know that the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has faced major
challenges in establishing the necessary conditions for
peace and lasting stability in the country. However, we
must acknowledge that renewed commitment by the
parties has made it possible for the adoption of certain
measures, including the establishment of an accelerated
process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and integration and the establishment of the Ministry
of Social Cohesion, Peace and National Reconciliation.
That has made it possible to undertake initiatives aimed
at increasing the participation of women in the peace
process. All those political and institutional measures
and other measures to strengthen security are aimed at
accelerating the implementation ofa peace process that
is more inclusive and that is in full compliance with the
peace agreement.

We would like to commend the people and the
Government of Mali, as well as MINUSMA and other
stakeholders, for achieving that progress. However,
it is also important to address the increase in attacks
that occurred in the country during the last few months
of 2018. The attacks illustrate the deterioration of the
security situation in the central part of the country and
the need to take immediate steps. We are particularly
concerned by the increase in attacks launched by
extremist groups in the central and northern regions
of the country against MINUSMA, against the
Malian defence and security forces and against other
international forces.

In addition to those attacks, we are seeing acts
of intimidation, kidnapping and selective killings
of civilians and members of armed groups that
are signatories of the peace agreement, especially
in the centre of the country. Also, we are seeing
intercommunal violence and fighting in the central
parts of Mali. We emphatically condemn all attacks
on civilians, especially on women and children.
We express our condolences to the families of the
victims. We would also like to state our rejection of all
violations of international human rights standards and
international humanitarian law. We will make all the
necessary efforts to ensure that those responsible for
violations are brought to justice.

Furthermore, we acknowledge the importance of
the work of France, the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), the European Union and
MINUSMA, as well as the Malian defence and security
forces. Their efforts to protect civilians, neutralize
armed groups and prosecute those responsible for
the crimes I mentioned. We urge the international
community to provide financial support to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and ensure that its troops are well equipped.
We commend MINUSMA for its commitment and
dedication to protecting civilians, even under difficult
circumstances, as well as the technical assistance
provided to the legal authorities of Mali in terms of
combating terrorism and transnational crime, logistical
support and support in investigating and training police
and human rights training.
We also continue to be concerned about the
humanitarian needs of the population. According to the
2019 humanitarian response plan, it is estimated that,
owing to the armed conflict, crime and severe flooding,
approximately 7.2 million people will be affected, of
which 3.2 million will require humanitarian assistance.
We call for continued support for the humanitarian
response plan in order to improve access to humanitarian
assistance and basic services for the most vulnerable.

The Dominican Republic would like to express its
concern about the effects ofclimate change regarding the
deterioration of lands and food insecurity, which have a
direct impact on stability in Mali. As expressed by the
Security Council, such land deterioration undermines
the means of subsistence and leads to a struggle for
available resources. We believe that climate change
has become one of the main challenges both for the
population and for the Government. In that regard, we
reiterate the need to tackle the adverse effects of climate
change, environmental changes and natural disasters. It
is also important that the Government of Mali and the
United Nations take into account the appropriate risk
assessment and risk management strategies regarding
those factors in order to overcome that major challenge.

In conclusion, we reiterate that the immediate
implementation of the basic provisions of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is essential to
prevent conflict and to uphold human rights. We
urge the parties, the entire population of Mali and the
international community to continue this dialogue to
ensure that the parties live up to the responsibility of
complying with the road map and make Mali a country
where peace, stability and the development of its
people prevail.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa
Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.

