Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I should like at the outset to join you, Madam
President, and other speakers in thanking Ambassador
Greenstock for everything he has done with us and
among us. We thank him for his interest in, and
commitment to, Africa, where he skillfully headed
several Security Council missions. On a personal note,
we will not soon forget his friendly assistance during
Cameroon's presidency of the Security Council and
during consultations on the question of Iraq in October
2002.

I should like to thank you, Madam, for having
convened this open meeting on the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire, which enables us to assess the progress made
towards achieving peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire.
The inclusion of this item in the agenda of your
presidency attests once again to the ongoing interest of
your country in the promotion of international peace
and security, in Africa in particular.

Indeed, a Security Council mission to West Africa
recently visited cote d'Ivoire. C6te d'Ivoire received it
in a manner befitting the body with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security - with much honour, but also, and
most importantly, with a great deal of hope.

Today cote d'Ivoire is returning the favour.
Indeed, today the Security Council is meeting with all
of Cote d'Ivoire through Mr. Seydou Diarra, consensus
Prime Minister and head of the Government of
National Reconciliation, who embodies all of the
Ivorian social and political sensibilities and is a
tangible manifestation of the historical compromise
represented by the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. He
enjoys the full confidence of Laurent Gbagbo,
President of Cote d'Ivoire.

My delegation in turn joins its voice to that of the
President of the Security Council and of preceding
speakers who have warmly welcomed the consensus
Prime Minister, Mr. Seydou Diarra, and to thank and
congratulate him for his important statement, which is
both a stock-taking of what his Government has
achieved and an indication of the actions that remain to
be taken. His presence here attests to the degree to
which the Ivorian people, who rightfully aspire to
peace and seek to restore Cote d'Ivoire to its place in
the international arena, have confidence in the Security
Council and hence in the United Nations.

The Security Council has spared no effort to see
that his country regain its established reputation as a
model of stability and an island of economic prosperity
that was, until recently, the pride of many Africans.

Through the actions of the Security Council, the
international community is standing with Cote d'Ivoire,
determined and resolved to support it as it moves ever
forward towards peace.

By adopting, on 4 February 2003, resolution 1464
(2003), the Security Council endorsed the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement, which was approved by the
Kleber conference of heads of State, and called upon
all Ivorian political forces fully to comply with it.

Today's discussion is an opportunity to take stock
of what has been achieved since that time. Under the
authority of the head of State, the Government of
National Reconciliation, headed by the consensus
Prime Minister with his well-known wisdom and
brilliance, has, in an environment that does not give
rise to optimism, made tremendous progress in the
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
The important statement made by the Prime Minister is
telling in this regard, as is the presentation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.

The conclusion that can be drawn is the one
stated by the Prime Minister himself at the end of his
briefing - that the crisis is now in the process of
ending.

The determination of all components of the
Ivorian population has made it possible effectively to
lay the foundation for a lasting peace whose elements
are gradually and methodically being instituted, with
the support of the international community. Cameroon
commends this, particularly since, as the Council is
aware, President Paul Biya, who personally took part in
the Linas-Marcoussis conference of heads of State, is a
moral guarantor in this process.

Today the military forces of both camps have
declared the end of the war and have recognized the
authority of the head of State and of the Government of
National Reconciliation. In so doing they have
committed themselves to supporting the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and the Accra accords. This is
an important step towards ending the crisis.

The Parliament will soon consider the amnesty
bill, as submitted by the Government and firmly
supported by the President of the Republic. The scope
of this law is vast, for, as underscored in the
governmental communique, it will provide for a
general pardon that recommends that each citizen make
a resolute choice to move beyond self-interest and to
embrace mutual tolerance.

In that context, Cameroon has no doubt that the
programme of the Government of National
Reconciliation, supported before the parliament on 28
May, will be continued and that the elections of
October 2005 will be elections of transparency - as
the Prime Minister said - of reconciliation and of a
restored nation. In that regard, restoring the State's
authority by extending the administration throughout
the territory is becoming a priority.

It is gratifying that the European Commission has
approved an immediate recovery programme after the
crisis in C6te d'Ivoire. The programme has as its
objectives, inter alia, financing the extension of the
administration and supporting the process of
demobilizing combatants.

Cote d'Ivoire finds itself at a crucial time in its
history. More than ever before, it needs to enjoy the
committed and renewed support of the international
community and of the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council. In that context, the Council needs to
send a strong message to the Ivorian people and leaders
and to the entire West Africa subregion - a message
clearly reiterating its approval of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, once again underscoring the paramount
necessity of its full implementation and urging all
Ivorians to refrain from any action that could
undermine the momentum towards an emergence from
the crisis.

Here, I must express our appreciation to the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Laurent
Gbagbo, for his trust in the Prime Minister and in his
Government. We express our encouragement to the
Ivorian people and to that country's vital forces,
resolutely committed to and oriented towards
reconciliation and national unity. We should like to
reaffirm our support for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire and Chairman
of the Monitoring Committee for the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, Mr. Albert Tevoedjre. We pay tribute to
him for his actions and for his commitment to the
advent of peace and harmony in Cote d'Ivoire.

In conclusion, I should like to indicate my
delegation's support for the draft presidential statement
prepared by the French delegation and submitted by
Ambassador De La Sabliere. That text contains certain
elements and guidelines to be taken into account for
the successful continuation of the implementation of
the programme of the Government of National
Reconciliation that was supported before the
parliament on 28 May. Clearly, the continuation of that
programme requires the stability of the Government
and the stability of the Prime Minister - by consensus
the architect of a return to peace - at the side of the
President of the Republic. We are sure that the head of
State will continue, with his usual wisdom, to ensure
that his Prime Minister's action is, in the long run, in
conformity with the spirit of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement. Furthermore, that important aspect could,
in my delegation's view, be incorporated into the draft
presidential statement, which would thus be enriched.

