Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): China welcomes the positive developments on the
question of Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We
understand the agreements on the question of Kosovo
reached between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the parties concerned and evaluate positively the efforts
made by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in alleviating the humanitarian situation in
Kosovo and pursuing lasting peace and reconciliation in the
region. We are of the view that the international community
should try to maintain and promote this momentum towards
a peaceful solution of the question of Kosovo.

However, very regrettably, almost at the same time as
those agreements were being concluded, a regional
organization concerned made the decision to take military
actions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
interfere in its internal affairs. More disturbingly, that
decision was made unilaterally, without consulting the
Security Council or seeking its authorization. Such an
irresponsible act is not conducive to the creation of a
peaceful atmosphere for dealing with the question of
Kosovo and will not help resolve the issue. Furthermore, it
has violated the purposes, principles and relevant provisions
of the United Nations Charter, as well as international law
and widely acknowledged norms governing relations
between States. It is a disparagement of and a challenge
to the authority of the United Nations and the Security
Council and has created an extremely dangerous
precedent in international relations. China is gravely
concerned about this.

Maintaining the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia conforms to the
provisions and requirements of the United Nations Charter
and is also a shared commitment of the international
community. It is on that basis that the question of Kosovo
should be resolved. The implementation of the above-
mentioned agreements should also proceed on that basis
and be completed through full consultation and
cooperation with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
Serbian Government.

In principle, China does not oppose the adoption of
a well-focused technical resolution by the Council to
endorse the agreements reached between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and relevant parties and to
encourage peaceful approaches on the question of
Kosovo. This is in line with the understandings between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the parties
concerned. However, we do not favour the inclusion in
the resolution of content beyond the above agreements.
We are even more opposed to using Council resolutions
to pressure the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or to
interfere in its internal affairs.

The Chinese delegation put forward its amendments
during the Council's consultations, among which the
request to delete those elements authorizing use of force
or threatening to use force was accommodated. We
believe that the resolution just adopted does not entail any
authorization to use force or to threaten to use force
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, nor should it
in any way be interpreted as authorizing the use of force
or threatening to use force against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

Nonetheless, the resolution just adopted still contains
some elements beyond the agreements reached between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and parties concerned,
including reference to Chapter VII of the Charter and
elements of interference in the internal affairs of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. To our deep regret, our
amendments concerning these questions were not
accommodated. Therefore, the Chinese delegation
abstained in the voting on the resolution.

 

