Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I begin, as indeed
I should, by applauding Norway for the quality of its
leadership of the Security Council this month.

The earthquakes of yesterday and today have
compounded the sorrows of Afghanistan. Bangladeshis,
our Prime Minister, Begum Khaleda Zia, our
Government and our people are profoundly saddened
by the resultant death and destruction. Our deepest
condolences go out to the Interim Authority and to the
Afghan people.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(5/2002/278), which is a blueprint for the United
Nations role in post-conflict peace-building in
Afghanistan. We also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Louise Frechette for elaborating on the mandate of the
proposed United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).

With the authorization of the Council, UNAMA
would be entrusted to assume a great responsibility at a
critical juncture in Afghan history. Beyond the borders
of Afghanistan, its contribution would also be critical
for Central Asia. It would help create a regenerated
Afghanistan at peace with itself and with its
neighbours, and free from external political and
military interference. It would contribute to building
institutions that would prevent threats to regional and
international stability and security from emanating
from its territory. From that perspective, Bangladesh
supports the basic operating principles and tasks
proposed for UNAMA. We shall try to contribute to the
success of the mission in every possible way.

We shall now make a few specific suggestions for
the consideration of the Council in authorizing the
mandate of the proposed United Nations mission. First,
with regard to security, it is only in an enabling
environment that UNAMA can carry out its mandate.
The core functions of the mission are drawn from the
Bonn Agreement, which entrusts the United Nations
with specific responsibilities. The Agreement sets a
calendar. It is imperative that the United Nations
mission be able to make progress in sequence.

It is reassuring to learn that arrangements are
being made for a smooth transfer of leadership in the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) from
the United Kingdom to Turkey; but the question of the
expansion of the multinational Force remains unclear.
There are views that since the formation and training of
an Afghan army and an effective police force will take
time, an expanded peacekeeping force remains
essential for the stability of Afghanistan. Chairman
Karzai has spoken about such a need before the
Security Council. In that regard, we shall call for
continued international engagement.

Secondly, with regard to support to the Interim
Authority, Tokyo raised our hopes for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. There was considerable
donor commitment. That is for the long-term; in the
short-term, Chairman Karzai needs to keep his
administrative machinery functioning. The Interim
Authority urgently requires immediate financial
support. It is needed even to pay the salaries of public
servants. This is deserving of the attention of the
international community. We have witnessed a similar
situation fraught with risks in the Central African
Republic.

Thirdly, with regard to the regional dimension,
the emphasis accorded by the Secretary-General to
inter-pillar coordination at the regional level is
noteworthy. That coordination, we believe, will go
beyond relief, recovery and reconstruction. It would
also extend to political aspects, including those
entrusted to pillar I of the proposed mission. Durable
peace in Afghanistan can be envisaged only with the
support and cooperation of regional actors. We place
our full trust and confidence in Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi in that regard.

Fourthly, with regard to mine clearance and
unexploded ordnance, as refugees and the internally
displaced persons return, their access to livelihood,
farms and orchards must be clear of anti-personnel
mines and unexploded ordnance. The reasons are both
humanitarian and economic. We urge that priority
attention be given to this area of special concern.

Fifthly, with regard to the coordination of
programmes, the United Nations Development
Programme has put forward a wide-ranging set of
policy recommendations and operational imperatives at
its workshop on learning from experience for
Afghanistan, the last session of which was held at the
Permanent Mission of Germany on 4 and 5 February.
With respect to security, the recommendations included
the expansion of the international security force
beyond Kabul and assistance for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. The operational
recommendations include ensuring a seamless
transition from humanitarian relief to recovery and
reconstruction; addressing the poverty gap; a
comprehensive approach to returnees; ensuring human
security; the use of microcredit as a tool for
development; and so on. The conclusions of the
workshop merit serious consideration. Some of them
should be integrated into the set of principles and tasks
ofUNAMA.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Bangladesh's
willingness to participate effectively in the building
and reconstruction of Afghanistan. Bangladesh, too,
began as a war-ravaged economy, in 1971. Today it is
widely viewed as a success story across a broad
spectrum of sectors. This was done by a wise
combination of good macro-economic policies and
appropriate utilization of external support. We have
sought to achieve all this against the matrix of
commitment to human rights, good governance and
pluralist values. This has rendered us what we are
today: a vibrant, progressive, modernizing polity of
130 million that is also one of the largest democracies
in the world. Our innovative ways of development
through a partnership of Government and civil society
attracted much interest last week in Monterrey. As
Foreign Minister Morshed Khan pledged in Tokyo, we
are prepared - indeed, anxious - to share our
experience in microcredit, empowerment of women,
poverty alleviation, education and health with the
Afghan people, with whom we share warm and historic
links. It is our vision that someday, Afghanistan will
play a constructive role in the comity of nations. It
shall be our endeavour, in concert with others in this
Chamber and beyond, to transform that vision into
reality.

