Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, which consists of 50 Member
States and the European Union and is co-chaired this
year by Italy and the State of Qatar.

The Group would like to thank Poland for
organizing today's important open debate. I would
also like to extend our gratitude to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres; the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Yves Daccord; and the Secretary-General of the
Iraqi Al-Amal Association, Ms. Hanaa Edwar, for their
highly informative briefings.

Today we bear witness to a continuing and pervasive

degradation ofrespect for civilian lives and an appalling
disregard for the norms and laws that the international
community established to alleviate the effects of armed
conflict. The results are tremendous human suffering
and a high risk of mass atrocity crimes. Although all
States have a responsibility to protect their populations
from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing, more than 65 million people are
currently displaced as a result of conflict, atrocities and
persecution worldwide. The commission of systematic,
flagrant and widespread violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law
in situations of armed conflict may constitute a threat
to international peace and security. It is within that
context that the Group of Friends would like to stress
the following points.

First, full and effective compliance with
international law is fundamental to the protection of
civilians. Many civilian deaths, as well as suffering
and displacement, could be avoided if all parties to
conflicts respected international humanitarian law and
human rights law.

Secondly, it is of the utmost importance that States
put in place appropriate legislative and institutional
arrangements to comprehensively address violations
of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights and hold those who commit
such violations and abuses accountable. Accountability
for serious violations of the law of armed conflict and
human rights violations and abuses not only helps
provide justice for victims, but also deters future
violations and abuses.

States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdiction. National accountability efforts
should be encouraged and supported, including through
the strengthening ofjudicial cooperation among States.
International investigative and judicial mechanisms,
including fact-finding missions, commissions ofinquiry,
international courts and hybrid tribunals, including the
International Criminal Court in circumstances that are
properly within its jurisdiction, provide complementary
avenues to enable accountability when and where
national options prove insufficient.

Thirdly, we are witnessing widespread attacks
directed against civilian infrastructure, such as
health-care facilities and schools. Let us not forget
that deliberate or indiscriminate attacks against
medical facilities and civilian infrastructure, such as
schools, as well as on the civilian population, including
humanitarian workers, may amount to war crimes.

There has been a pattern in recent years of attacks
on schools, students, teachers and other education
personnel by State security forces or non-State armed
groups. The United Nations was able to verify 753
attacks on schools and hospitals in 2016. From May
2016 to date, the ICRC has recorded more than 1,200
incidents of violence against health-care facilities
or personnel in just 16 countries. Approximately one
incident of violence against health-care facilities or
personnel has taken place every single week since
the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), with regard to
the protection of medical and humanitarian personnel
and facilities.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians should be
sensitive to gender considerations. Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security note that
armed conflict and emergencies have a differential
impact on women, girls, men and boys. Women's needs
must be considered and addressed. The Group urges the
United Nations and other relevant actors to ensure that
affected populations, including women, are involved in
the development of protection-of-civilians strategies
and activities.

Lastly,journalists play an important role in bringing
attention to conflict situations and in mobilizing action
in situations where atrocity crimes are committed.
Independent reporting can put pressure on political
actors to find solutions to conflicts and can contribute
to promoting accountability. According to Reporters
without Borders, more than 1,000 professional
journalists were killed in the past 15 years, an average
of two deaths per week, while more than 24 have
already been killed in 2018. Member States should
create and maintain a safe and enabling environment
forjournalists reporting in conflict situations.

Far too many civilians are killed, in both direct
and indiscriminate attacks, in today's complex and
protracted conflicts. The international community
should make every effort to assist civilians caught up in
conflicts. The members of the Security Council should
take timely and decisive action aimed at ending and
preventing atrocities, and not hinder credible efforts to
that end.

Finally, the surest way to protect civilian populations
is by investing in the prevention of conflicts and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, based on the principles
of justice and international law.

