The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Cape Verde, Cuba,
Finland, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Portugal, Singapore and Timor-Leste, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Guterres
(Timor-Leste), took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend a warm welcome to Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the course of the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Martin to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 11 August 2006 from the
Permanent Representative of Cape Verde to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
"In my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of Cape Verde and a member of
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), I have the honour to request
that the Executive Secretary of the CPLP, His
Excellency Ambassador Luis Fonseca, be allowed
to participate, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Charter and the provisional rules
of procedure of the Security Council, in the
Council's public meeting on Tuesday, 15 August
2006, regarding the item entitled 'The situation

95:

in Timor-Leste .

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite His Excellency Mr. Luis Fonseca, Executive
Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 39
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Fonseca to take a seat at the side of
the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2006/628 and S/2006/580, which contain
the reports of the Secretary-General on Timor-Leste
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1690 (2006)
and on justice and reconciliation for Timor-Leste,
respectively.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
documents S/2006/620 and S/2006/651, which contain
the texts of letters dated 4 and 14 August 2006 from the
Charge d'affaires ad interim of Timor-Leste addressed
to the President of the Security Council and to the
Secretary-General, respectively.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
statement by Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste. I now give him the
floor.


