Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein for their briefings.

Today we pay respect and convey our deepest
sympathy to all innocent victims and the survivors
of the worst crime in Europe since the end of the
Second World War - in Srebrenica and surrounding
areas in July 1995. The Srebrenica genocide left deep
scars: thousands of men executed and buried in mass
graves, hundreds of men buried alive, men and women
mutilated and slaughtered. We remember all these
atrocities so that they never happen again and so that
the principles of humankind are never again abandoned.
This remembrance is also crucial for prevention and the
resolution of other conflicts around the world. It is a
matter of deep regret that, due to the Russian veto today,
the Council failed to show unity in paying tribute to the
civilian victims of the genocide in Srebrenica.

We condemn the genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed during the conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their perpetrators must be
brought to justice.

Srebrenica's crimes cannot be denied. Acceptance
of the past and ensuring justice for the victims on
all sides is essential in pursuing reconciliation. It
is therefore vital that political elites on all sides
recognize and accept past events, including the fact of
the genocide. The politicians in the region must show
courage, overcome their differences and unite for the
stable future that all of us wish to see.

Hundreds of families live with the pain of not
knowing what happened to their loved ones, not
knowing the truth. "It is not living because you want to,
but living because you have no choice", said a mother
who lost two of her sons in describing what those who
lost their families are going through.

Much more needs to be done. Some 20,000 survivors
of cruel and premeditated sexual violence are living
in the shadows, afraid to speak, afraid to seek justice.
They need care, protection and support. The enormous
scope of the crime, 20 years on, contrasts sharply with
the few dozen convicted perpetrators.

Only truth and justice can nurture peace and
stability. The International Court of Justice and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
recognized the genocide at Srebrenica. Those who were
behind this tragedy are now standing trial.

The international community and the United
Nations, established 70 years ago, meant to save
humanity from horrors such as those that the people of
the Balkans lived through. The experience in Bosnia
was a painful one in the history of the United Nations.
This lesson must be learned.

The United Nations today is better equipped to
detect the early warning signs ofpossible atrocities. The
responsibility to protect must not remain a concept on
paper only. The Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, as well
as the Special Representatives ofthe Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for Children and
Armed Conflict, are vital elements in this strategy.
Their tireless efforts in bringing human rights abuses
to the Council's attention are commendable.
But perhaps the most important lesson drawn from
these terrible events is that the systemic terrorization
of people must be met decisively with all necessary
means and with political will, as the Secretary-General
outlined in his report. Yet far too often lack of political
will and divisions have stood in the way of decisive
action, including on the part of the Council. Let me be
clear: restraint in the use of the veto in mass atrocity
situations should not remain a theoretical option. We
call on all permanent members of the Council to declare
it forthwith.

Let us use this solemn occasion to encourage the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina to unite in building
a better future for their children. Twenty years have not
passed without positive changes. The country is taking
steps towards its European integration, with strong
continuous support for these efforts by the European
Union.

The recent agreement by the Parliament and
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina on a broad
range of reforms and their commitment to be proactive
in the reconciliation process will, hopefully, help them
to overcome differences, unite for the future and ensure
stability and peace in the region. The international
community, including the members of the Council,
should and will continue to support these efforts.

