Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We too
thank the delegations of the United States, Japan and
Korea for having called this meeting; Mr. Jenea for his
briefing; and especially you, Mr. President, not only for
your responsiveness in convening this meeting, but also
for making this briefing open to the entire membership.
This is too serious an issue for a private meeting and
it is important for us to express our views before the
entire membership of the Organization.

Uruguay vigorously condemns the recent launch
by North Korea of a ballistic missile of allegedly
intercontinental range. We call once again on North
Korea to fully, verifiably and irreversibly abandon its
existing nuclear programmes, and to immediately put
an end to all related activities, including launches using
ballistic missile technology and other provocative acts.
North Korea's behaviour is a threat to international
peace and security and constitutes a flagrant violation
of myriad Security Council resolutions. North Korea
must respect all the resolutions adopted by this
body and abandon its nuclear intentions. Such a step
would contribute to fostering peace on the Korean
peninsula and would help to pave the way to a
resumption of dialogue, with the ultimate objective of
achieving denulearization.

The use and threat of use of nuclear weapons
constitute a crime against humanity and a serious
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian law, as well as the Charter of the United
Nations. The only guarantee against the use or threat
ofuse of these weapons is their express prohibition and
total elimination. While we are in the Chamber dealing
with North Korea's obstinacy in the proliferation
of nuclear weapons, the membership of the United
Nations is doing its utmost to be able to adopt, perhaps
next Friday, a treaty to prohibit the nuclear weapons.
Regrettably, neither North Korea nor the nuclear Powers
and other States are participating in those negotiations.
The objective of achieving a more secure world, free
of the lethal effects of nuclear weapons, should be seen
as the goal and responsibility to be born equally by all
those gathered in this Chamber today to guarantee the
safety and survival of humankind.

North Korea's ongoing defiance and a lack of
concrete action on the part of the Security Council
and the concerned parties to reach a peaceful solution
to this situation simply raise tensions on the Korean
peninsula and might inflame the situation further,
with serious consequences. In order to make headway,
Uruguay understands that the sanctions regime must be
fully and properly implemented by all Member States.

Uruguay underscores the need to develop new
options for action, try new approaches and ways of
negotiating to untangle this situation, which gets worse
and worse with each passing month. The Security
Council must find an appropriate response to put an end
to the endless round of provocations and violations by
North Korea and to usher in a resumption of dialogue
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
reiterate our call for dialogue, as we see no viable
solution to the North Korean question other than that
of face-to-face negotiation and the shared political
commitment of the parties.

Uruguay urges the members of the Security Council
to come together as one on this issue and to maintain
their commitment to find a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution aimed at the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. In times of great tension, we must
remain calm, avoid unilateral actions and focus on
finding a solution to the problem.

