Mr. Shinyo (Japan): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate on this vitally
important subject. My delegation highly commends the
excellent preparatory work by the Government of
Slovakia, in particular the holding of a series of round-
table discussions and an Arria-formula meeting over the
past six months, on which we have built today's
discussion, focusing on a number of specific issues that
have proved to warrant close attention by the Security
Council.

Security sector reform (SSR), particularly for
countries emerging from conflict, provides one of the
critical foundations of a State and is an essential
element for the return and resettlement of refugees and
internally displaced persons, as well as for rebuilding
the lives of local populations. It would not be an
exaggeration to say that the eventual success of
reconstruction and peacebuilding in a given country
hinges on whether security sector reform can be
implemented effectively; and, therefore, SSR should
not be seen merely as one aspect of institution-
building.

It is for this reason that Japan has been giving
significant attention to security sector reform. My
Government has been helping women and men in

Afghanistan, Iraq, Timor-Leste and other countries in
their SSR activities.

Mr. President, we fully support your view that the
objective of security sector reform is to ensure that
security and justice are delivered to the State and its
people, in an environment consistent with democratic
norms and the principles of good governance and the
rule of law, thereby promoting human security. This
human security aspect is quite important in security
sector reform. In addition to its political, technical and
institutional aspects, we need to pay sufficient attention
to its psychological aspect, as SSR is as much a
question of winning the hearts and minds of the people.
In other words, security sector reform can be achieved
only if human security is ensured and if people are able
to go through their daily lives with confidence and a
sense of reassurance. Security institutions, therefore,
must be developed with the perspectives of individuals
and communities in mind, in addition to those of the
State.

We fully endorse your view, Sir, that a
comprehensive, coherent and coordinated approach is
needed for security sector reform. Insofar as it is an
important pillar of the rule of law and the democratic
governance of a State, SSR should be undertaken in a
comprehensive fashion. Furthermore, a wide range of
outside actors have roles to play. The efforts of
bilateral donors, United Nations organs, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
non-governmental organizations must also be
adequately harmonized, while encouraging local
ownership of the SSR process.

My delegation highly commends ongoing
coordination efforts in the United Nations system
within the framework of the inter-agency working
group among the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the United Nations Development
Programme and other players. We hope that such
efforts will continue to further advance coordination on
SSR, while fully utilizing existing mechanisms. When
we talk about coordination, there is often the risk of
narrowing our discussion to focus on building a new
coordination mechanism, but we should remember that
this is not what the individual men and women on the
ground are hoping for. My Government recently
utilized Afghanistan's existing coordination body, the
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board, to propose a
joint effort between Japan and Germany towards
reforming the Ministry of the Interior.

There is no doubt that the role of the Security
Council is quite important with respect to security
sector reform. For the eventual handover of security
sector responsibilities from the international
community to the local Government to be conducted
smoothly, it is imperative, first and foremost, that the
Security Council ensure that the international
community's intervention in a conflict, whenever the
Council decides to authorize such intervention, is made
with legitimacy. It is also important for the Security
Council to see to it that sufficient consideration is
given to SSR aspects at an early stage, especially
during the negotiations for a peace agreement.

The mandates of peacekeeping missions in which
security sector reform is an important element will be
significantly enriched if the Security Council conducts
dialogue with a wide range of stakeholders in the
course of deliberations. It was from this perspective
that my delegation stressed the importance of the
Council's communication with non-Council actors
during our term as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council in 2005 and 2006.

In order to bridge the critical gap between a post-
conflict situation and sustainable development, a
smooth transfer of the principal local mandate from a
peacekeeping operation to an integrated United Nations
mission and then to a United Nations country team is
essential. In this connection, it will be useful to closely
coordinate the exit strategy of a peacekeeping
operation or an integrated mission, both of which come
within the Security Council's purview, with the longer-
term integrated peacebuilding strategy that the
Peacebuilding Commission has just begun formulating.
In this process, substantive progress in SSR provides a
nexus between the peacekeeping phase and the
peacebuilding phase. Effective collaboration between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission will therefore be important.

In conclusion, we need to build on today's
discussion and continue our efforts to make a
difference on the ground. In our follow-up efforts, we
must ensure a coherent approach within the United
Nations system, so as to make the most of available
financial resources. We must also continue to respect
and promote the post-conflict countries' sense of
ownership. From these viewpoints, Japan fully
supports the draft presidential statement, which refers
to a report of the Secretary-General on this important
subject.
