The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Canada, Cuba, Egypt, Germany, Guatemala, Honduras,
Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, the Republic of
Korea, the Sudan, Switzerland and Uruguay, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I am
pleased to invite the following participants under rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council: Her Excellency Sheikha Haya Rashed
Al-Khalifa, President of the General Assembly; His
Excellency Mr. Dalius Cekuolis, President of the
Economic and Social Council; and His Excellency
Mr. Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins, Chairman of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw attention to document
S/2007/72, which contains the text of a letter dated 8
February 2007 from the Permanent Representative of
Slovakia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

Allow me to present my opening statement. I am
indeed honoured and privileged to open the first
Security Council open debate ever organized by the
Slovak Republic. It is no coincidence that Slovakia has
chosen to devote this meeting to security sector reform,
since our own transitional experience has shown how
important such reform has been for security, stability,
good governance and rapid development in our
country.

During our one-year-long experience in the
Security Council, we have learned how crucial security
sector reform has also been in other parts of the world.
Particularly in countries emerging from conflict, we
have seen that the lack of reform of the security sector
is an underlying cause of conflict or a reason for
relapse into it. In virtually all the cases that the Council
has dealt with, security sector reform has been a
precondition for stable and sustainable post-conflict
stabilization and reconstruction.

Nevertheless, security sector reform goes far
beyond simple post-conflict institution- and capacity-
building. Unreformed security institutions directly
affect the everyday lives of the people. It cannot,
therefore, be overemphasized that the ultimate
objective of security sector reform should be the
improvement of people's lives through that public
service.

If we are to achieve those goals, we have to solve
one basic conundrum: how to strike a balance between
national ownership and international support. National
ownership is crucial for the success and sustainability
of any security sector reform. However, in post-
conflict environments in particular, national actors
often lack adequate resources and international support
becomes necessary. The United Nations system as a
whole has done an excellent job in that regard by
promoting security sector reform in many parts of the
world. Nevertheless, we believe that there is room for
improvement in the coordination, coherence and
efficiency of international activities. We believe that
today's debate will provide an important impetus in
that regard.
07-24428
It is therefore my pleasure to welcome among us
Her Excellency Sheikha Haya Rashed Al-Khalifa,
President of the General Assembly; His Excellency
Ambassador Dalius Cekuolis, Permanent
Representative of Lithuania, President of the Economic
and Social Council; and His Excellency Ambassador
Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins, Permanent
Representative of Angola, Chairman of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

A crucial role in these efforts will belong to the
Secretary-General. It is therefore a special honour to
have the Secretary-General present. As is the case for
the Slovak presidency, this open debate is one of the
first during the Secretary-General's term in office. We
therefore believe that the issue of security sector
reform will remain at the centre of his attention during
his tenure.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations.


