Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): I
would like join with all those speakers who have
thanked you personally, Mr. Minister, and your
delegation, for having taken the initiative to hold this
debate.

There has been encouraging progress in the
search for solutions to humanitarian problems, with
renewed interest in such matters in recent years in the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council. We
welcome the innovations introduced into the mandates
of peacekeeping operations following the publication
of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809).

While welcoming such progress, we are all aware
of the challenges that remain. In this regard, I would
like to elaborate on four basic points. The first relates
to strengthening the authority of international
humanitarian law. The second relates to ensuring safe
and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance for
victims and affected populations. The third relates to
the need to deal with humanitarian crises in a timely
manner. The fourth relates to the need to promote
political solutions to the conflicts that lead to
humanitarian crises.

On the first point, Benin would like to point out
that respect in all circumstances for international
humanitarian law is indispensable for the prevention of
humanitarian crises. The Security Council should at all
times reaffirm that key principle and use all its
authority and the instruments available to it to prevent
the massive violations of humanitarian law that affect
civilian populations, in particular, children, women and
the elderly, and to put an immediate stop to them
whenever they occur.

It goes without saying that children in armed
conflict are also affected by the consequences of
humanitarian crises. Benin hopes that the Council will
very soon be able to take a decision regarding a draft
resolution on this issue. Its adoption would
undoubtedly help to promote respect for existing
international norms in this area, to put an end to the
inhumane treatment inflicted on children in armed
conflict.

It is particularly important that violations of
humanitarian law not go unpunished. The principle of
rejecting amnesty for grave crimes should become an
essential standard for Council action. The Secretary-
General's proposal concerning the sending of fact-
finding missions to countries where such violations
occur remains important here. The issue of
strengthening national judicial systems is also of
primary importance in that regard. In fact, the adoption
of a preventive approach to humanitarian crises
requires that high priority be given to re-establishing
the rule of law and to national reconciliation in
countries at risk or emerging from armed conflict,
because the rule of law offers a favourable context for
the effective protection of civilian populations.

It is the duty of the Security Council to do
everything in its power to guarantee respect for the
principle of ensuring that victims and all affected
populations have safe and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance. Administrative impediments
and the harassment of humanitarian personnel must be
prohibited, because they are entirely unjustifiable. The
parties involved must cooperate constructively in
humanitarian action and must shoulder their
responsibility to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of humanitarian personnel. Humanitarian
action must be conducted with strict respect for the
principles of neutrality and impartiality.

Problems of access due to difficult terrain are a
real challenge for the international community. It must
mobilize all the appropriate logistical means it requires
to reach populations in distress, wherever they are.

With regard to my third point - the need to
address humanitarian crises in a timely manner - we
must emphasize that the differences of views within the
Security Council on assessing situations and on
choosing means of action undermine the Council's
credibility, because they promote the worsening of
critical humanitarian situations and are often exploited
by the parties to continue and even increase the
suffering they inflict on populations.

That said, there are some examples in which the
Council has shown remarkable effectiveness. Among
those successes, I would mention the dispatch of
Operation Artemis to Ituri, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the deployment of a multinational
force to Haiti in February 2004. The most important
lesson to be drawn from those two cases is that
effective Security Council action was possible because
of the Council's ability to promptly take a unanimous
decision, guided by its concern to fully shoulder its
responsibility towards the threatened populations.

Finally, the fourth point - very important in the
view of my delegation - relates to the need to
promote the political settlement of the conflicts from
which humanitarian crises result. Benin wishes to point
out that the Council has a major responsibility in that
area. It must equip itself with the means to closely
follow and promote negotiations among the parties.

Furthermore, it is important to continue and
conclude, as soon as possible, the discussions now
under way on providing the Security Council with an
early-warning mechanism that would operate in close
cooperation with regional organizations. The Council
would thus have information and proposals for
concrete action enabling it to take swift, timely and
useful decisions on situations that could compromise
international peace and security and gravely affect the
situation of civilian populations.

Cooperation with regional organizations is a tool
that the Council should use to the utmost to increase its
capacity to act preventively or to react promptly in the
face of humanitarian crises. Providing sufficient
support to regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen their capacities for rapid intervention is of
paramount importance for such cooperation, without
prejudice to the Council's prerogatives and primary
responsibility in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Mobilizing adequate financing and taking into
account the regional dimension related to the cross-
border mobility of ex-combatants will greatly help to
stem the resurgence of armed conflicts and the
disastrous humanitarian situations resulting from them.
That is the prerequisite for ensuring the success of
recovery plans in countries emerging from conflict.
Here, the inherent link between security and
development is clear. Strengthening local capacities to
maintain public order and safety - not only with
resources, but also with properly trained personnel -
must be an essential aspect of strategies for the
withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping operations
from the countries where they are deployed.

