Mr. Banoum (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Brahimi
for his excellent, comprehensive and clear report. I
should like to pay a glowing tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
Afghanistan. He has left his mark on the remarkable
progress made in that country since the signing on 5
December 2001 of the Bonn Agreement.

Thanks, inter alia, to the tireless efforts of
Ambasador Brahimi, the Emergency Loya Jirga was
held from 11 to 19 June, leading to the establishment of
the Transitional Authority, headed by President Hamid
Karzai. We wish also to thank Mr. Brahimi's Deputy,
Mr. Fisher, and the entire team of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who are
being impressively creative in helping Afghanistan find
its way back to the path to peace and to economic and
social progress.

Three weeks ago, when we were adopting
resolution 1419 (2002), the mood was one of optimism.
The Emergency Loya Jirga had just scored a
remarkable success, and a very professional transition
was under way in the command of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF).

Today, however, a succession of tragic events has
given rise to concern. Afghanistan has been one of the
main focuses of interest in the Council for some time
now. We have many concerns: security, peace-building,
emergency humanitarian assistance, post-conflict
management and, in particular, economic
reconstruction and recovery, capacity-building and so
on. The Council's interest in Afghanistan also stems
from the international community's resolve to wage an
all-out war against drug trafficking and the creeping
tentacles of terrorism.

In other words, the job is a mammoth one, and so
all the more credit goes to Ambassador Brahimi and to
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

Among the issues he raised this morning, three
caught our attention: security, emergency humanitarian
assistance and the financing of economic recovery.

On 6 July, we learned with horror of the
assassination of the Vice-President and Minister for
Public Works, Haji Abdul Qadir. That was
unacceptable, a futile act that certainly does not help
the Afghan cause. We hope that the Transitional
Authority will soon find the assassins and bring them
to justice.

This, together with the many incidents that have
been reported, particularly from the northern part of
Afghanistan, bring the issue of security in the country
to the forefront once again.

ISAF plays an irreplaceable role that has allowed
for the stabilization of the central authority, provided
security in and around Kabul, and successfully
organized the Emergency Loya Jirga. But the death of
Vice-President Qadir makes it clear that we must be
constantly vigilant.

The passing of the baton from the British
commander to the Turkish one was quite natural, but,
as we stressed in earlier meetings, this should not lead
to any disengagement, however relative, on the part of
the United Kingdom, for the British forces have won
the respect and admiration of the Government and the
people of Afghanistan.

The question of security outside Kabul continues
to be an issue. The financial, political and human costs
of deploying ISAF throughout Afghanistan deterred the
Council from taking up this matter earlier. However,
developments on the ground indicate that it is high
time to reopen this discussion, for unless there is
security, peace will continue to be precarious.

Ambassador Brahimi's briefing corroborated
warnings by the World Food Programme of a difficult
situation in Afghanistan during the winter. A few
weeks ago, the World Food Programme issued a strong
warning about the need for 175,000 tons of food to
meet emergency humanitarian requirements. Cameroon
would like to appeal to donors to help the country
avoid this clearly looming famine.

In closing, I would like to echo the concerns of
the Government of Afghanistan and of UNAMA by
saying that it is high time that the financial pledges
made at the Tokyo Conference to be fulfilled. Thanks
to UNAMA, structures are now in place to absorb
financing for reconstruction, rehabilitation and
economic recovery. Unfortunately, as Ambassador
Brahimi has just pointed out to us, the light is still on
red. Unless there is an immediate financial effort, the
Transitional Authority will find it difficult to
implement its programme successfully. However,
thanks to the efforts of the United Nations Mission, the
Government and people of Afghanistan, including the
diaspora, and donors, we feel sure that the peace
process and Afghan recovery will remain on track.

