Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your briefing as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is highly appreciated.

Let me start by acknowledging the presence of the
families of Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp.On behalf
of Sweden and me, personally, I extend our deepest
condolences and heartfelt to them.

I would also like to acknowledge His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Once again, we strongly condemn the murders of
Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp. It is intolerable that
those tasked by the Council to investigate violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law are brutally killed. Zaida Catalan
was the humanitarian expert of the Group of Experts.
She was recognized for conducting her work with skill
and integrity and for standing up for human rights and
international humanitarian law. The same commitment
and dedication led her to become a strong advocate
for the human rights of the Congolese people. We
know that Michael Sharp was a deeply appreciated
coordinator of the Group and that he brought with him
equal dedication.

We recognize the particularly difficult
circumstances under which the colleagues of Zaida
Catalan and Michael Sharp worked to finalize the report
(see S/2017/672/Rev.l), and we commend them for
their indispensable work. In honour of Zaida Catalan,
Michael Sharp and of their colleagues, we would like
the focus of today's meeting to be on their report and
on how we can bring peace andjustice to all those who
suffer in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Sweden welcomes the report, which illustrates the
fragile and worrying security situation in the eastern
part ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, including
its ethnic dimensions. In that context, information
about ex-combatants being re-mobilized is worrisome.
The reintegration of former combatants, notably child
soldiers, must be significantly improved and attention
given to the needs of both female and male combatants.
As a partner and donor to the Congolese disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process,
Sweden supports the recommendation by the Group
of Experts to revise the implementation of the DDR
programme, with a particular focus on job creation and
professional training.

Revenues from conflict minerals fuel the ongoing
insecurity. Sweden is pleased that our hard work has
resulted in a European Union regulation that requires
importers of conflict minerals to control their supply
chains. This is one example of relevant instruments
in the fight against the international trade in conflict
minerals. It is clear that more needs to be done.

Conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is not confined to the east; it touches both Kasai and
Tanganyika. The report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of
4 August recounts a terrible situation in the Kasai
region, with violations and abuses of human rights
and violations of international humanitarian law. That
includes summary executions, extrajudicial killings,
the recruitment of children into militias and horrifying
testimonies of mutilations, sexual violence and rape.
The scale of the violence has a direct negative impact
on peace and security. There must be no impunity for
those crimes.

The Kavumu case in South Kivu province,
with 42 incidents of aggravated rape of children, is
another example of barbaric crimes being committed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sweden
welcomes the arrest of a number of suspects for those
crimes. Thorough investigation and prosecution is
necessary in order to ensure justice for those victims.
In that regard, we would welcome further collaboration
among the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Sanctions Committee.
That could entail sharing information more regularly,
including through meetings, on groups and individuals
that meet the criteria for listing.

Most important, though, the sanctions regime
must be upheld and implemented by all parties, and
the Group of Experts must have the adequate means
to carry out its mandate. Sweden supports the Group's
recommendation to extend the mandate to 18 months
and to allow time for information-gathering under a
more stringent security regime.

There can be no peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo without democratic progress. We continue
to call for the full implementation of the New Year's Eve
agreement, in good faith and by and with all Congolese
stakeholders. Free, fair, credible and inclusive elections
remain the only viable and peaceful way out of the
current political crisis, which otherwise, as the conflict
in Kasai illustrates, fuels further conflict and instability.

To promote peaceful development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we would like to underline the
importance of joint efforts by the African Union and
the United Nations, such as the recent high-level visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo led by the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Mohammed. In the
same vein, we welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. She Okitundu here today. We look forward to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's close cooperation
with the United Nations and the Council going forward.

One of the recommendations of the Group
of Experts is that the United Nations continue its
investigations into the murders of the experts. We
share that view. No stone should be left unturned in
our efforts to deliver justice for those who lost their
lives in the service of the United Nations. Now that the
Board of Inquiry has delivered its report, we welcome
the fact that the Secretary-General is looking into
which follow-up mechanism would best serve our joint
efforts to establish the truth and bring the perpetrators
to justice, as well as supporting the ongoing national
investigations. We support the establishment of such a
mechanism by the Secretary-General.

Separately, we must draw lessons from possible
failures in the system, and we will carefully study the
Board of Inquiry's conclusions and recommendations
in this regard. It is the Council's duty to ensure the
safety of the United Nations personnel mandated by it.
What happened to Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp
should never happen again.

