Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Allow me to first
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission and to thank the
Commission for its second annual report. We would
also like to thank Ambassador Yukio Takasu of Japan
for his remarks and to commend the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the present and previous
Chairs of the four country configurations and the
Working Group on Lessons Learned.

In its presidential statement S/PRST/2008/l6 of
20 May 2008, the Security Council expressed its
intention to support the peacebuilding efforts in
countries emerging from conflict. We believe that
peacebuilding support should be provided to those
countries at an early stage, especially when the Council
creates or renews the mandates of United Nations-led
missions through its decisions and resolutions. That
very important step could ensure that peacebuilding
support is incorporated in a United Nations mission.

We hold the View that the more the notion of
peacebuilding support is meaningfully reflected in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and other
United Nations political missions, the greater is the
chance for realizing the priority areas of peace
consolidation as stipulated in the integrated
peacebuilding strategies. The key to that exercise is
close consultations with the receiving country,
potential contributors and the Secretariat. The Security

Council is also an appropriate forum for providing
guidance on the political and security aspects of
peacebuilding activities.

Yet the challenge is how those aspects could be
effectively linked with the social, economic and
development components of peacebuilding efforts, as
envisioned by other United Nations bodies. My
delegation therefore believes that the Commission can
play a very important role as a nexus for linking the
political and security components taken up at the
Council with the social, humanitarian and economic
aspects that the Economic and Social Council focuses
on.

At the strategic level, that approach can be
developed with the Commission's active and
substantive engagement with other principal United
Nations organs, Bretton Woods institutions and other
relevant agencies. At the operational level, it can be
derived through the regular interface of the country
configurations with the pertinent United Nations funds,
programmes and country teams. That will lead to better
coherence and integration of the cause of and results in
the United Nations system.

The issue of coordination remains critical, given
the existence of so many institutions and resources. By
giving good consideration to how coordination within
the United Nations and between it and other actors
might take place, we will more effectively utilize those
resources and have a more efficient process. The
United Nations itself should continue to play a leading
role in the field in coordinating international efforts in
post-conflict situations.

For its part, the Security Council, as part of the
United Nations system, could play an important role in
enhancing adequate coordination and division of labour
at the level of United Nations organs. It can ensure the
operational relevance of Peacebuilding Commission
advice, which remains essential for countries on the
agenda of both organs and in resolving the security-
related aspects of peacebuilding. The finest synergy
between the two organs would serve to clarify and
define a seamless transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding.

Close cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council should also
continue to be nurtured. That is crucial because it is the
Council that draws up referral letters to the
Commission. That collaboration also forms a basis for
the Commission to identify peace challenges, risks and
priorities in a particular post-conflict country. Further
collaboration between the Commission and the Council
should also be encouraged in the information-sharing
activities that relate to peacebuilding.

The information that the Peacebuilding
Commission gathers and that the Security Council
receives must be mutually complementary and merged
to form a basis for sound decisions with regard to
peacebuilding activities. To narrow any gap, there
should be more synergy and substantial communication
between the Council and the Commission.

Equally essential is the synergy between the
Peacebuilding Commission, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. Of particular
importance is bridging peacebuilding and political
stability, socio-economic recovery and humanitarian
issues, which would lay the foundation for longer-term
development activities. In that regard, as stipulated in
the Council's presidential statement S/PRST/2007/42
of 6 November 2007, the Peacebuilding Commission
should continue to serve as a forum for coordination
between the United Nations system and regional and
subregional organizations in the area of post-conflict
situations.

My delegation recognizes that the Peacebuilding
Commission is steadily leaving its infancy. Its work,
however, is not particularly well known to wider
audiences, including the private sector,
non-governmental organizations and other civil society
groups, whose role in and contribution to
peacebuilding efforts have been recognized by the
Council. As the co-creator of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Security Council should therefore
help in boosting public awareness and visibility of the
Commission's work by featuring its processes and
outcomes in its various engagements.

Finally, allow me to reiterate that Indonesia, for
its part, will continue to support and contribute to the
efforts for an integrated and coherent approach in
peacebuilding based on the dimensions of security,
democracy and development, and to raise awareness of
those matters nationally and regionally.

