Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I begin
by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for his briefing and aligning myself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union shortly.

France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2315 (2016), which shows that all members
of the Council share the same guiding principles with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina: support for the
presence ofthe European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR Althea) while awaiting the strategic review
that will be carried out next autumn by the European
External Action Service; respect for the aspirationa
of all factions in the country that favour a European
outlook; and the absolute necessity that all must respect
the principles and institutions set forth in the Paris
Dayton accords.

The unity of the Council around such a common
base sends a message of peace to the region. It recalls
that the international community is in agreement in
supporting the independence and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which should not be
challenged by any of its entities, and in respecting the
country's choices, provided that they are in line with
international law and the framework established by the
peace agreements.

More than 20 years after its signature, the Dayton
accords remain the cornerstone of institutional stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard, and as many
have done before me, we can only deplore the decision
made by the authorities of the Republika Srpska to hold
a referendum in September on the issue of Republika
Srpska Day, in contravention of its suspension by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
hence of the Constitution, which is an integral part of
the peace agreements that stipulates that the Court's
rulings are final and binding. That decision has led to
an unnecessary spiral of tensions between communities
and has revived memories of past divisions. We also
regret the fact that the local elections on 2 October were
not held in Mostar because of a lack of agreement on
its status. The inhabitants of Mostar cannot continue
to be deprived of their right to choose their own
representatives, as they have been for eight years now.

France does not rule out the possibility ofa debate
being held among the entities on the definition of
national holidays or the aspirations of some to improve
the functioning of the central State. It nonetheless
recalls that any viable solution must come by way of
dialogue in good faith among the different stakeholders
of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina - the central
State and the entities - while respecting constitutional
rules. We also call on all the parties to cooperate with
the institutions mentioned in the peace agreement,
in particular the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the High Representative. The
latter has a crucial role to play in promoting peaceful
dialogue among the different communities and the
entities. Political decision-makers must also fulfil
their responsibilities, and we call on them to abandon
divisive rhetoric.

Having said that, despite such fragilities we remain
convinced that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is today heading in the right direction, towards
normalization. Our objective for years to come remains,
without challenging the principles of the Paris Dayton

accords, to fully adapt the international presence to
current realities.

France welcomes the fact that a European outlook
is the main driver of development and consolidation in
the country. Last February, Bosnia and Herzegovina
submitted its candidacy for accession to the European
Union, reflecting the broad support for such an
outlook within the country. In that new context, the
European Union shall continue more than ever to
assist the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
implementing reforms that respond to the economic
and social aspirations of the population. The Reform
Agenda adopted last year is, in that regard, critical.
We welcome the fact that it is already bearing concrete
results, such as the adoption of new labour legislation at
the entity level. We encourage Bosnian authorities at all
levels to intensify their reform efforts to the benefit of
the people of the country and in the context of moving
Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to Europe.

The European Union mission EUFOR Althea will
also pursue its efforts to enable the security forces of
Bosnia to operate in an independent fashion and to
thereby participate in building a peaceful society looking
towards the future. Next autumn, this will be subject
of a strategic review within the European Union, as I
have already said, that will allow for the drawing up of
options for its development in the years to come, taking
into account the progress Bosnia and Herzegovina has
made towards European rapprochement.

Twenty years after the horror of war, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is today advancing in the right direction,
with the support of the European Union and its other
partners. The responsibility of the international
community, and especially the Council, is to encourage
it in that direction. The unanimity with which we
have adopted resolution 2315 (2016) this morning will
undoubtedly contribute to that.

