Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like first of all to congratulate
Ambassadors Negroponte of the United States and
Emyr Jones Parry of the United Kingdom for the
comprehensive briefings and in-depth analyses that
they have just given us on the recent developments of
the situation in Iraq.

It is always with untold horror and sadness that
we address that question, and this is especially true in
the wake of the heinous attack on the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad, which caused wanton
destruction and loss of human lives. The activities of
the Organization symbolized the determination of the
international community to participate courageously in
the reconstruction of Iraq.

I would like in that respect to express once again
the sincerest condolences of the people and
Government of Guinea to the bereaved families and the
United Nations family as a whole for these irreparable
losses, which have affected dedicated and talented staff
members who have devoted their recognized
experience and expertise to the service of the Iraqi
people.

We are especially shocked that the United
Nations has lost one of the leading lights in its
diplomatic, human rights and peacekeeping work
through this unspeakable attack: the greatly lamented
Sergio Vieira de Mello. The statement that he made to
us in this context highlights the magnitude of the
challenges that the Council must meet to accomplish its
vital mandate of promoting international peace and
security.

My delegation believes that the Council has the
imperative duty to reflect on the most appropriate ways
and means to stem the manichean designs of the
terrorists. We think it is no accident that the attack
against the United Nations occurred only four days
after the adoption of the Security Council resolution
that officially established the United Nations mission
in Iraq, and following a strengthening of its presence
there. Nor is it coincidental that that attack was
planned and carried out to make it the deadliest assault
on the United Nations since its establishment in 1945.
We are convinced that the terrorists have a fundamental
objective: to jeopardize the achievements made in Iraq
by preventing the economic, political and institutional
reforms under way as a result of the moment
established by the coalition and with the assistance of
the international community.

The two briefings clearly showed that the
situation in Iraq was improving in a relatively
satisfactory way from the humanitarian, institutional
and political standpoint. My delegation commends the
laudable efforts made by the members of the coalition,
which have made it possible to put an end to years of
repression, discrimination, suffering and deprivation of
individual and collective freedoms. We welcome the
achievements already made in the economic,
infrastructural, political and cultural spheres. We are
pleased to see that despite the violence, Iraqis are
increasingly responsible for their fate and that an
interim Governing Council that reflects national
diversity has been established. The Government of
Guinea fully supports the work of that Council.

The attack of last Tuesday strengthens my
delegation's conviction that the Security Council must
support the process of reconstructing a new Iraq,
particularly by promoting the establishment of new and
democratic institutions.

We believe that the heinous and unacceptable act
that has just struck the United Nations should not
discourage the international community. We must be
increasingly aware of the need to give an enlarged and
consolidated mandate to the United Nations so that it
can meet the present challenge.

We must stay the course and reconsider the
structure of our mission in Iraq, particularly the
security measures that can be taken immediately. It
would be useful for the Secretary-General to evaluate
as soon as possible the situation on the ground to create
more reliable security and safety conditions to carry
out the work of our Organization. The security task is
indeed our highest priority. It must receive our fullest
attention if we are to succeed. Everything must be done
to arrest and bring to justice the perpetrators of the
attack. The humanitarian efforts of the international
community must be pursued and strengthened. We
must make unfailing efforts to help the suffering Iraqi
people to take their destiny in their own hands.

In conclusion, my country would like to
encourage the activities of the coalition, the
international community and all those who are working
on the ground to build a peaceful, safe, democratic and
reconciled Iraq.

