Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye-Brook
Zerihoun, the Chief Monitor of the Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Ambassador Ertugrul
Apakan, and the Special Representative of the OSCE
Chairperson-in-office in Ukraine, Ambassador Martin
Sajdik, for their briefings. We also welcome the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs okaraine to this meeting.

After a period of calm, with a ceasefire holding
since the last quarter of 2015, violence has returned
to the east of Ukraine, marking the end of a period
of hope for better days in the country. Deaths of
civilians, disappearances, violations of women's rights,
displacement of people, humanitarian crises and human
misery will again become realities of life in eastern
Ukraine unless a ceasefire and cessation of hostilities
are not reinstated in earnest.

We reiterate our support for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, which were endorsed by
the Security Council through resolution 2202 (2015),
and for a permanent ceasefire, as the prerequisites for
the speedy implementation of the Minsk agreements'
package of measures and ultimately the establishment
of a durable and sustainable peace in Ukraine.

We are deeply concerned by the worsening conflict
in eastern Ukraine. Reports of increasing ceasefire
violations, mainly in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
are matters of concern. We regret the restrictions
imposed on the freedom of movement of the Special
Monitoring Mission and express our total disapproval
that heavy weapons previously withdrawn from the
front lines are missing from the permanent storage
sites and are being used by the belligerents. Also of
concern is the situation of internally displaced persons
as a consequence of the reported incidents, while
humanitarian access is increasingly restricted and
serious security incidents are being reported.

We regret constraints on humanitarian access and
urge all parties to the conflict to facilitate the safe, rapid
and unimpeded access by humanitarian organizations
to the areas and people in need. Once again, we call for
the immediate cessation of hostilities, the withdrawal
of all heavy weapons and the full implementation of
the Minsk agreement's package of measures. We
furthermore call for full access for the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission and for monitoring and verifying
compliance with the Minsk agreements and urge strict
respect for international commitments agreed under
international guarantees so that the people of Ukraine
are allowed to live in peace, freedom and security.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts through dialogue and negotiations
and strict respect for the principles of international law
and the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine.

