Mr. Kung: First, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
having extended to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) this invitation to come and address the
Council about a subject of great concern not only to all
present here, but to millions of people throughout the
world. That subject is the very serious problems caused by
the widespread use of land-mines.

With 64 countries affected by land-mines and
approximately 24,000 victims of such mines every year,
there is no doubt that mine clearance is a priority for the
world community. Although the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) does not itself undertake mine
clearance, it is often called upon to give advice as to the
priority areas to clear in order to enable humanitarian relief
to reach those in need and in order to enable a war-torn
country to begin its reconstruction. We also undertake a
number of mine-awareness programmes. However, the fact
that we are present in these areas also means that we are
fully aware of the total insufficiency of these measures. The
extreme difficulties involved in mine clearance, which make
it a very time-consuming, dangerous and expensive task,
cannot be overestimated. The ICRC has seen that even
establishing the presence of minefields frequently depends
on anecdotal indications by locals of where an animal or a
person was blown up by one. Mines are also frequently
found in areas very far removed from their original point of
emplacement due to the effects of rain or soil movements.
Not only does the presence of mines hamper our efforts to
bring relief to victims of war, frequently entailing expensive
airlifts of relief supplies rather than the use of roads, but
also Red Cross and Red Crescent personnel have been
killed and injured by mines on roads which were supposed
to be safe.

The ICRC is convinced that major efforts must be
made to clear the mines that have already been laid, a task
which the Secretary-General has estimated will cost about
$33 billion. However, although tens of millions of dollars
are being spent each year on clearance, far more mines
continue to be laid than can be removed.

The ICRC is convinced that mine-clearance, although
essential, can never be seen as the solution to the problem,
for it will not significantly improve the present situation as
long as mines continue to be used. The ICRC has very
rarely called for the ban of a specific weapon, and therefore
only does so if it is sure that very weighty reasons require
such a step.

First, our surgeons, who have had many years of
experience in treating war wounds, have stressed that
anti-personnel land-mines cause by far the worst injuries
of all conventional weapons. They are very difficult to
treat, require multiple operations and usually result in
maiming or death. It is certainly arguable that the nature
of the injury is excessively serious when compared with
the military purpose of such mines. Secondly, statistics
from our hospitals and orthopaedic centres show that the
majority of victims are civilians, including thousands
upon thousands of women and children. We have also
consistently seen a dramatic rise in land-mine deaths and
injuries at the end of hostilities, when displaced persons
try to return to their homes and rebuild their normal lives.
There is no doubt in our minds of the inherently
indiscriminate nature of this weapon.

Then there are the profound economic consequences
provoked by these weapons: whole regions needed to
support and feed large communities of people, often
located in the poorest parts of the planet, are closed to
agricultural, social and economic development. A severe
deprivation of resources can last for decades since the
cost and time required to demine these areas is truly
phenomenal. Land-mines also severely hamper the
universally accepted need to provide aid to the victims of
conflict, for the suspected presence of mines hinders
humanitarian operations, depriving whole communities of
access to essential emergency relief.

The preponderant argument against a total ban is the
military utility of anti-personnel land-mines, which is
written into the military doctrine of most armies. As
international humanitarian law is based on a balance
between military and humanitarian needs, the ICRC has
long had extensive contacts with the military in order to
arrive at a balanced judgement on any issue. We therefore
decided to commission a study by senior military officers,
both retired and active, from a number of armed forces,
to look specifically at the military use and effectiveness
of such weapons. In studying some 26 post-Second World
War conflicts, including all the international ones, this
study found that mines could rarely be used, even by
professional armies, in accordance with military doctrine
and that their effect on the tactical situation was at best
marginal. In many situations, their military effect was
even counterproductive for the user. We would be pleased
to provide a copy of this study to those of you who wish
to have one.

We are also aware that obstacles to solving the land-
mine crisis include existing and prospective commercial
contracts, the huge bulk of land-mines already laid or
stockpiled and their continued manufacture. Unless firm

 

action is taken, the number of innocent victims will
continue to grow and recovery of countries after war will
be further hindered. This is being increasingly recognized
by States: over 60 nations already support a global ban on
anti-personnel land-mines. Multinational forums, such as
the Organization of African Unity, the Organization of
American States and the European Parliament, have also
endorsed such a ban.

The ICRC participated in the conference that led to the
amendment of Protocol II of the 1980 United Nations
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. Although
major efforts were certainly made to arrive at the best
possible consensus, the ICRC fears that the amended
Protocol will not significantly reduce the extent of the land-
mine problem for reasons that were made known at the
time by the ICRC, by a number of States themselves and
by a large number of organizations. It is our view that
anti-personnel mines must be banned and severe restrictions
placed on anti-vehicle mines.

In early October, at a conference in Ottawa, Canada,
representatives from many countries will meet to debate
new forms of action and determine new ways of achieving
the common goal of eliminating anti-personnel mines. For
the ICRC this is a most welcome development, and we are
convinced that such national and regional initiatives will
pave the way for achieving a genuine consensus in favour
of a ban. The alternative will be countless new victims,
further destruction of economic and development potential
and endless pouring of truly enormous amounts of money
for demining, the end result of which will be more mines
and not fewer. We sincerely hope that the world community
will take the only humane and the only logical decision.

