The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia reiterates its deep concern about the acts
of violence that occurred in Rakhine state in August
2017 and their aftermath, which led to the displacement
of approximately 900,000 people to Bangladesh,
where they are living in difficult conditions. That
violence cannot go unpunished. Those deeds must
be investigated, and the people responsible for them
identified and brought to justice to answer for them in
the appropriate courts. The work of the independent
commission of inquiry on Rakhine state established
at the end of July is key to achieving that goal. To
that end, it is essential that all the relevant agencies
and institutions cooperate with the commission's
investigations and provide all the information needed
to ensure that the perpetrators do not continue to enjoy
impunity. We want to emphasize in that regard that
since its establishment, the commission has held three
meetings with officials at various levels of Government
and members of the populations affected.

We would like to highlight the efforts of regional
actors to bring the parties together and promote dialogue
between them, such as the meeting held on 27 September
with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Myanmar and
Bangladesh at the initiative of China's Minister for
Foreign Affairs, which the Secretary-General attended.
An agreement was reached at that meeting to resolve the
issue through amicable consultations among the parties,
coordinate the repatriation of a first group of displaced
persons and hold a joint meeting to develop a road map
and timetable to achieve that goal. We also want to
point to the meeting in Beijing on 29 June between the
Foreign Ministers of Myanmar and Bangladesh, also
initiated by China's Minister for Foreign Affairs, during
which the basic principles for four points for resolving
the situation of the Rohingya refugees were agreed
on - finding a way to stop the violence, beginning
the work of repatriation, implementing projects and
sustainable development programmes to the benefit
of both parties and thereby strengthening relations of
trust and cooperation between the Governments of
Bangladesh and Myanmar. It is that type of positive
action that should be at the forefront of promoting the
resolution of the situation in Myanmar.

On the other hand, it is also important to
strengthen the cooperation and coordination work
for the repatriation of Rohingya refugees that the
Government of Myanmar is developing together with
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in the framework of the memorandum
of understanding signed on 6 June. As a result of its
implementation, 23 villages were evaluated in July and
26 additional villages are currently being evaluated. In
addition, the international community should provide
all possible support to the Governments of Bangladesh
and Myanmar for the implementation of the framework
for a dignified, safe, voluntary and transparent return
of the refugees to their places of origin and encourage
the fulfilment of the remaining tasks. In that regard, we
have taken note of the visit to Myanmar of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar, which
concluded a few days ago.

Finally, as all the other delegations have done, my
delegation acknowledges and commends the efforts
that the Government of Bangladesh has made over the
past year with regard to the refugees in its country.
In that regard, it is imperative that the international
community and the United Nations do everything
possible to support host communities in Bangladesh
and ensure that they have access to short-, medium- and
long-term development incentives.

I shall make a brief reference to what we heard at
the end of the statement made by the representative
of the United States. I will be very brief so as not to
distract the Council's attention from the subject that
brings us together today. I would like to point out that I
agree with the Permanent Representative of the United
States that there are ways of doing things at the United
Nations. There are ways to have relations of cooperation
and mutual respect among Member State. And there is
also the other way - to use and instrumentalize the
United Nations and its facilities for political purposes,
or to use and instrumentalize the issue of human rights
with a double standard and for political purposes. My
delegation, in its national capacity, is not going to ask
anyone for permission on how to behave or act. On the
other hand, we insist that United Nations facilities not
be used for political purposes.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Myanmar.

