Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, may I first of all congratulate you and,
through you, the Republic of Bangladesh on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. We are aware of and grateful for
the leadership that your delegation, under the direction
of Ambassador Chowdhury, has been exercising in the
defence of the interests and the positions of the
developing countries within this important body. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General for his valuable
report on the prevention of armed conflict. We also
appreciate the introduction provided to us this morning
by the Deputy Secretary-General.

We trust that this report will be the subject of a
broad discussion in each of the organs of the United
Nations. Therefore on this occasion I will emphasize
only those aspects that relate to the activities of the
Security Council itself, while in the months to come we
hope to discuss the relevant sections in the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.

My delegation agrees completely with the
Secretary-General that the United Nations and the
international community have the essential moral
obligation to prevent armed conflict and other threats
to international peace and security. This obligation
stems not only from the fundamental provisions of the
United Nations Charter, but also from the basic
principles of solidarity and fraternity among all human
beings. This means that we cannot continue to be
passive witnesses to innumerable acts of genocide, to
massacres and to wars.

The promotion of peace requires a continued and
sustained effort to create an environment of mutual
respect and of rejection of violence. A genuine and
sustainable peace can be achieved only when proper
living conditions are insured for all our inhabitants and
when there is a sufficient level of economic
development for everyone to meet his basic needs,
when fundamental human rights are respected and
when social and political differences are resolved
through democratic channels.

For this reason, early prevention of armed
conflict means that we must confront the profound
structural causes of crises. The effective prevention of
conflicts thus requires that we adopt preventive
measures aimed at meeting the many needs in relation
to food, health, housing, drinking water, education, job
training, employment, fair wages, productivity,
competitiveness and access to opportunities. It also
means that we must establish and strengthen democracy,
good governance and respect for human rights.

We believe that in accordance with the wise
distribution of competence established by the Charter,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council are the appropriate bodies to implement and
coordinate efforts to tackle the structural causes of
armed conflicts. The Security Council, for its part, has
the task of what has been termed operational
prevention, which is aimed at adopting measures with
regard to an imminent crisis.

Nonetheless, it is impossible to establish an iron-
clad distinction among which activities must be carried
out by which organ. For this reason, my delegation
advocates the utmost coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council, on the one hand, and the
Economic and Social Council and General Assembly,
on the other.

The Secretary-General has indicated to us that the
fundamental responsibility for conflict prevention rests
with governments and local authorities. This principle
is correct to the extent that the government and
authorities are effective, responsible and democratic.
Unfortunately, historical experience has taught us that
in many cases it is the governments and political
leaders themselves who fuel social tension and promote
armed conflict.

The harmful circumstances of poverty,
underdevelopment, ethnic differences, health problems,
gender differences, or lack of educational opportunities
in and of themselves do not produce armed conflicts.
These structural factors can cause violence only if there
are political leaders that are prepared to incite to
Violence those groups that are voicing their claims. In
this respect, the presence of political leaders who are
prepared to handle social complaints and demands by
violent means with a view to satisfying selfish political
and economic ambitions is the real cause of, and an
inevitable catalyst of, social violence and armed
conflicts.

Allow me to offer a few concrete examples. Both
in the Great Lakes region and in the Balkans, it was the
political leaders, in the governments and in the
opposition, who fuelled and made negative use of
ethnic differences in order to consolidate their
respective power bases. The political leaders
intentionally ignited ethnic violence as an instrument
for promoting their corrupt objectives. The armed
conflicts and the genocide that we witnessed were the
premeditated creation of precisely those who had the
responsibility to defend the population.
In Zaire and in Haiti, the armed conflicts resulted
from the actions of hardened, corrupt, dictatorial
governments that turned their backs on the civilian
population and established violence as the norm of
political discourse and squandered national resources.
The governments themselves created the conditions for
conflagration.

My delegation believes that the principal means
of preventing armed conflict over the long term is to
support and demand practices of good government, the
rule of law, democracy, representative government and
respect for human rights. We welcome the initiative of
the Secretary-General to present to the Security Council
periodic reports on potential threats to the peace. There
is no doubt that this type of information will make it
possible both for the Secretariat and for members of
the Council to tackle the sources of conflict.

Nonetheless, we would recommend utmost
prudence in this endeavour. Experience shows us that
on some occasions, when international opinion is
suddenly focused on a situation that is already tense,
the situation can become further destabilized, and it
may be more difficult to find a peaceful way out of the
crisis. In this respect, we believe that a careful,
reserved and quiet exercise of preventive diplomacy
may be preferable to public action by the Council. We
must above all avoid allowing parties to a conflict from
using the United Nations or the Security Council as a
means to legitimize their claims or aspirations.

We are gratified to note the sending of fact-
finding missions composed of permanent representatives
of members of the Security Council. We recognize that
on some occasions these can serve to convey important
political messages. Nonetheless, we do believe that the
scope of these missions must not be exaggerated. We
wonder about the usefulness of a quick and superficial
mission whose members are not experts in the region
or experts regarding a specific conflict. For this reason
my delegation would tend to favour in-depth
investigative missions composed of real experts.

Furthermore, my delegation has serious doubts
about the appropriateness of creating a new subsidiary
body of the Security Council to study the subject of the
prevention of armed conflicts. Our experience shows
that the proliferation of Council committees reduces
the Council's transparency, does not increase its
effectiveness and limits its legitimacy.

In order to effectively prevent armed conflict the
United Nations needs the firm and sustained support of
all Member States. We must not forget the accusations
levelled against us just a few months ago in the
Brahimi report, which said that the failures of the
Organization are the result of a lack of commitment on
the part of Member States. For this reason, if we really
want the United Nations to be capable of preventing
conflicts, it is essential that we provide it with
financial, operational and logistical resources that are
commensurate with the magnitude of the task. If the
Member States are not truly prepared to support the
Organization, then they should not take on this new
challenge.

