Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), which
was set up by the Security Council and includes Russian
military observers, has played an extremely important
stabilizing role. Its work has been effective and has
allowed for the establishment of an environment that
is conducive to advancement towards a political
settlement ofthis long-standing issue, based on Security
Council resolutions.

The relevant Security Council resolutions clearly
set out that the form of the settlement must be acceptable
to the parties, Morocco and the Polisario Front, and
must provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara within the context of the procedures
and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Monitoring the ceasefire is one of
the key roles of the Mission; however, the political
component is also of considerable importance. Since no
one has changed the final goal, which was established
through international decisions, the parties must
realize that, without United Nations assistance, the
difficult path towards a mutually acceptable settlement
is unthinkable.

The situation concerning the Mission is, however, a
cause for deep concern. We know that specific steps are
being taken in order to diffuse the tension, but they have
not yielded the hoped-for result. The actions that have
been taken with regard to United Nations personnel may
negatively impact the situation in the region, and what
is very important for international peace and security,
namely, United Nations peacekeeping efforts, has been
made more difficult to implement. The confrontational
approach must be replaced by a responsible one based
on unconditional respect for Security Council decisions.
The work of the Mission must be fully re-established.
We need to bring all staff back to their responsibilities
as soon as possible, so that they can fulfil unhindered
the functions that have been assigned to them.

In our View, the text of resolution 2285 (2016),
which extends the mandate of the Mission for the next
12 months suffers from substantive shortcomings. We
were therefore unable to vote in favour of the resolution.
The ninth preambular paragraph mentions serious and
credible efforts to move the process forward towards a
solution. Everyone who is aware of the current situation

will say that that text has been outpaced by events and
sends the wrong political message.

However, we would particularly stress the fact
that we appreciate our good and historically friendly
relationships with countries in the region, including,
of course, Morocco, which are based on their
multidimensional plans for development and respect
and concern for each other's interests. Concerning
the artificially exacerbated situation with regard to
MINURSO, we should not forget the key task, which is
to get a dialogue going between the parties, and that is of
fundamental importance to efforts to support security
and stability in that part of the world. In that regard, a
positive role could be played by the African Union.

