Ms. Sarne (Philippines): On behalf of my
delegation, I wish to extend my warmest
congratulations to Judge Fausto Pocar on his election
to the presidency of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to wish him
success in his term and in his future endeavours with
the Tribunal. I would also like to extend my
delegation's commendation to Judge Theodor Meron
for the achievements and progress the Tribunal
achieved under his leadership.

At the outset, I would like to thank President
Mose, President Pocar and Prosecutors Del Ponte and
Jallow for their reports. My delegation notes with
satisfaction much of the progress made since their last
reports, particularly the changes and new procedures
implemented to increase the efficiency of the working
methods of the two Tribunals.

On the ICTY, we await the further report of the
working group on speeding up trials * in particular its
views on increasing the efficient disposal of pre-trial
motions. We note with satisfaction that the
recommendations of the working group on speeding up
appeals, which were implemented in September and
November of 2005, have increased the efficiency of
proceedings before the Appeals Chamber.

Of particular note is the foresight shown by the
court in realizing the importance of e-technology in
enhancing its work. The integration of case-related
documents into a central electronic database, the
e-Court system, increases the accessibility of
information needed in writing a judgement. It is the
hope of my delegation that technical problems
associated with the proper functioning of the system
will be remedied soon.

We take note with much satisfaction the
apprehension of Ante Gotovina. We laud the efforts of
the Spanish and Croatian Governments in facilitating
his arrest and his transfer to the ICTY. It is through
cooperative efforts among States such as this, that
perpetrators of horrific crimes against humanity are
brought to justice.

Concerning the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), we are encouraged by the efforts
of the Prosecutor in formulating a more aggressive
programme for tracking and apprehending fugitives
and in requesting cooperation with Member States in
that regard. In our last intervention, we welcomed the
new procedures followed by the ICTR Chambers in
restricting the length of examination-in-chief and
cross-examination, without unduly detracting from
principles of fair trial. These, as well as the adoption of
measures to regulate the pre-trial process and to restrict
the number of interlocutory appeals have greatly
contributed to the efficiency of the working methods of
the Rwanda Tribunal.

We laud all the efforts of the two Tribunals in
referring middle- and low-level cases to competent
national jurisdictions and undertaking measures to
build the local capacity of national courts. While the
principal judicial purpose of the two Tribunals has
been to recover the universality and equal application
of the law, both have also been designed to promote
peace by restoring the authority of law and justice in
communities that have been victimized by such
atrocities. The Tribunals are thus meant to foster
national reconciliation.

My delegation believes that the international
criminal tribunals represent forums - and even
symbols - of transitional justice whose verdicts need
to be consolidated through national prosecutions. The
restoration of law and justice must then be founded and
affirmed in national communities through their laws,
courts and constitutions.

My delegation is aware that issues of justice,
healing, reconciliation and accountability need to be
addressed in a way that is owned by and rooted in the
affected communities. Mechanisms for ensuring the
engagement and participation of stakeholders across
the affected countries are essential.

Building peace and reconciliation and healing the
effects of war and violence will require sustained
efforts over time. Most of all, sincere and committed
support for the people who choose to build their own
future and their own processes for reconciliation and
healing is likewise needed. It is important to recognize
that, in the long run, there can be no reconciliation
without justice. For only if there is justice can social
healing occur.

My delegation congratulates the Tribunals on
carrying out their work at full capacity and integrating
time-saving measures that do not detract from the
international standards of justice and due process. My
delegation is fully cognizant of the challenges and
difficulties in achieving the completion strategies,
specifically the requirement for the completion of all
trials in accordance with the Tribunals' respective
mandates. We appeal to all States to fully cooperate
with the Tribunals, specifically in bringing the
fugitives to justice, as that is crucial to the achievement
of the strategies. My delegation would not want to see
any further adjustment to the completion strategies.
