Mr. Schmitz: We appreciate this opportunity to
explain how the World Customs Organization (WCO)
might assist in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Customs administrations worldwide face the
trade-security/trade-facilitation dilemma. On one hand,
there is the continuing growth in legitimate
international trade, while on the other hand there is the
illicit cross-border movement of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), drugs, counterfeit merchandise,
dual-use chemicals, small arms, undeclared
merchandise, currency, cultural property, hazardous
materials and individuals.

In the light of the terrorist threat to the global
economy, nations seek from their customs
administrations economic and physical security, while
international traders look for uniformity, predictability,
transparency and efficiency in their dealings with
customs agencies. The WCO finds itself in the business
of globalizing and to the extent possible standardizing
customs control efforts to improve both the security
and the facilitation of the global supply chain. Our
most Visible effort to that end is the Framework of
Standards - known as SAFE - a global supply chain
security initiative developed at the WCO by the
international trade community and WCO member
customs administrations.

In the 15 to 20 years prior to 11 September 2001,
customs administrations, particularly in the developed
world, began focusing more on trade facilitation rather
than continuing to support unnecessary customs
controls. At the WCO, that trade facilitation focus led
to the negotiation of the revised Kyoto Convention on
the simplification and harmonization of customs
procedures in 1999. Today, 52 WCO members,
including all of the world's major trading nations, are
signatories to the revised Kyoto Convention. However,
9/11 caused the world to refocus on customs control
and to face a simple truth: that every nation has an
absolute right to determine who and what will cross its
national borders. The instrument of this exercise of
sovereign control is customs.

The joint industry customs task force that worked
on the Framework built upon the work done on the
revised Kyoto Convention and has produced guidelines
on integrated border management, which is the single
window through which to coordinate border agencies;
integrated supply-chain management, which
coordinates all links in the global supply chain; a
revised data model that provides harmonized form and
content of messages; and unique consignment
reference policies, so that a shipment can be identified
from origin to destination.

Working together, customs and the private sector
produced the SAFE Framework of Standards. It was
unanimously adopted by the WCO Council in June
2005, and in June 2006 the WCO Council approved a
document on authorized economic operators as part of
the SAFE Framework. To date, 144 of our 171
members have signed letters of intent to
implementation the SAFE Framework. The theory
underlying the SAFE Framework is that appropriate,
focused and layered trade security measures will
actually facilitate the movement of legitimate trade
across national boundaries and thereby protect the
global economy. The SAFE Framework reflects the
realization of the fact that security and facilitation are
inextricably intertwined.

The SAFE Framework has four core elements:
advanced electronic manifest information; a consistent
risk management approach; at the request of the
importing nation, the outbound inspection of high-risk
cargo at the point of export using non-intrusive
detection equipment; and enhanced trade facilitation
for legitimate trade that meets certain security
standards. The SAFE Framework is built on two
pillars: customs-to-customs network arrangements and
customs-to-business partnerships. While not
specifically set forth in the SAFE Framework, there is
in reality a third pillar, namely customs cooperation
with other national, regional and international
Government organizations that have border control
responsibilities.

The WCO has engaged other regional and
international organizations such as the United Nations,
the World Trade Organization, the International
Maritime Organization, the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the International Organization for
8

Standardization, the International Labour Organization,
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe,
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, the
European Union and the African Union, to ensure that
the SAFE Framework is compatible with other security
and facilitation guidelines being developed by those
organizations and does not unduly burden the private
sector with conflicting security standards.

We also work closely with the Security Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Group of Eight, the
World Health Organization, Interpol, the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other international organizations on security
matters that can impact the global supply chain. We
work with those organizations on training and
capacity-building efforts.

The SAFE Framework is a concept that moves
customs focus from importation to exportation for
security purposes. However, by focusing on the
exportation of goods, customs will actually increase
the facilitation of cargo upon importation. The concept
is to identify high-risk shipments early in the global
supply chain - at or before exportation - to allow for
appropriate and timely control of high-risk cargo prior
to its introduction into the global supply chain's more
vulnerable transportation network. The SAFE
Framework foresees the rapid release of legitimate
cargo upon its importation by identifying international
traders that demonstrate an appropriate degree of
security within their supply chain. That concept pushes
security further back in the global supply chain by
involving the private sector, which has increased
security in its supply chains.

How are we doing with this balancing act
between security and facilitation? We are doing better
than we were five years ago, but we are not yet where
we want to be. Technology has been an enabler, but
infrastructure and customs staffing are still real issues
we have to face. Inevitably, trade volumes have
continued to grow and security needs have increased. It
has long been apparent to customs agencies that there
are no physical security processes that can be
successfully applied to match an ever-expanding threat
potential while at the same time facilitating the rapid
clearance of legitimate trade across national borders.
Therefore, the sole means by which the safety of the
07-24806
global supply chain can be secured without imposing a
crippling impact on the necessary free flow of
legitimate trade, is through the consistent and effective
application of well-reasoned risk management regimes
along with the effective use of technology and customs
best practices in security and facilitation.

The WCO programme to control the exportation
and importation of nuclear and radiological materials
was developed nearly 15 years ago to further customs
agencies' efforts to protect the societies they serve. Ten
years ago, working with IAEA, WCO developed
recommendations covering customs actions against
illegal cross-border movement of nuclear and
hazardous materials. Those comprehensive
recommendations urged our members' administrations
to recognize the need for the prevention, detection and
repression of illicit movements of nuclear and
hazardous substances. It called for appropriate
legislation and powers to deal with all aspects of illegal
trafficking in nuclear and hazardous material. It called
for cooperation and the sharing of information on
trafficking, and urged efforts to detect illicit cross-
border movements.

WCO and IAEA entered into a memorandum of
understanding in 1998; we exchange illicit trafficking
data, co-sponsor seminars and jointly develop technical
and training materials. We also collaborate with IAEA
in the production of technical documents on
prevention, detection and response. We have
participated with IAEA in customs radiation safety
training courses and reviewed IAEA illicit trafficking
handbooks and guidelines for monitoring radioactive
material in the international mail. We have also
developed a secure encrypted customs enforcement
network, which permits customs services to exchange
information and communications and includes
databases on nuclear materials and hazardous
substances.

WCO has also, in the past two years, participated
with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee
in seven missions to assess the measures employed by
countries to bring themselves into compliance with
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), which in part
requires enhanced border security to prevent acts of
terrorism.

At the end of the day, the one barrier that the
actors in this play must cross is customs, and WCO and
its member administrations stand ready to assist the
07-24806
United Nations and the members of this Council in
their efforts.

