Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. President, may I first of all extend my
thanks to the Secretariat for the report that has been
introduced to us by Mr. Mark Malloch Brown.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to reform of the procurement system in the United
Nations, fully in accordance with the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on enhancing the
effectiveness and transparency of procurement,
ensuring equal access to the United Nations market for
all suppliers in good standing from all United Nations
Member States and removing any possibility of
duplication of function, fraud or abusive authority. In
our view, matters relating to improving the planning of
peacekeeping operations and the managing and
equipping of such operations should be the focus of
attention here in the Security Council. We must also
seek to ensure that solutions to such problems are fully
in accordance with the more complicated nature and
scale of peacekeeping operations.

As for procurement activities, they must be
transparent, swift and flexible, as regards both the
operational level and long-term planning. There must
also not be any superfluous expenditure. This is
something that must be monitored by the States
Members of the United Nations.

The Russian delegation notes the appearance of
the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on procurement for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There is a broad collection of
recommendations in this report that relate to key issues
on procurement in the United Nations, including those
on how to improve the quality of planning procurement
for peacekeeping operations, on ensuring clear
interaction between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the procurement services, on improving
monitoring of the costs of contracts, on registration and
decision-making on the awarding of contracts to
suppliers, on avoiding conflicts of interest in
procurement, and so forth.

In principle, the recommendations in the report
are in line with improving United Nations procurement
activities to the maximum possible. However, they do
need thorough and careful analysis. We believe the
Secretary-General will soon be submitting a
comprehensive report to the General Assembly on this
matter, as provided for in resolution 59/296 on the
administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is
our hope that this report will also include specific
proposals on further improving procurement activities
in the United Nations.

The Russian delegation believes it is important
that today's Security Council meeting should provide
further impetus for the future work in the Organization
on improving the effectiveness of procurement and the
adoption of effective measures to prevent and eliminate
any financial violations in planning and equipping
peacekeeping missions.

