Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing. Recently, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made progress in the fields of
national reconciliation, economic development and the
rule of law. The situation of the country as a whole has
remained stable. China welcomes those developments,
while it notes the difficulties and challenges that
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face in its efforts
to stabilize the country and enhance the development,
support and help it continues to need from the
international community.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. China also respects the choice of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina with regard to the
future of their country and encourages all ethnic groups
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to live in peace and harmony
and pursue their common development. We hope that all
the ethnic groups of Bosnia and Herzegovina will stay
focused on the well-being and long-term interest of the
nation, and take practical measures to build up political
trust, promote national reconciliation, consolidate the
gains of the political process, settle their differences
through dialogue, fully implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement, and continue to strive for greater progress
in all fields of reconstruction.

The preservation of peace and stability and the
promotion economic development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is in the common interest of all parties.
The question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is extremely
complex and sensitive because it not only involves
Bosnia and Herzegovina itself, but also bears on
the peace and stability of the entire Balkan region.
Therefore, the international community should take a
prudent approach to the matter and pay great attention
to the views and concerns of all parties.

China welcomes High Representative Inzko's
efforts to promote the political process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and hopes that he will continue to play a
positive and constructive role in the implementation of
the Dayton Agreement, as mandated.

China supports the extension of the mandate of
the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR) and hopes that the Force will increase its
support for the capacity-building of the armed forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina so that the authorities will
be able to assume full responsibility for safeguarding
the national sovereignty, security and stability of their
country at an early date. China is ready to join the rest
of the international community in the ongoing effort
to contribute to the achievement of lasting peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

