Mr. Tfirk (Slovenia): It gives us great satisfaction
to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council's
present discussion on protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations.
The subject is vast and important, and we hope that this
discussion will contribute to the quality of the future
decisions and other activities of the Security Council. We

 

commend you for your wisdom and perseverance, which
made this discussion possible.

Each year the General Assembly considers the report
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
The recommendations adopted by the General Assembly
relate to all aspects of the problems of refugees, as well as
to specific areas of priority concern. As such, they represent
a helpful contribution to the decision-making of the
Security Council. We believe that the present discussion
should proceed from that body of opinion and attempt to
take a step forward towards identifying the current priorities
for the Security Council, or, as appropriate, towards
drawing the necessary lessons which should guide future
action.

In the period following the end of the cold war,
humanitarian crises and the resulting refugee flows
proliferated at an unprecedented rate. For many
Governments and other international actors,
humanitarianism has occupied a central place. Most often
humanitarian emergency situations reflected a variety of
symptoms and causes, and were most often described as
complex emergency situations - a term which has
emphasized the need for an urgent and comprehensive
response.

However, the terminology of complex emergency
situations added little to the capacity to explain the
principal causes of conflict or to the ability to devise
adequate policies in response to emergency situations.
Obviously, adding a sense of urgency to the search for
solutions does not always guarantee the adequacy of the
solutions proposed.
The first, and perhaps the most important, lesson
learned in these few years is, I believe, clear and simple:
humanitarian action must not be used as a substitute for
political or- where needed - military action. In his
recent statement to the United Nations Association of Japan
on 13 May 1997, the Secretary-General referred to this
lesson by stating the following:

"Humanitarian assistance is essential. But there
is a growing recognition of the fact that emergency
relief is only a palliative. It offers crucial but only
temporary succour from often terrible circumstances.
It is no substitute for action aimed at tackling the
roots of a crisis".

The basic question for the Security Council in its
effort to protect humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations is the question of a political
framework for humanitarian action. Much has been said
about this question in past years. It is useful to recall the
opinions and recommendations put forward at a recent
meeting - the most recent in the cycle of Singapore
conferences - which discussed, at the end of February
this year, the interface between humanitarian action and
peacekeeping operations. The opening part of the
concluding document of the Singapore Conference can be
summarized in the following two basic points.

First, the responsibility of the Security Council
remains a key element in the international community's
response to humanitarian crises. In several cases which
involved complex emergencies, the decision-making
process of the Council did not often work well. For a
number of reasons, some of the Council's decisions and
resolutions have been weak, inconsistent, ambiguous, ill-
timed and, in certain instances, too numerous. This flaw
has had far-reaching implications for the operations in the
field, both for the victims of the conflicts, and for
others - in particular, peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers.

Secondly, the Security Council defines the mandates
and objectives of United Nations operations. It thereby
determines the political framework for both military and
humanitarian action. Its approach, its grasp of the issues,
and the degree of unity among its members will
determine the success or failure of missions.

It could be added that it is essential that the
mandates and objectives of United Nations military
operations be defined with precision and coherence and
that the fundamental distinction between peacekeeping
and peace enforcement be kept in mind in the preparation
of decisions.
This does not mean that the Security Council should
necessarily refrain from military enforcement in all
situations. Quite to the contrary - as, most specifically,
the experience in Bosnia and Herzegovina showed -
peace enforcement may be the only effective response to
the mounting problems of a complex emergency situation.
Furthermore, the elements of enforcement action proved
to be more effective and less risky in that situation than
originally thought.

Another lesson re-learned in the past few years is
that prevention is always better than cure. Moreover,
recent practice has showed that prevention is possible. In
addition to preventive diplomacy, which is always the

 

preferred option, albeit not always an available one,
preventive deployment may considerably reduce the danger
of complex emergencies. The multinational protection force
for Albania, established in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1101 (1997) of 28 March this year is the
most recent example of such a preventive operation.
Slovenia is among the Member States contributing troops
to that operation.

The multinational protection force has already
provided important experience. As suggested in the bi-
weekly reports of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council regarding that operation, the mere presence of the
protection force has an important stabilizing and therefore
preventive effect. This is important also because such a
preventive effect makes it possible to avoid some of the
more complex issues concerning cooperation between the
military force and humanitarian operations - that is, the
type of issues which would necessarily arise if the situation
were allowed to escalate into an armed conflict.

In a general, system-wide perspective, it is possible to
discern a variety of further mechanisms that have
considerable preventive potential which needs to be
developed further. Above all, carefully targeted economic
assistance and development aid can help prevent economic
problems from degenerating into political or ethnic conflicts
and the resulting humanitarian emergencies. A stronger and
more effective human-rights machinery would expose, in a
timely and objective manner, violations of human rights
leading to armed conflict or humanitarian emergencies. An
international criminal tribunal, once established and
operational, would deter potential perpetrators and planners
of crimes from such heinous acts as genocide and other
grave breaches of international humanitarian law.

While the Security Council cannot directly influence
the evolution of the United Nations system as a whole, it
has an important responsibility for the system-wide effects
of its actions. Most specifically, it must ensure the effective
functioning of the organs it has created. The two ad hoc
criminal tribunals created by the Security Council -
established with the task of bringing to justice persons
responsible for serious violations of humanitarian law in the
former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda - vitally depend on the
effectiveness that only the Security Council and its
members can provide. Furthermore, the success or failure
of these tribunals will be decisive for the establishment of
the future international criminal court. It is not difficult to
see the important preventive potential such an international
court could have, provided that it is given the necessary
effectiveness. And it is important to understand that the test
of the effectiveness of a future international criminal court
is not a matter for some distant future. The critical test
for the United Nations and its Security Council is today,
and it has to be passed now. The criminals must be
transferred to the tribunals for trial, and the Security
Council must demonstrate its ability and willingness to
ensure the effectiveness of the tribunals it has created.

Preventive action, while always preferable, is not
always possible. The challenges involved in the protection
of humanitarian action in conditions of active armed
conflict need to be dealt with. Recent practice appears to
give rise to several lessons which need to be taken into
consideration in the future. The problem of timeliness and
adequacy of response to an emergency situation continues
to haunt the Security Council. Moreover, in situations in
which military action is authorized or taken by the
Security Council, it is necessary to ensure that military
support for humanitarian action does not become a
substitute for the necessary political action. In particular,
the military should not be placed in the humiliating
position of being expected to implement an expanding
and insufficiently clear mandate and, at the same time,
being inadequately mandated or equipped to confront
gross violations of humanitarian law and human rights.
There is a need to clearly distinguish between
peacekeeping and peace-enforcement objectives. Shifting
from one objective to another within the same operation
can have very serious negative consequences on both the
military and the humanitarian components of the mission.

Another basic question relates to coordination of
humanitarian and political-military action. It appears that
the experience of recent years has confirmed the need for
a carefully coordinated approach. While it is necessary
that humanitarian activities, especially those carried out
by the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other non- governmental organizations, remain independent
and that the requisite humanitarian space is respected, it
remains equally important that the humanitarian aspects
of a United Nations operation be properly placed within
a comprehensive approach which includes political,
military and humanitarian aspects of the operation. And
again, humanitarian action should not be allowed to
become a substitute for political action.

In the process of delivering humanitarian assistance
and in the analytical work and decision-making of the
Security Council, it is necessary to ensure that protection
from violations of humanitarian law and human rights is
seen as an integral part of humanitarian and military
activity. As a minimum it is necessary to ensure that

 

military and civilian field personnel are not made silent
witnesses to grave violations of humanitarian law and
human rights.

Moreover, the experience of some recent peacekeeping
operations has shown that quick action by peacekeeping
forces can prevent gross abuses and can have a deterrent
effect, and, perhaps most important, that such action is
compatible with the role of peacekeepers. Peacekeepers and
other personnel must be properly trained in matters
concerning respect for humanitarian law and human rights.
The expected directives on international humanitarian law
for United Nations forces will be valuable in this context.

And finally, the United Nations should not condone
the abuse of human rights by its personnel. The cases of
abuse of the rights of children described in paragraph 98 of
the report by Ms. Graca Machel on the impact of armed
conflict on children (A/51/306) must be a source of serious
concern for the Security Council, and it is necessary to
ensure that similar practices do not occur in the future.

The reports of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to the General Assembly
describe the efforts to protect particularly vulnerable
groups, such as women and children, and the need to
provide special assistance to them. Their health care and
education deserve further effective assistance, and the
Security Council should consider, in each situation, the
most effective measures to make such assistance possible.
Slovenia, which has been a country of first asylum for
many refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, has made
special efforts to satisfy the needs of refugee children in the
fields of health care and education. It is important that the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has made
considerable progress in integrating the concern for the
special protection needs of these groups, especially those of
children, into the planning and implementation of
UNHCR's own programmes. Support for such programmes
is a vital necessity.

We believe that the Security Council and other United
Nations organs should also continue to support the concept
and practical programmes of the UNHCR's threefold
strategy, a strategy which includes prevention, emergency
assistance - including the encouragement of appropriate
regional approaches to situations which generate refugee
flows - and, finally, enabling the voluntary repatriation of
refugees.

In each of these three types of circumstances there is
a role for the Security Council. That role could be more or
less directly linked to the specific needs of refugees. For
example, the absence of an immediate threat to peace in
situations where the repatriation of refugees is delayed
does not mean that the Security Council can remain idle.
Its proper role should be sought in each of these types of
circumstances. While the work of the Security Council is
mainly situation-specific, a general discussion such as the
present one can help in addressing broader issues and in
providing guidance which will help in specific situations.

