Allow me at the outset to commend you, Sir, on the efficient manner in which you have been steering the work of the Security Council during the month of July, and to express my delegation's appreciation to you and the other Members of the Council for giving us this opportunity to address the alarming deterioration in the condition of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. I also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme for their valuable briefings. The crisis in Yemen continues to be one of the most pressing threats to international peace and security and one of the world's worst humanitarian catastrophes. Egypt continues to call for a comprehensive Yemeni-led and-owned political process leading to a peaceful settlement of the conflict in a manner that restores legitimacy and stability in accordance with the relevant Council resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, and the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference. In that regard, Egypt urges all parties to constructively engage with the ongoing efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen on a ceasefire agreement, accompanied by the urgently needed humanitarian and economic measures. Egypt also calls on all parties to implement the previous agreements reached in Stockholm, without further delay, in a manner that preserves the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Yemen. We also continue to condemn in the strongest terms the attacks against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and all actions that continue to fuel the conflict in Yemen and violate the relevant Council resolutions by providing the Houthis with weaponry, as has been alarmingly underscored in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/531), on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The deteriorating condition of the 44-year old FSO SAFER oil tanker represents a clear and imminent threat that could, at any moment, cause a massive environmental and economic catastrophe that would add to the tremendous suffering of the people of Yemen, as well as cause irreversible damage to the coastal States of the Red Sea, including Egypt. It would also undermine the safety of international maritime transportation through the strategic Strait of Bab El-Mandab, which is the southern gate to the Suez Canal. In that regard, Egypt joined five other States in bringing the expected environmental, humanitarian and economic damage to the attention of the Security Council in a detailed joint letter dated 11 March 2020 (S/2020/200). The transactional and opportunistic approach that the Houthis have been following by politicizing humanitarian issues and risking environmental disaster for political gains is morally unacceptable and unjustifiable regardless of its motivations, especially at a time when the ramifications of the coronavirus disease pandemic are sweeping across the world and the region. We call on all parties to take the necessary measures to cooperate with the relevant agencies of the United Nations to ensure that the FSO SAFER oil tanker is properly maintained and secured without further delay or conditions. In that regard, we stand ready to provide any needed technical assistance. In that regard, we stress the urgent need for the Security Council to take immediate measures to redress this situation in parallel with the ongoing efforts aimed at a political solution.
