Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): We have
heard time and again in this Chamber the horrific scale
of violations and abuses carried out against civilians
by the Syrian regime over the past three years of the
conflict: the indiscriminate bombardment of civilian
inhabited areas; horrendous violations, including
systematic murder and torture in regime detention
centres; the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access to
those in need; and the use of siege and starvation as a
weapon of war.

Today's draft resolution S/2014348 /offered Syrians
the prospect of an end to impunity for the individuals
who committed those atrocities. Holding perpetrators
to account for their actions is a vital element of a
sustainable peace. No settlement in Syria can be
real or lasting without justice. The draft resolution
would have given the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court a mandate to investigate all war crimes
and crimes against humanity perpetrated during the
conflict, regardless of the identity or affiliation of the
perpetrator.

The draft resolution had the support of 13 members
of the Security Council, 65 sponsors, more than
100 non-governmental organizations from all around
the world, and the Syrian National Coalition. That
shows the strength of international feeling on this
issue. It is to Russia and China's shame that they
have chosen to block efforts to achieve justice for the
Syrian people. It is disgraceful that they have yet again
vetoed the Security Council's efforts to take action in
response to the appalling human rights violations being
committed every day in Syria. Russia and China will
have to justify their behaviour, not only to those States
and organizations, but to so many of the Syrian people
who continue to suffer under Al-Assad's brutal regime.

The United Kingdom is committed to accountability.
Despite today's vote, we will continue to look for
ways to ensure that there can be accountability in
Syria. We will continue to support efforts to document
atrocities and will remain ready for the time when those
responsible can be held to account. The perpetrators of
appalling crimes in Syria may be able to hide behind
Russian and Chinese vetoes for now, but they will not
be able to evade justice forever.

