Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the candidate countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro,
and the European Free Trade Association countries
members of the European Economic Area Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes this initiative by
the Security Council to address the situation in Haiti at
this critical time. The European Union also welcomes
the decision by the Secretary-General to appoint a
Special Adviser on Haiti.

The European Union is gravely concerned at the
worsening situation in Haiti. Our concern has increased
with each troubling report on the marked deterioration
in the security situation, the continuing loss of life, the
abuse of human rights, the serious violations of
democratic rules, the reduction in access for
humanitarian workers and the hindering of the
provision of assistance to the affected civilian
population.

The European Union reminds all concerned of
their duty to respect the Haitian Constitution and to
adhere to international law, including international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. We call
on all parties to facilitate the provision of humanitarian
aid and to respect humanitarian personnel,
establishments, vehicles and medical facilities.

The present crisis in Haiti must be resolved
peacefully, through constitutional means and a process
of political dialogue and compromise. The European
Union has given clear support to the efforts of the
Organization of American States (OAS) to facilitate a
resolution of the political impasse in Haiti. We have
also strongly supported the recent initiative by the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM). The European
Union deeply regrets that the opposition in Haiti has so
far declined to accept the Plan of Action presented to
the Government and the opposition in Haiti on
Saturday, 21 February. The European Union remains
convinced that the principles of that plan offer an
important opportunity to restore confidence and to
facilitate dialogue. All parties bear heavy
responsibilities in the current circumstances and need
to act accordingly.

The European Union stands ready, together with
other concerned States and regional organizations, to
accelerate the search for a peaceful, democratic and
constitutional outcome. In that regard, the European
Union particularly welcomes the urgent initiative of the
Government of France to invite representatives of the
Haitian Government, the opposition and civil society to
talks in Paris tomorrow. While we await the outcome of
those discussions, the European Union calls on all
parties to refrain from any action which would further
imperil the welfare of the Haitian people.
