Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): We thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his comprehensive briefing. We also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and thank him for his statement.

Uganda commends the High Representative for
his efforts in promoting the political processes, in
particular facilitating the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement. We are concerned about the negative
developments arising from the ongoing attacks against
State institutions, mainly by the Government of
Republika Srpska, and the continued challenges to the
authority of the High Representative and the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council. The
impact of this has limited political progress, which
could lead to further tension in the country. We
therefore call on the authorities of Republika Srpska to
refrain from divisive rhetoric and actions that
challenge the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We welcome the joint European Union-United
States efforts aimed at initiating high-level political
dialogue with the key leaders among the parties to
sustain unity, facilitate reforms and break the political
stalemate. We call on all parties to offer cooperation
with this process in order to move the country forward.
Furthermore, we urge all parties, including the
neighbours of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to uphold their
commitments to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the spirit of
good-neighbourliness and peaceful coexistence.

We commend the European Union stabilization
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR), in
collaboration with the armed forces of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for contributing to a safe and secure
environment, which has enabled the Office of the High
Representative and other international organizations to
fulfil their respective mandates. It is in recognition of
this important work that, this past week, Uganda
supported the extension of the mandate of the EUFOR
configuration (see resolution 1895 (2009)).

We welcome the progress that has been achieved
in the area of the entrenchment of the rule of law and
acknowledge the efforts by the European Union Police
Mission in collaboration with the Office of the High
Representative in supporting police reform and the
fight against organized crime.

We are nevertheless concerned that the progress
made could be jeopardized by the stagnation in the
implementation of both the National War Crimes
Prosecution Strategy and the National Justice Sector
Reform Strategy. It is therefore important that the
mandates of the international judges working in the
Prosecutor's Office be extended, as recommended by
the High Representative, in order to ensure justice
sector reforms as soon as possible.

It is evident from the report (see S/2009/588*)
that Bosnia and Herzegovina, like many other countries
around the world, has not been immune to the global
economic crisis. We are concerned about the
substantial impact the crisis has had on foreign direct
investment in the country. Furthermore, the funding
deficit created could also impede the Government's
capacity to make crucial investments for sustainable
growth and to cover its other obligations.

The Government will require the support of
international partners to focus on addressing these
challenges, because they could potentially have a
negative impact on the stability of the country. Given
the important economic links that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has with the countries in the region, we
believe that strengthening economic cooperation with
those countries will further enhance the Government's
efforts to cope with the challenges arising from the
global economic crisis.
We are also concerned about the situation of
refugees and displaced persons. We call on the
authorities to address their plight with a view to
ensuring their quick return and resettlement.
Finally, we too congratulate Bosnia and
Herzegovina upon its election as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council for the period
2010-2011, and wish it success during its mandate.

