The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of the United States for the kind words
she addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Argentine Republic.

First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to
express my pleasure at the presence this evening in the
Security Council of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Italy, Mr. Antonio Martino. In addition, my delegation
thanks the delegation of Rwanda for its work last month
under the leadership of Ambassador Manzi Bakuramutsa.

My delegation voted in favour of resolution 970
(1995) after having carefully studied the reports submitted
every 30 days by the Co-Chairmen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia, as requested under paragraph 3 of resolution
943 (1994). Those reports, the most recent of which is
contained in document S/1995/6, provide the certification
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's implementation
of the closure of its border with the areas of the Republic
of Bosnia and Herzegovina controlled by Bosnian Serb
forces.

The Argentine Republic notes with satisfaction the
effective fulfilment of the commitments undertaken by the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We would also like to
emphasize that for a bit more than three months that
country has been cooperating with the observers of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia.

None the less, there are still important steps that
need to be taken by the Government of that country in the
peace process. For example, we hope it will soon
formally recognize the sovereignty of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The resolution we have just
adopted extends the suspension of sanctions for another
period of 100 days and, thanks to the experience we have
acquired, improves the relevant monitoring procedures.
The Argentine Republic reaffirms its belief that in this
case the application or suspension of sanctions should be
used to encourage measures leading to a peaceful,
negotiated settlement in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The Argentine delegation wishes to take this
opportunity to highlight the agreements for a cease-fire
and cessation of hostilities reached by the parties to the
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina recently - last
December, to be exact. We consider them highly
significant, and they give us renewed hope that progress
can be made towards a lasting agreement between the
parties, based on the Contact Group's peace plan, that
will put an end to this conflict that has for too long been
bleeding the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
 

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 7.50 pm.
