Mr. Hunter (United States ofAmerica): I thank you,
Mr. President, for coming to preside over this meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Ms. Qadeem for their remarks today.

The United States joins the Archbishop in
honouring the memory of the late Kofi Annan on this
issue. In August 2012, Mr. Annan spoke to the press
about his work as Special Envoy for Syria. Reflecting
on his task, he said:

"I accepted this task, which some called
"Mission Impossible', for I believed that it was a
sacred duty to do whatever was in my power to help
the Syrian people find a peaceful solution to this
bloody conflict."

He made real progress towards developing a peace
plan. Had the parties listened to Mr. Annan at the time,
hundreds of thousands of Syrians could have been
saved. But after five months on the job, Annan came
to a sobering realization. As he said, "You have to
understand: as an envoy, I cannot want peace more than
the protagonists". He stepped down, paralysed because
the Al-Assad regime did not want peace, and Russia,
sometimes alongside China, blocked the Security
Council from stepping in.

That is the challenge with mediation. All of us
know that it is vastly better to solve conflicts through
talks instead of by force. All of us agree that investing
in mediation and prevention is important. All of us
support the efforts of the Secretary-General to build the
United Nations mediation capacity. But, of course, even
the world's greatest mediators have no troops at their
command; they cannot impose sanctions and cannot
compel people to do anything. The missing ingredient
when it comes to mediation is often a real desire on the
part of us, the members of the Security Council, to see
those efforts succeed.

Around the world, the Security Council is quick
to send out envoys and proclaim our support for them.
There are United Nations-led dialogues and political
processes in Yemen, Libya, Syria, Iraq, Colombia,
Afghanistan and the Great Lakes, to name just a few.
Those are some of the world's most daunting conflicts,
and we are looking to the United Nations envoys to
find solutions. But they cannot do it alone. That is why
the United States has pushed the Security Council to
impose real consequences when parties are not willing
to negotiate. Mediators may not be able to compel
people to come to the table, so we have to play that role.

In South Sudan, the Council waited years before
finally imposing an arms embargo. That is a place
where war has raged out of control. Government
troops and other armed groups have slaughtered
civilians, burned down their villages and committed
unspeakable atrocities. The United States repeatedly
sought to impose sanctions as a step towards holding
South Sudan's leaders accountable for their actions,
but we were told over and over to wait for talks to
come through. Agreements and ceasefires came and
went and the Violence continued, but we were still
told to wait to take action. In the end, we adopted an
arms embargo and new sanctions last month. Now, the
parties will have a new incentive to negotiate in earnest
and reach a sustainable agreement that represents the
needs and interests of the South Sudanese people. We
do not know whether those negotiations will ultimately
be successful, but we know that progress will not be
possible without consequences for those who refuse to
compromise for peace.

We must not let mediation blind us to the realities of
what people are doing to each other on the ground. We
want diplomacy to work, but when it does not, we must
have the courage to say it and to pursue a meaningful
response. That is how we help mediators out - by

showing the parties that there will be consequences if
they do not commit to talks.

The United States has also made it a priority to
push for political progress in places that have long been
on our agenda. In situations like those in Cyprus and
Western Sahara, we have peacekeeping missions that
have sat on the ground for decades. In theory, those
missions support political solutions, but in reality,
they are perpetuating a status quo. The United States
is going back to those legacy peacekeeping missions
and asking hard questions about what we are achieving.
We are making a renewed push to see whether the
parties are working with the United Nations to make
political progress and, if they are not, we are going to
reassess what those missions are doing. Either way, we
do mediators no favours when we let the status quo be
an end in itself.

The United Nations can never walk away from
mediation. Even in the worst of circumstances, we look
to the United Nations and its mediators to keep trying
to find a way out of conflict. That is the fundamental
purpose of the Organization. For mediators, talk can be
powerful, but for the Security Council, talk is cheap. It
is easy for us to express support for mediation, but it is
only when we actually empower mediators and use the
tools that we have to push parties back to the table that
we can expect to see results.

