Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of New Zealand for its initiative
in convening this meeting, which makes it possible
to learn at first hand the challenges and specific
vulnerabilities faced by small island developing
States (SIDS) in maintaining international peace and
security. On behalf of Mexico, I should like to take
this opportunity to commend you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July, which, as we have seen, has not been an easy
month. We also wish to acknowledge the presence of
the various ministers and Heads of State or Government
participating here today.

Mexico is convinced that development is
intrinsically linked to peace and security. Without peace
there can be no sustainable development, and vice versa.
We recognize the vulnerability and special situation
of SIDS in terms of making progress on sustainable
development and therefore consider it indispensable to
strengthen international cooperation to benefit these
States in the economic, social and environmental areas.

That is why we encourage every effort to bring
about the effective implementation of the SIDS Action
Platform as a space with a dual function: to integrate the
progress made and to provide guidance for the planning
of future actions. We believe that the United Nations
system is the sole authority with the ability to mobilize
and take concrete action to consolidate and guide
efforts in this direction; accordingly, it is incumbent
upon all Member States to nurture the system with
political will and concrete commitments in order to
effectively address the unique challenges facing small
island developing States.

From those who are dealing with these challenges
every day, we have at this meeting heard about the
consequences that climate change, food insecurity,
transnational organized crime and piracy have had
for their territories and populations. The droughts
and hurricanes that often affect SIDS, together with
so-called slow-onset events, conspire in some cases
to generate a real threat to their territorial survival
and become unequivocal examples of how climate
change can be a threat multiplier for global security.
We take this opportunity to call for strengthening the
global climate regime by adopting a new and ambitious
agreement at the upcoming Conference ofthe Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to be held in France in December.

Among other underlying challenges for many SIDS
is the prevalence of undernourishment at alarming rates
for their populations, aggravated by the challenges in
agriculture and fisheries. Hunger and malnutrition are
not only the result of conflict, but can also provoke them,
alter the fabric of societies and nations, and undermine
peace. In contrast, their eradication helps to prevent
conflict and promote peace. My delegation believes
that governance issues such as the responsiveness
of the institutions of small island States can prevent
temporary food insecurity crises caused by short-term
factors from becoming chronic food insecurity that
threatens peace and security.

Everyone in this Chamber is well aware of the link
between the over-exploitation of natural resources and
conflicts around the world. The sanctions imposed by
the Security Council on countries where the illegal
exploitation of natural resources takes place should be
the international community's imperative for preventing
conflicts, especially in developing countries like SIDS.

The challenge that transnational organized
crime represents for the international community is
exacerbated when we analyse it from the viewpoint of
SIDS. Their size and limited capabilities for effectively
patrolling exclusive economic zones make them more
susceptible to lurking criminal networks, often turning
them into stopover points in the illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons, persons and drugs.
Mexico has a strong interest in promoting a substantive
multilateral discussion that highlights the similarities
among regions within the framework of the preparatory
process for the special session of the General Assembly
on the world drug problem to be held next year.

The threats and challenges that we have heard
about throughout this debate demand multifaceted
responses not only from the countries concerned
but from the international community as a whole. In
addition to the tools available to the United Nations
system to which we have already referred, there is the
role the Security Council could play, and should want
to play, to mitigate the risks and threats of conflicts.
Thought must be given to the actions that the Security
Council can take to support the efforts that the small
island developing States are carrying out to address the
existing challenges and, more importantly, to prevent
future conflicts and strengthen the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Compliance with decisions and resolutions of the
Security Council requires new legal, economic and
financial obligations from many States and, in the
particular case of SIDS, a disproportionate additional
administrative burden and a further reduction in their
limited resources as the result of competing policy
priorities. We invite the Security Council to discuss
and adopt formulas that equip Member States with
institutional mechanisms to respond clearly to the issues
raised by the implementation of some of its resolutions
and in particular sanctions regimes. It will be essential
to provide access to resources of the Organization to
address these issues in the instances that warrant it.

For no one is this challenge more burdensome
than for SIDS. In a rules-based international system,
practical support should be provided to all parts of the
system. Larger countries and the multilateral system
and organizations cannot continue to impose on small
island developing States the same obligations as on the
rest without providing structural support so that they
can meet those obligations appropriately.

In this context, we believe it is important to
emphasize the need for the voice of the SIDS have a
more regular presence in this Chamber. Mexico is
aware that in the past quarter century only six SIDS
have been members of this Council. Therefore, as part
of the compromise proposal to reform and democratize
the Security Council, we urge the expansion of the
number of seats - all non-permanent - to have a more
diverse representation of the international community,
ensuring greater and more frequent representation
of SIDS, and the creation of long-term seats with the
possibility ofimmediate re-election. Mexico invites the
small island developing States to broaden the dialogue
on this issue and on other ideas or proposals that help
them and us to strengthen their ability to completely
fulfil their role as active members of the international
community.

