Mr. Cortorreal (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to congratulate,
through you, New Zealand for bringing to this
important forum of the United Nations an issue of
particular sensitivity for island States, given that
environmental degradation and climate change directly
affect sustainable development in all of our countries.
It is important that the Security Council recognize
the humanitarian risks entailed by climate change, as
well as the political and security risks that result from
extreme tensions and conflict.

The impact and consequences of climate change
on human security are related to international security.
In our view, global policy action is required by this
important international forum. The Dominican
Republic finds itself in a special situation that makes
us vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
Our overriding priority is human security, and, to that
end, we value the opportunity to share our concerns in
this important arena.

Our delegation is particularly troubled by the
phenomenon of annual rainfall distribution. Adequate
knowledge about this phenomenon makes it possible to
safeguard water as a resource that is not only vital but
crucial to establishing and maintaining stable societies.
For small island developing States (SIDS) like ours,
this is particularly important.

The Dominican Republic, which shares the island
of Hispaniola with the Republic of Haiti, knows full
well its rainfall pattern. This has enabled the country
to make its water resources one of its main vectors
for development. The Dominican nation has therefore
built 14 major multipurpose hydro plants and 4,000
kilometres of irrigation channels. This infrastructure
has allowed us to double the amount of arable land in
just a few decades. We must also point out that up to
15 per cent of Dominican electric production comes
from hydro-electric plants. This system of clean and
renewable energy cost billions of dollars and requires
substantial resources for its expansion and maintenance.

We are proud to say that Dominican legislation
establishes the resource of water as a public good, but
despite this progress the impacts of climate change
have begun to affect the efficiency of our hydro
system. The clear changes in rainfall patterns, with
persistent periods of drought, has plunged us into an
unprecedented water-supply crisis.

As things stand, every five or seven years we
have a year of drought. The danger now is that, if
the temperatures keep rising, rainfall years will soon
become the exception. This would involve a constant
decrease of rainfall throughout the island, that is,
persistent drought. There is already a water crisis in
neighbouring Haiti, in addition to a well-known lack
of infrastructure for regulating and exploiting water
resources. This is an additional factor of concern to that
brother country that leads to its nationals continuing
to emigrate to our country, owing to the continuing
pressure on resources.

Increasing drought, water scarcity and land abuse
undoubtedly will further degrade the soil, leading to
social tensions and economic and land losses, which
will undoubtedly affect global human security, even in
those countries considered to be politically sound. In
our opinion, it is appropriate and very important that
the Security Council adopt a resolution recognizing
the threat posed by the foreseeable effects of climate
change. In so doing, it would be more fully taking on
a universal challenge and facilitate the emergence and
implementation of effective and timely solutions to
provide peaceful responses that are based on shared
values of respect for life, human dignity and the
environment.

In conclusion, I wish to categorically reject
the imputations made by the Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines Minister for Foreign Affairs against the
Dominican Republic in its national plan for foreigners.
The Dominican Republic stresses that our country has
not conducted any deportations since 2003 and that
there has been no violence against those who have
wished to voluntarily leave our country. In exercise
of its sovereignty, the Dominican Republic, in the
framework of a strict constitutional and legal order,
has always implemented its national plan for the
regularization of foreigners with due respect for human
dignity and in compliance with the principles and
standards established in human rights commissions.

