Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
and Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for their
important and informative briefings, and to welcome
the presence here of President Mahmoud Abbas of
Palestine and the courageous and constant commitment
to peace and negotiations that he has reaffirmed before
the Council today.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not just one more
crisis among all the crises rocking the Middle East. It is
the oldest conflict in the region and one whose symbolic
dimension, historical depth and regional reverberations
transcend the borders of Israel and the Palestinian
territories. And lastly, it is a conflict whose centrality
and dynamics have always given terrorist groups active
in the region and beyond grounds for recruitment. Now,
almost a quarter of a century after the Oslo Accords,
the prospects for peace continue to diminish both on
the ground and in discussions and minds. During that
time, the new generation of Palestinians and Israelis
that has grown up has seen the hopes for a settlement
of the conflict recede. In that regard, there are some
who may be tempted to turn everything upside down,
particularly by transforming a political disagreement
that seeks compromise into a religious conflict where no
concessions are possible. We should be very conscious
of the risk of that happening.

We cannot ignore the fact that in reality the so-
called status quo on the ground is deteriorating every
day, thanks in part to colonization and more generally
to Israel's occupation. It is also marked by violence,
which continues to be used and encouraged by several
movements, including Hamas, in a situation that
may degenerate and lead to uncontrollable regional
consequences at any time. The risk of escalation is
particularly evident in Gaza, which is my first point
and which the news of the past few days compels me
to make. Recent incidents, against a background of
humanitarian and economic crises in the Gaza Strip,
increase the risk of a new conflict like the three Gaza
experienced over the past decade. In order to avoid new
violence, whose primary victims would be the people of
Gaza, we call on everyone to exercise restraint. I want
to reiterate that we will never compromise on Israel's
security and reiterate our strong condemnation of the
attacks perpetrated on Israel's territory - be they
the use of explosives, the indiscriminate rocket fire
that has recently resumed, or the digging of offensive
tunnels such as that which has just been destroyed by
Israeli forces.

Beyond the urgently required de-escalation,
there can be no lasting solution for Gaza without the
return of the Palestinian Authority under the authority
of Mahmoud Abbas and within the framework of
the principles endorsed by the Palestine Liberation
Organization. In that regard, we reiterate our
commitment to the implementation of the agreement
signed in Cairo on 12 October 2017 by Fatah and Hamas,
which should enable the Palestinian Authority to fully
exercise its prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in
the area of security. That process must result in a rapid
improvement of the living conditions of the people in
Gaza and must also be accompanied by a lifting of the
blockade, as well as credible security guarantees for
Israel. France stands ready to support those efforts.

Finally, we must not separate the situation in Gaza
from the Palestinian question as a whole. Gaza is an
integral part of the Palestinian territories, and there
can be no Palestinian State or viable peace agreement
with Israel without Gaza. Palestinian unity is therefore
essential to peace in the Middle East.

My second point concerns the conflict as a whole.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the oldest of the
conflicts that are tearing apart the Middle East and
the only one whose solution is also widely known
and shared. This solution is based on the principle of
two States living in peace and security within secure
and recognized borders; borders drawn on the basis
of the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed exchanges of
territories; Jerusalem as the future capital of those two
States; and a concerted, realistic and fair solution for
Palestinian refugees. Any negotiations must be based
on internationally agreed parameters, which themselves
are based on international law and the resolutions of the
Council. These parameters are not optional, but rather
the very framework for negotiations. We know very
well that the fate of the Israelis and the Palestinians are
connected. Neither of the two peoples will sustainably
achieve their national aspirations at the expense of
the other. Today we are at a crossroads, at a critical
moment when each of the parameters I have just listed
has been weakened.

With regard to the 1967 lines, the settlement
of Palestinian territories and all the accompanying
legislative and administrative measures are trying to
impose another reality on the ground and to implement a
project that is incompatible with the two-State solution.
If we are not careful, that solution will disappear like a
mirage in the desert. After a record year for settlement
in 2017, there have already been announcements of
some 1,800 housing units this year. The position of
France is clear. We condemn settlement activity in all
its forms. It is illegal under international law, as recalled
in resolution 2334 (2016). It is also dangerous, since it
destroys on the ground the possibility of two States and
undermines trust between the parties.

With regard to the issue of Jerusalem, the status
of the city can be determined only by the parties
themselves within the framework of a peace agreement.
Under such a future agreement, the city is destined to
become the capital of two States, Israel and Palestine.
In the absence of agreement, we do not recognize
any sovereignty over Jerusalem. We therefore do not
agree with any announcement that deviates from the
international consensus and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 478 (1980).
Similarly, we regret the adoption early this year of
an Israeli law on Jerusalem that will make it much
more difficult to share Jerusalem as part of a future
peace agreement.

Finally, the situation of the Palestinian refugee
camps is a time bomb in Gaza - I will not dwell on
this - and throughout the region. As long as a realistic
and fair solution for refugees remains out of reach,
the provision of basic services by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) to more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees will be essential. This is a humanitarian
imperative, in particular in areas such as medical
assistance and food supplies. It is also a question of
human development, in particular when it comes to
UNRWA's network of schools, and an imperative for
the security and stability of the region. The situation in
Lebanon is particularly worrying in this respect.

Let us be clear. The weaker UNRWA becomes,
the more terrorist groups can use Palestinian refugee
camps as breeding grounds for recruitment. In the name
of humanitarian requirements, but also realism and our
security interests, we call on the United States not to
give up the historic and vital role it plays with regard
to UNRWA. At the same time, all current and potential
donors should renew their efforts to promote UNRWA
as a unique tool for regional stabilization.

I have recalled the main parameters for a solution
to the conflict, which are based on the Council's
resolutions. My third and last point is: How can we
contribute on this basis to a resumption of negotiations?
We acknowledge the commitment of the United States,
whose role is essential, to fostering a resumption
of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on a final-status
agreement. We hope the American proposals will be
within the framework agreed by the international
community, as recalled by President Emmanuel Macron
when he met with Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu
and President Mahmoud Abbas in December 2017. Our
authorities intend to remain in close contact with the
parties in order to contribute to the preservation of
the possibility of two States on the ground and the
resumption of negotiations.

With regard to methodology, we welcome the
proposals made today by President Abbas and are open
to exploring the development of the ways in which
the international community can support the peace
process. France has been reflecting on that for a long
time. That is what motivated our initiative leading
to the Paris conference on 15 January 2017, at which
more than 70 countries renewed their agreement on
the parameters for peace and the idea that Israelis
and Palestinians should themselves create a lasting
solution through negotiations. Such a development is
intended not to undermine the role of the United States,
whose commitment to supporting the peace process is
indispensable, but to make it possible for the actors who
can play a constructive role with the parties to more
easily join together, on the basis of the international
parameters I have described, in order to help the
parties to resume and successfully carry out the peace
negotiations. In that regard, regional actors would play
a crucial role by offering, on the basis of the Arab Peace
Initiative, the prospect of full regional normalization
for Israel in the wake of a peace agreement. Similarly,
Council members should provide their support.
In the difficult context I have just described, I want
to solemnly reiterate that there is no viable alternative
to the two-State solution. A single State would lead to
two parallel citizenship regimes in the same territory,
thereby creating an unequal situation that would
be unacceptable in principle and catastrophic in its
consequences. Such a situation would represent a
double impasse. For the Palestinians, it would mean
the abandonment of their aspirations for statehood; for
the Israelis, it would mean the demise of their national
democratic project.

Ifthere is one urgent need today, it is to offer Israelis
and Palestinians a political future by actively working
to restore hope for two States and the possibility of
negotiations between the parties. France, because it is a
friend of both Israelis and Palestinians, intends to play
its full role nationally and with its international partners.

