Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We are confident
that your diplomatic expertise and political knowledge
will galvanize the work of the Council and prompt it to
assume its role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

My delegation also wishes to convey its thanks
and appreciation to the Ambassador of Argentina and
his staff for their efforts in the presidency of the
Council last month.

My delegation is gravely concerned over the
Security Council's failure once again to shoulder its
responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security in an important and sensitive region
of the world - the Middle East. That is due mainly to
the selectivity and double standards applied by some to
the question of the Arab-Israeli conflict. While the
Arab side complies with the Security Council's
resolutions, despite their unjust nature, some States
members of the Security Council continue to oppose
the Council's adoption of any resolution condemning
Israel's policies in the Arab territories and its lack of
compliance with the Council's resolutions.

The question we must ask is: Why does the
situation in the Middle East continue to deteriorate and
why are we still caught up in a cycle of violence? The
answer lies in the double standards and failure of the
protectors of Israel earnestly to seek a just and
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Israel's ongoing aggression against the
Palestinian people and its use of the most heinous
means of oppression and terror with the utmost
disregard for ethical, political and legal norms and
considerations confirm that it is not yet convinced of
the need to establish a just and comprehensive peace in
the region. One case in point is its ongoing attempts to
storm Arab villages and towns and Palestinian refugee
camps in the occupied territories, its commission of
further assassinations and killings, its imposition of
collective punishment on the Palestinian people, and its
continued establishment of settlements. Israel has also
continued to build the separation wall, in clear
contravention of the opinion of the International Court
of Justice and the resolutions of the General Assembly
and in flagrant defiance of international humanitarian
law and international law.

In addition to the deteriorating security situation
in the occupied Arab territories, exacerbated by the
killing and destruction wrought by the Israeli military
machine, the humanitarian and economic situation has
been pushed to the brink of tragedy by the siege and
closure policies followed by the Israeli occupying
authorities in a manner intended to humiliate and to
mete out collective punishment to the people of
Palestine, who embraced democracy in the recent
legislative elections, which were held in transparency
and integrity.

My delegation calls on the international
community to respect the will of the Palestinian people
in their choice of leaders, not to interfere in their
internal affairs, and to continue to provide them with
the financial support that will allow them to overcome
the difficulties caused by the ongoing Israeli
occupation.

The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan is no
better than that in the occupied Palestinian territories.
That is due to Israel's oppression of our people in the
occupied Syrian Golan in the context of the imposition
of Israeli identity upon them, their detention in great
numbers, and the ongoing establishment of settlements
on their land. Despite the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 497 (1981), which declared null and void
the Israeli decision to annex the Syrian Golan, Israel
continues to plan further settlements, to intensify its
occupation and to flout the will of the international
community by its non-compliance with that and many
other resolutions adopted by the General Assembly.

Syria has repeatedly expressed its hope for the
establishment of a just and comprehensive peace in the
Middle East and for the unconditional pursuit of the
peace process, despite the fact that the decisions of
international legitimacy do not constitute
preconditions. Israel has met those calls with further
intransigence and opposition in an attempt to shirk its
responsibility in establishing a just and comprehensive
peace in the region. That in itself is proof of Israel's
lack of desire to bring about peace, security and
stability in the region. It confirms that it is Israel's aim
to destabilize the region by continuing its policies of
aggression and expansion, which make the hope of
realizing peace elusive.

Six decades have passed in the Middle East
conflict. The Arab people look forward to the day
when they can live in peace and security like any other
people in the world. The peace to which we all aspire
can come about only if Israel withdraws fully from all
the occupied Arab territories in the Syrian Golan, the
Lebanese Sheb'a farms and the Palestinian territories,
to the 4 June 1967 borders, and if it complies with
resolutions of international legitimacy, particular
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and with the principle of land for peace and the
Madrid terms of reference. Israel should also accept the
Arab peace initiative adopted at the 2002 Arab summit,
held in Beirut, and confirmed at subsequent Arab
summits.

The repeated claims by the Israeli representative,
accusing Syria and others of terrorism, are remarkably
cynical, because the Israeli representative is trying to
cover up the war crimes committed by his Government
day after day against the defenceless Palestinian
people. The daily military acts perpetrated by the
Israeli occupying army prove the State terror
perpetrated by Israel against the Arab people in the
occupied territories.

Israel should be held accountable under
international law for its acts. Israel has displaced
millions of Palestinians and Syrians since occupying
the Arab territories. They live as refugees in many
countries, including Syria, which has hosted these
refugees and has provided them with the means of
which Israel has deprived them. Israel is now denying
these people the right to return to their homeland,
which Israel has transformed into military bases and
illegitimate settlements. It prevents them from
expressing their opinions and from realizing their
dream of establishing their homeland with Jerusalem as
its capital.

It is also ironic that the representative of Israel
tries to turn the facts upside down, presenting Israel as
a victim while the other side is the gladiator. Everyone
knows who the occupier is; everyone knows who uses
the most modern weapons against a defenceless people
and who terrorizes people; and everyone knows who is
the victim of occupation and of inhumane practices.
Israel does not hesitate to kill children and women. It
pays no heed to the number of victims who have fallen
since the eruption of the intifada: more than 4,000
civilians have died so far.

