Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Special Representative Kobler and
Ambassador Skoog for their briefings and commends
them for their efforts.

There has been limited progress on the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement,
which was signed more than a year ago. The Libyan
peace process is facing serious challenges. The political
dialogue has run into major problems and the parties
lack confidence. The security situation is fragile.
Armed conflicts are escalating, the terrorist forces
have still not been eradicated and arms proliferation
continues to be a serious issue. China firmly supports
Libya in its use of peaceful means to restore national
security and stability, and commends all the Libyan
stakeholders for their efforts to implement the Political
Agreement. They should all work together with the
aim of reversing the current negative trend and take
proactive and effective measures to advance the peace
process in Libya.

First, the only choice for a solution to the Libyan
problem must be a political one. The Libyan political
process should uphold the principle of Libyan ownership
and leadership and an inclusive political dialogue
should begin as soon as possible. All the parties should
demonstrate sincerity and promote dialogue and
negotiation in settling their differences. The relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Libyan Political
Agreement should serve as a foundation for finding a
solution that is acceptable to all parties and will help to
achieve national reconciliation.

Secondly, a ceasefire must be reached if the right
conditions for restoring and maintaining the political
dialogue are to be created. All Libyan stakeholders
should exercise restraint and avoid resorting to force.
They should put aside their differences, build mutual
trust and cooperate in such areas as fighting terrorism
and protecting airfields, harbours and other critical
economic infrastructure, in order to protect the interests
of all Libyans.

Thirdly, the international community should
provide constructive assistance, with the United
Nations as the principal mediator. The United Nations
Support Mission in Libya should conduct its work
based on the mandate assigned to it by the Security
Council. Regional organizations such as the League
of Arab States and the African Union, as well as
Libya's neighbours, should continue to promote peace,
facilitate talks and encourage all parties in Libya to be
flexible in dialogue and participate actively in national
reconciliation efforts. The international community
should respect Libya's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity and increase support to it in
order to help it strengthen its State governance and
development capacities. China stands ready to work
with the international community as a whole and to
contribute to the restoration of State governance and
the realization of peace, stability and development as
soon as possible.

