Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Australian presidency for convening today's debate and
circulating a very solid and substantive concept note to
help us prepare for it (S/2014/787, annex).

Today's debate has once again highlighted the
strong nexus between terrorism and violent extremism.
Ideologies, strategies and operations of terrorists and
extremists overlap. In fact, it is the violent extremism
in one form or the other that fuels terrorism. Both
terrorism and violent extremism defy State writ, disrupt
civil order and create anarchy to incite hatred in order
to execute their toxic agenda.

Violent acts justifiably require fitting military
offensive responses. We must also develop national
capacities to deconstruct those two phenomena to
comprehend the conditions in which terrorism and
violent extremism thrive. The underlying causes may
include political and economic grievances, ethnic and
religious tensions and a sense of relevant deprivation,
real or imagined. We need to understand the mindset
of the masterminds behind terrorism and violent
extremism, counter their narratives, delegitimize
their ideologies, devalue tools they use to make their
messages attractive and degrade the means they use to
recruit and motivate followers.

We should also know what impels individuals to
take violent action. Comprehension, however, does
not mean acquiescence or condonance of their heinous
crimes. We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.

With the rise of the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and the interflows of
transnational terrorist groups and foreign terrorist
fighters, the broader Middle East region and scores
of countries beyond have become more volatile and
more vulnerable. The United Nations has taken timely
measures; now they must be implemented faithfully.

Our national experience is that there should be zero
tolerance for terrorists and violent extremists. That is
why for the past several months we have been prosecuting
the intense counter-terrorist Operation Zarb-e-Azb to
take out terrorists, dismantle their networks, staunch
their flow inside and outside borders, and destroy
their support system. We have learnt that hardcore
terrorists abuse the name of religion to commit crimes
against civilians and mistake overtures for dialogue as
appeasement. At the same time, we continue to make
our efforts to bring misled moderate youth back to the
national mainstream, deradicalize them and reintegrate
them. This requires both political idiom and economic
incentives. For that purpose, we are investing in the
social, educational, religious and economic sectors.

Violent extremism is, regrettably, infecting all
societies. Countering violent extremism requires
strategies and solutions suited to the relevant
environments. A one-size-fits all approach does not
work. Our national experience in countering violent
extremism has brought forth the following lessons.

Best practices need to be adapted to local conditions.
The participation of foreign actors is generally
perceived with suspicion at the local level. Efforts to
counter violent extremism must involve local actors,
preferably from the same community, and should have
demonstrable results. Young people respond positively
to economic programmes and projects; direct advocacy
is less effective. We recommend the pursuit of a rule
of law and a due process approach, and esnure access
to justice. We should avoid exacerbating ideological
and religious divisions and focus on the criminality
of terrorism and violent extremism, and not on their
ideological rationales. Community leaders should
be involved in countering violent extremism to use
appropriate platforms for mediation and intercession.

With respect to foreign terrorist fighters, our
Government has intensified efforts to implement
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). In this
regard, real-time information-sharing and effective
coordination among all relevant national departments
are most critical.

Pakistan welcomes the role played by the United
Nations and its agencies in counter-terrorism efforts.
We View the United Nations as a facilitator and provider
of technical expertise in areas identified by the Member
States. We support the idea of a roster of experts being
developed by the United Nations Centre for Counter-
Terrorism (UNCCT). Experts well-versed in local
culture and environment can act as a focal point in the
United Nations system. The Council should weigh the
benefits of creating a new post of special representative
on extremism in order to synergize the work of the
United Nations.

Measures to prevent extremism and violent
terrorism should be mainstreamed. Most conflicts
today are being driven by extremism, terrorism and
asymmetric warfare. The United Nations peacekeeping
missions from have to deal time to time with terrorism
and transnational crime, but it would be prudent to
keep peacekeeping missions focused on their primary
mandate of keeping peace and protecting civilians.
Counter-terrorism is too broad a brief to be neatly
integrated or subsumed into peacekeeping.

We thank the leadership of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the UNCCT
for their influential work in countering terrorism.

