Mr. Westcott: I have the pleasure to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

I would first like to thank you, Madam President,
for taking the initiative to convene this open debate on
an important topic, and for the excellent concept note
(S/2015/599, annex) and for highlighting the work of the
European Union in peacebuilding, conflict prevention
and mediation.

The global and European security environments
have changed dramatically in recent years. The
conflicts, threats and instability in the EU's immediate
and wider neighbourhood, together with the long-
standing and emerging security challenges affecting
Iraq, Libya, the Sahel, Syria and Ukraine, are having an
impact on Europe's security as well as on international
peace and security, and represent a common challenge
to our fundamental values and principles. This
changing global environment was outlined by the High
Representative in her report to the European Council
in June, which launched work on an EU global strategy
on foreign and security policy. In May, it also prompted
European foreign and defence ministers to call for a
stronger Europe and a more effective common security
and defence policy.

Among the many challenges we see, there is a
need to address in particular the challenge of terrorism
and foreign fighters, maritime security and organized
crime, including the smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings. Those are in addition to
the challenges posed by irregular migration, climate
change, energy security, cybersecurity and space
security. To address those challenges, the EU and its
member States are assuming increased responsibilities
to act as a security provider, at the international level
and in particular in our neighbourhood, in order to
enhance our own security and our strategic role in the
world and to respond to those challenges together with
the international community.

Our response is focused on a comprehensive
approach to preventing and managing conflicts, using
both our Common Security and Defence Policy and
the other policies and instruments of the European
Union. In particular, preventing conflicts and relapses
into conflict, in accordance with international law, is
a primary objective of our external action, working
together with global, regional, national and local
partners.

Since the adoption, in 2001, of the so-called
Gothenburg Programme, the EU has developed an
early-warning system, strengthened its mediation and
dialogue capacities and established its own mediation
support team. In that field we have developed
close cooperation with regional and international
organizations. We recently hosted a meeting in
Brussels on preventive diplomacy and mediation, with
experts from the United Nations, the League of Arab
States, the African Union (AU) and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). That
approach has helped the European Union to facilitate
crucial agreements - between Belgrade and Pristina
in 2013, and last month between the E3+3 and Iran on a
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action that is contributing
to a comprehensive, long-lasting and peaceful solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue. The Plan of Action also
strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation regime as a
whole, and that will be monitored by the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

The European Union will remain committed
to effective multilateralism. That commitment is
enshrined in our founding treaty, according to which
the EU

"shall contribute to peace, security, sustainable
development [and] the strict observance of
international law, including respect for the
principles of the United Nations Charter."

We therefore work particularly closely with the
United Nations at the heart of the multilateral system.

In 2011, the General Assembly itself underlined
the EU's special relationship with the United Nations
through its resolution 65/276, which recognizes
the EU's partnership with the Organization. This
partnership, particularly with regard to peace and
security, comes under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which explicitly recognizes and
encourages that regional arrangements should be put
in place. The Secretary-General recently built on that
in drawing up his report on partnering for peace and
partnership peacekeeping (S/2015/229), which we
thoroughly welcome and support.

As a rather unique regional organization, we
cooperate very closely with the United Nations
at the strategic level through our United Nations-
European Union Steering Committee and high-level
dialogue on crisis management, as well as through
joint consultative mechanisms and arrangements for
operational cooperation on the ground in places such
as the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia. In
order to strengthen that further, we welcome the recent
joint identification of priority areas for strengthening
the EU-United Nations strategic partnership, which,
among other things, underline the importance of
EU member States' contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Both the EU and the United Nations are currently
engaged in crucial strategic reviews, in order to face
the challenges more effectively. We welcome the
reports issued by the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and by the Advisory
Group of Experts on their respective reviews of peace
operations and the peacebuilding architecture, which
reflect well the EU's contribution. We particularly look
forward to the review of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. Ensuring follow-up to
those reports with concrete steps will be crucial.
Similarly, improved cooperation and coordination
among regional organizations is a priority for us. In
that context, we are pleased about something that you
yourself pointed out, Madam President, which is the
partnerships we have developed, in particular with the
African Union, as well as with African subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the Southern African
Development Community, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the East African
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.

At the most recent EU-Africa Summit, in Brussels
last year, the EU strongly supported African aspirations
and commitment to ensuring peace, security and
stability on the continent in the framework of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. In order
to improve the African capacity to handle crises, we
committed to operationalizing the multidimensional
African Standby Force and recognizing the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises as a
transitional tool that is complementary to the Force,
and thereby enhancing the AU's capacity to respond
rapidly to crises and reinforce its continental early
warning system. Progress on that is to be welcomed,
and closer cooperation between the AU and its regional
organizations is of great value. In that respect, we
particularly value the positive role the AU has played in
the recent crisis in Burundi in recalling very clearly the
principles of the African Charter for good governance
and democracy.

We have supported AU-led peace operations
themselves in a number of ways. In the 10 years since
2004, the EU has provided €1.4 billion to AU-led
peace operations through the African Peace Facility.
I am happy to announce that we recently agreed to
increase the Facility provision from €750 million to
€900 million for the next three-year period, to respond
to the increasing crises. It will enable us not only to
continue our support for the efforts of the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the IGAD-led monitoring and
verification mechanism in South Sudan, but also to
provide funding for the Multinational Joint Task Force
against Boko Haram and the ECOWAS mission to
Guinea-Bissau.

But the long-term solution is to reinforce the
AU's own capabilities and fund all these. We provide
additional support through the European Development
Fund and the Instrument for Stability to build long-
term African sustainability. The EU, in addition, has
deployed a Common Security and Defence Policy
missions in Mali, the Niger, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and the Central African Republic,
specifically to enhance the capacity of local security
operations to deal with the challenges they face. Those
include security sector reform, border management,
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation, which we support through the provision
of advice, mentoring and training. Where there are
regional security challenges, such as piracy, trafficking
and terrorism, we have adopted a regional strategic
approach for the Sahel, the Gulf of Guinea and the
Horn of Africa. Once again, those approaches are built
very strongly on triangular cooperation among the EU,
the AU and the United Nations in order to face the
challenges.

It is not in Africa alone that the EU has been active.
We have developed partnerships with other regional
organizations. Earlier this month, High Representative
Federica Mogherini travelled to Malaysia to participate
in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Regional Forum and to co-chair the EU-ASEAN Post-
Ministerial Conference. In that context, allow me to
reiterate our appreciation to Malaysia for kindly hosting
those two important meetings.

The European Union also cooperates closely with
NATO, the OSCE and the Council of Europe. All EU
member States are participating States in the OSCE
and the Council of Europe, and 22 member States
belong to NATO. The EU cooperates closely with
NATO, both strategically and operationally, in crisis
management, for example, off the Horn of Africa and
in the Western Balkans. Most recently, the focus of the
partnership with the OSCE has been the conflict in
Ukraine, where the OSCE role is central and has the
EU's full support, including through considerable EU
financial and material support to the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. However, the scope
of our partnership is much broader and covers such
important issues as election observation, arms control
and the many OSCE field presences throughout the
wider European region. We consider the OSCE to
be a central and inclusive platform for dialogue and
confidence-building in the current crisis in European
security. Cooperation with the Council of Europe is
also important in the context of the Ukrainian conflict
in focusing on support for constitutional and judicial
reform.

We are now facing a particularly dramatic situation
in the Mediterranean, on the European Union's own
borders, which illustrates very well many of today's
themes. Since 17 April, in which more than 800
migrants died in a single dramatic incident, the EU has
adopted a comprehensive plan for substantial measures
to deal with the challenges faced in the Mediterranean.
Dealing with migration is a common interest of all
countries around the Mediterranean, in the Sahel and in
East Africa. It is not only a humanitarian problem, but
also a political and a security problem for our member
States and the wider neighbourhood, and therefore
involves joint efforts with our partners in the AU, the
Rabat Process and the Khartoum Process and with the
League of Arab States.

The current situation in the Mediterranean is
an example of how international organized crime is
involved with the smuggling of migrants and trafficking
of human beings and how that can destabilize a whole
region and put the basic rights and the lives ofthousands
of migrants at risk. In response to that threat, the
European Union decided to launch in June, in addition
to the naval operations Triton and Poseidon, operated
by Frontex, another naval operation, the European
Union Naval Force-Mediterranean, with the mandate
to disrupt the business model of smuggling and
trafficking networks. It is already engaged in collecting
information and intelligence about those networks.
Once the Council provides the required authorization,
it will enable the operation to actively disrupt the
smugglers and traffickers" business, in full respect for
international law and the Security Council mandate.
That will also be undertaken in close cooperation
with the Libyan authorities in order to ensure that the
legitimate livelihoods of Libyans are not affected. We
will also ensure that the rights of the refugees and
migrants are fully protected, and we are pleased to have
established close cooperation with the United Nations,
particularly the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, in that regard.

Many migrants risk their lives to travel across
the Mediterranean to Europe, often driven by despair,
poverty, conflict or human rights abuses, which means
that we also need to cooperate with the countries of
origin and transit and to do more to address the root
causes of migration. We will do so in close cooperation
with the regional organizations concerned. On 11 and
12 November, we will hold a conference with African
partners in Valletta to build our common vision and
agree on common action on migration to tackle the
challenge in the Mediterranean. A high-level meeting
on the Western Balkan route is also envisaged.

Furthermore, the EU supports underpinning
regional cooperation frameworks, such as the Rabat and
Khartoum Processes, and provides increased support
to border management across Africa and more widely,
including through the Common Security and Defence
Policy missions, such as that in the Niger. The EU
also supports the development of return and migration
management capacities, including at the regional level
in Western Africa. But above all, we want to look at
addressing the root causes of migration and, where
we can, to support local efforts to tackle conflicts and
human rights abuses and to improve the socioeconomic
conditions in the countries of origin so that people are
no longer feel forced to flee their own countries.

Finally, Madam President, I thank you very much
for your time and for the opportunity to contribute to
this debate from the EU's perspective.

