Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their statements. I
would also like to thank the presidency for organizing
this open debate. The fact that it is traditionally held
twice a year enables the Council to address an issue that,
as we unfortunately see in many conflicts, continues to
demand its attention.

The fight against impunity is one of the fundamental
pillars supporting the effective implementation of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. It is States that have the primary responsibility to
comply with it, and protecting civilians is incumbent
on all the parties to a conflict. However, I wish to
underscore that in the event of a failure to exercise that
responsibility, the Security Council can act, and must
do so consistently. This involves careful follow-up on
the conclusions of international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions, and, when appropriate,
referral of the facts to the International Criminal Court.

Accountability and the assigning of responsibility
undoubtedly have an impact on support for and
compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. However, this is not enough. I would
therefore like to draw attention to the existence of other
instruments that can contribute to protecting civilians
more effectively. At times, resorting to inclusive
mediation - in the sense described in the United
Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation - can
play a preventive role in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Spain, which is a staunch supporter
of the available instruments for conflict prevention,
is an active member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, and is promoting a mediation initiative in
the Mediterranean that is holding its first seminar on
mediation in the region right now in Madrid. I hope that
the Council will take the outcomes of such initiatives
into consideration inasmuch as they may offer ways of
effectively protecting civilians in conflict situations.

I would like to express particular concern about three
facts that represent serious obstacles to the application
of the modern concept of the protection of civilians.
First is the use of bombs and explosives in urban areas
to kill or maim civilians, destroy basic infrastructures
such as hospitals, schools and water-storage facilities,
and displace huge numbers of civilians. Spain deplores
this grave violation of international humanitarian law,
especially when it is used deliberately as a way ofwaging
psychological warfare on the civilian population, and
believes that the Council must continue to focus on this
practice and to explore and exploit all possible means
to put an end to it.

Secondly, it is the elderly, women and children who
suffer most in such conflicts. Sexual violence continues
to be used as a weapon in conflict and even as a military
strategy, leaving victims with scars that last into the
post-conflict period. Spain believes that this is an issue
to which the Council and the commissions of inquiry
should pay special attention, since it can come up
against victims' reluctance to report incidents for fear
of stigma in their communities. Among the groups that
are particularly vulnerable to the effects of conflict, I
would like to stress the issue ofpeople with disabilities.
This year the General Assembly will host a high-
level meeting on disability and development, which
Spain, together with the Philippines, has the honour to
co-facilitate. This is also a good opportunity to note
that in the area of the effective protection of civilians,
the special needs of this group should be taken into
account.

Thirdly, attacks on medical staff and installations
and on humanitarian personnel, and constraints
imposed on their activities, are also an indirect attack
on the civilian population. The Security Council has
the means necessary to enable humanitarian actors
to carry out their work, guaranteeing their safety and
promoting an environment conducive to their rapid and
unimpeded access to civilians in need. My Government
calls on the Security Council to assess the possibility of
recalling the content of the resolution on health care in
danger adopted at the 31st International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent in 2011.

Spain has always considered it a very positive fact
that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is
included in the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
Spain's experience in this area, resulting from our
extensive involvement in peacekeeping operations,
has shown us that there can be no stable and lasting
peace if human rights are not respected. The protection
of civilians should therefore also be part of the
international community's approach to post-conflict
situations as it could become a tool of prevention with
a view to avoiding a resurgence of the previous combat
situation.

Spain associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

