Germany fully supports the call by Special Envoy Pedersen for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria and his active engagement with the Syrian parties and regional and international key actors in this regard. His call needs to finally be taken up. Given that the security situation throughout the country remains very fragile and that a major coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak would exacerbate the already alarming humanitarian situation, we need an immediate and lasting nationwide ceasefire. Since this has not been achieved yet, at the cost of innocent civilian lives, we encourage the Special Envoy to inform the Security Council about exactly which party is hindering an agreement on a lasting, nationwide ceasefire in Syria. A genuine and sustainable nationwide ceasefire is a prerequisite not only for an effective humanitarian response to COVID-19 but also for a resumption of the political process. We stress the central role of the United Nations in reaching such a genuine and sustainable nationwide ceasefire, which is also already included in Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). Sustainable peace, stability and security in Syria can be achieved only through a political process under the auspices of the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We therefore call for a swift return to the political process and reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen in this regard, including for adapting working methods that allow for the next session of the Constitutional Committee to take place soon despite the current Corona-related restrictions. We are all well aware that it is the Syrian regime that is obstructing and delaying the work of the Constitutional Committee. The Syrian regime must finally end its obstruction and start engaging seriously and constructively in the Constitutional Committee. We need substantive progress in the broader political process and the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). As Russia claims that it is interested in a political solution and that the Astana format can move the United Nations-led political process forward, we urge Russia to use its influence over Damascus in this regard. Germany's and the European Union's (EU) position on reconstruction remains crystal-clear - we will assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition is firmly under way. We also support the call by Special Envoy Pedersen for unconditional large- scale releases of detainees and abductees and more meaningful action on missing persons. The Syrian regime, which holds the overwhelming majority of detainees, must finally release political detainees on a meaningful scale, starting with elderly people, women and children and those with health conditions. Since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak, Governments around the world have released prisoners on humanitarian grounds. Unfortunately, it does not come as a surprise that the Syrian regime has, on the contrary, continued with arbitrary arrests, enforced disappearances and torture in its prisons. We call on the Syrian regime to allow immediate, unconditional and unhindered access for relevant humanitarian organizations to all prisons and detention facilities under its control, and to ensure adequate medical care and protective measures for all persons in detention in order to prevent COVID-19 leading to yet more loss of life and misery in Syrian prisons. The Syrian regime must inform the families of the tens of thousands of missing persons about the fate of their loved ones. We remain convinced that national reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria will not be possible without justice and accountability. Germany therefore continues to support all efforts, in particular those of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, to ensure that the crimes and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict do not go unpunished, that perpetrators are held accountable and that victims receive justice. We welcome the most recent reports of the Organization on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Investigation and Identification Team and of the Board of Inquiry, as well as the latest report of Amnesty International, which documents attacks on medical facilities and schools in north-west Syria. All these reports clearly show that the Syrian regime and its ally Russia were responsible for indiscriminate attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure in north-west Syria. There has to be a follow-up to the findings in these reports; impunity for those responsible for these serious violations of international humanitarian law cannot be an option. It has, unfortunately, not been possible to refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court (ICC). Those who committed and are still committing international crimes in Syria can thus not be prosecuted by the ICC. The recent start of the trial in Germany of two former officials of the Syrian regime's security service charged with crimes against humanity sends an important message that those who commit crimes against humanity or war crimes cannot feel safe anywhere and will eventually be held accountable. So long as the Syrian regime does not change its brutal behaviour and does not end its grave violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law, there will be no lifting of sanctions. Even if the Syrian regime and its supporters falsely claim otherwise, these sanctions are targeted at the Syrian regime and not at the Syrian people. These sanctions specifically allow for the provision of humanitarian aid, including the medicines and medical equipment needed to respond to COVID-19 in Syria. As such, they do not affect the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need. The European Commission has published a detailed guidance note with regard to humanitarian aid and EU sanctions vis-a-vis Syria. It explains that EU sanctions do not stand in the way or impede the provision of humanitarian aid - in particular medical equipment and supplies to fight the COVID-19 pandemic - and that they provide for humanitarian exemptions. The guidance note clearly states that medical equipment, including oxygen, respirators, personal protective equipment and ventilators, as well as medicines and other medical items required to fight the COVID-19 pandemic, are not subject to direct restrictions on export, supply, financing or use in Syria. To be very clear, the primary responsibility for the humanitarian catastrophe in Syria lies with the regime. By destroying medical infrastructure, by arresting doctors and nurses or by blocking humanitarian convoys, the regime is waging a war against its own people and then blaming those who have helped to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people and have provided billions of dollars to United Nations organizations. Its position is cynical beyond belief.
