The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

This meeting of the Security Council is timely in
every respect, first and foremost because the focus of
our attention is the genuine strengthening of the major
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
meeting is of special significance, because Mr. Ban Ki-
moon, the Secretary-General, is participating in the
Council's activities for the first time. I would like, on
behalf of the Russian delegation, to welcome him once
again.

In September 2005, during the World Summit,
heads of State or Government of the countries members
of the Council conducted an exchange of views on the
issue under discussion today. There can be no doubt
that the world has not become any more stable or
predictable since that meeting. The international
community continues to face wide-ranging challenges
in the interrelated areas of security, humanitarian
problems and development. We are still confronting
severe challenges resulting from the escalation of
armed conflict, international terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including
the danger of their falling into the hands of terrorists
and extremists.

The time that has gone by since the Security
Council summit has not, however, been wasted. The
major result is the growing awareness of the fact that
there can be no alternative to the consolidation of the
central role of the Security Council and the United
Nations in the quest for collective solutions to the
many global and regional threats and challenges on the
Security Council's agenda over the past year - we
need think only of the war in Lebanon, of the problems
relating to the observance of the nuclear non-
proliferation regime or of the situation in Darfur.

It is significant that, on these and other pressing
problems, members of the Council have been able to
achieve agreement, sometimes after difficult
negotiations, and to adopt effective solutions in the
interests of long-term stability.

We hear criticism - sometimes not without
reason - of the Security Council and of the entire
United Nations for lack of effectiveness in its decisions
and actions. This should not lead us to be pessimistic.
Indeed, it is only now - when the world has rid itself
of the confrontation of the cold war and is painfully
disabusing itself of any illusions of the effectiveness of
unilateral approaches - that the United Nations and

the Security Council, for the first time, have an
opportunity fully to realize their potential. Working in
cooperation with all interested partners, Russia will
continue to promote the enhancement of the practical
implementation of Security Council efforts to prevent
and resolve disputes and armed conflicts, including in
Africa.

Special attention must be given to the building up
of United Nations potential in the area of
peacekeeping. The effort to maintain peace under the
authority of the Security Council and in accordance
with its decisions remains the hallmark of this world
Organization. That has been made clear in the sharp
increase in demand for such operations. Today, more
than 80,000 military personnel and police contingents
are involved in a total of 19 operations. Russian
peacekeepers are participating in operations in the
Middle East, Haiti, Kosovo, Serbia, Africa, Asia and,
with the political support of the United Nations, on the
territory of the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

We are continuing to enhance our contribution to
the peacekeeping and humanitarian activities of the
United Nations. Not all of the unique peacekeeping
opportunities and mechanisms of the United Nations
are being fully used. That situation could be improved
through the more active utilization of the potential of
the Military Staff Committee, as well as of the
opportunities provided by regional organizations, on
the basis of the relevant provisions of the Charter and
with respect for the prerogatives of the Security
Council.

We base ourselves on the need to strengthen,
through joint efforts, the international legal basis of
peacekeeping in accordance with the Charter and the
decisions of the Security Council, which will serve to
reaffirm multilateral approaches in the area of crisis
resolution. The task of enhancing the coordination and
effectiveness of our fellow countries emerging from
crisis has been entrusted to the Peacebuilding
Commission. That body has already taken its first steps
in peacebuilding, helping in Burundi and Sierra Leone.
We attach great importance to the commencement of
the effective activities of that intergovernmental body,
in particular through the strengthening of its
relationship with the Security Council and the General
Assembly, pursuant to the decisions of those organs.
We intend to actively support the accomplishment of
that task.

Combating international terrorism remains one of

the key areas in creating an effective system of

collective security. The United Nations has a central

role to play in that area. The problem of combating

terrorism and its sources, and issues relating to the

development of broad anti-terrorism cooperation,

should in future be the subject of constant attention on

the part of the Security Council and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

We also need more vigorous measures to prevent
deadly weapons from falling into the hands of non-
State entities. A priority in this area is the consistent
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

In broader terms, it is necessary to continue work
to ensure the smooth coordination of all of the
activities of all of the Security Council's anti-terrorist
committees, keeping in mind their cross-cutting
mandates. The goal is to enhance the usefulness of the
activities of all of those structures, while avoiding
duplication of effort. The Security Council faces a
major challenge in this regard. It is important to make
rational use of existing resources, focusing the
activities of the Council on those areas relating to
threats to international and regional peace and security
and observing the division of authority between the
major bodies of the world Organization set forth in the
Charter.

I would like to focus on another important aspect.
We base ourselves on the premise that enhancing the
effectiveness of United Nations activities in the key
areas of strengthening peace and security will be
promoted by reforming the management of the
Organization and enhancing transparency and
accountability in the Secretariat. We wish the
Secretary-General every success in modernizing the
United Nations, in accordance with international
standards and in keeping with the demands of our time.

In conclusion, I would like to express gratitude to
all of our partners in the Security Council for their
constructive participation in and agreement on the
presidential statement to be adopted later today. We
trust that it will serve to further strengthen the potential
of Council to carry out its overall mission.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

