Ms. Power (United States of America): In recent
years, no Government has invested more in the effort
to achieve Israeli-Palestinian peace than the United
States. Peace, however difficult it may be to forge, is
too important to give up on. As we were reminded this
summer in Gaza, and as we have been reminded too
painfully recently in Jerusalem and the West Bank, the
human consequences of ensuing cycles of violence are
too grave. The United States searches every day for new
ways to take constructive steps to support the parties
in making progress towards achieving a negotiated
settlement.

The draft resolution (S/2014/9l6) put before us
today is not one of those constructive steps. It would
undermine efforts to get back to an atmosphere that
would make it possible to achieve two States for two
peoples. Regrettably, instead of giving voice to the
aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis alike, the text
addresses the concerns of only one side. It is deeply
imbalanced and contains many elements that are
not conducive to negotiations between the parties,
including unconstructive deadlines that take no account
of Israel's legitimate security concerns. In addition, the
draft resolution was put to a vote without a discussion
or due consideration among Council members, which
is highly unusual, especially considering the gravity of
the matter at hand. We must proceed responsibly, and
not take actions that would risk creating a downward
spiral.

We voted against the draft resolution not because
we are comfortable with the status quo; we voted
against it because we know what everyone here knows
as well - that peace will come from hard choices and
compromises that must be made at the negotiating table.
Today's staged confrontation in the Security Council
will not bring the parties closer to achieving a two-
State solution. We voted against the draft resolution
not because we are indifferent to the daily hardships
or the security threats endured by Palestinians and
Israelis, but because we know that those hardships
will not cease and those threats will not subside until
the parties reach a comprehensive settlement achieved
through negotiations. The draft resolution sets the stage
for more division, not for compromise. It could well
serve to provoke the very confrontation it purports to
address.

For decades, the United States has worked to try
to help achieve a comprehensive end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, and we remain committed to
achieving the peace that both the Palestinians and
the Israelis deserve - two States for two peoples,
with a sovereign, viable and independent Palestine
living side by side in peace and security with a Jewish
and democratic Israel. The United States does not
just acknowledge the tremendous frustrations and
disappointments on both sides over the years in pursuit
of peace - we share them, and we understand the
immense challenges that the parties need to overcome
to make peace a reality. Yet at the same time, we
firmly believe that the status quo between Israelis and
Palestinians is unsustainable.

The United States recognizes the role that the
Council has played before in advancing a sustainable
end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including
through resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1515
(2003), which calls for the creation of a Palestinian
State alongside Israel, with both States living "side by
side within secure and recognized borders". In a May
2011 speech, President Obama elaborated further that

"the United States believes that negotiations should
result in two States with permanent Palestinian
borders with Israel, Jordan, and Egypt, and
permanent Israeli borders with Palestine... based
on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed swaps, so
that secure and recognized borders are established
for both States".

He made clear that the

"The Palestinian people must have the right to
govern themselves, and reach their full potential,
in a sovereign and contiguous State".

The United States will continue reaching out to
the parties in an effort to find a way forward, and we
are ready to engage and support them when they are
ready to return to the table. We will continue to oppose
actions by both sides that we view as detrimental to the
cause of peace, whether those actions come in the form
of settlement activity or imbalanced draft resolutions
in the Council. The parties have a responsibility to
negotiate and own the hard choices that will be needed
if they are to bring real and long-overdue change to
their region to benefit their people.

Today's vote should not be interpreted as a victory
for an unsustainable status quo. Instead, it should serve
as a wake-up call to catalyse all interested parties to
take constructive, responsible steps to achieve a two-
State solution, which remains the only way to bring
an end to the ongoing cycle of violence and suffering.
We hope that those who share our vision for peace
between two States - Israel and Palestine, both secure,
democratic and prosperous - will join us in redoubling
efforts to find a path forward that can rally international
consensus, advance future negotiations and provide a
horizon of hope for Palestinians and Israelis alike.

