Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia reiterates its strongest and
most absolute condemnation and rejection of the use
of chemical weapons and toxic substances, regardless
of who uses them or their reasons for doing so or
where such acts are perpetrated. Those responsible
must be duly investigated, tried and punished to the
fullest extent. The use of chemical weapons violates
obligations under international law.
Bolivia voted against the draft resolution
(S/2017/ 172) put forward today, which proposed a
sanctions mechanism on the Government of Syria for
using chemical weapons. Moreover, however, the draft
resolution included an annex with a list of people and
companies subject to the sanctions. None of the lists
annexed to the draft resolution was compiled by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, which
was established to investigate the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. The names of the people and
companies mentioned in the draft resolution did not
come from the Panel ofExperts ofthe Joint Investigative
Mechanism. That list therefore Violates the right to due
process. A few years ago, in this very Chamber, so-
called proof of weapons of mass destruction was found
in that same region of the world. That ended with a
country being invaded and left approximately 1 million
people dead. Allow us, therefore, to challenge the
information presented to us in today's draft resolution.

In the same vein, we believe that it is important that
the Joint Investigative Mechanism be given more time
to complete its work. We hope that its future reports
will be completed with the highest level of transparency
and political independence and that they can shed more
light on developments.

It is also important to point out that the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), which we chair, is a body that addresses
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and chemical, biological and nuclear weapons by
non-State actors. In that regard, its work is in no way
related to the issue of imposing sanctions on Syria. Its
focus is on ensuring that groups such as Islamic State
do not possess such weapons.

We believe that those reasons were enough to vote
against the draft resolution. I nevertheless believe that
it is the Security Council's duty to look at the political
context and situation above and beyond the contents
the draft resolution. Bolivia has paid great attention to
the comments made by Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General Staffan de Mistura, who stated that the region's
current ceasefire, which has indisputably led to a
considerable reduction in violence, is one of the few
remaining glimmers of hope for a political process and
a path to peace in Syria.

At the same time, we believe that these types of
initiatives -which, I reiterate, are notbased on sufficient
concrete facts or on the outcome of full, independent,
impartial and conclusive investigations - threaten
the ceasefire and, much more important, threaten the
peace process being conducted under the auspices of
the United Nations.

In that regard, we believe that it is important to
ask ourselves why this type of draft resolution was
presented to the Council when everyone knew that it
would be vetoed. Why were more extensive negotiations
not conducted to ensure that members of the Council
could participate fully and contribute to the text of the
draft resolution? What are the reasons for insisting that
the draft resolution be put before the Council - to
be vetoed, might I add, once again? The most logical
answer that we can find to those questions is that the
draft resolution presented today was simply an attempt
to use the Security Council for political purposes. The
goal was not to seek peace in Syria or to independently
and objectively identify those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons in the region; rather, it was to launch
a political media offensive on members of the Council
that voted against the draft resolution.

We believe that it is important to highlight that
there were three abstentions and three votes against
the draft resolution. We believe that that sends a very
strong signal that, unfortunately, when faced with such
types of draft resolutions, things are not functioning as
they should in the Council.

