Mr. Nambiar (India): Your delegation has been
sedulous, Madam President, in pursuing this month an
agenda of important though sombre thematic issues for
the consideration of the Council. This open meeting of
the Council on children and armed conflict deals with
one such issue. For those who believe the poet who
said that "Heaven lies about us in our infancy", the
"shades of the prison-house" that "begin to close upon
the growing boy" would appear to have a context not
quite apposite to the theme of today's debate. But they
most certainly describe the plight of many children in
different parts of the world caught up in the vicious
grip of conflicts they hardly understand but find
themselves hopelessly enmeshed in.

Children have become increasingly involved in
conflicts, both as targets of violence and as combatants.
During the last few years, more than 500,000 children,
recruited in 87 countries, with approximately 300,000
actively participating in combat, have been involved in
conflict in some form or another. Aged generally
between 15 and 18 and some as young as seven, child
soldiers are often in support services. The rise in intra-
State conflicts, compounded by conditions such as
internal displacement and refugee situations, has
caused the phenomenon of the child-soldier. It is often
impossible to make a distinction between a forced and
a voluntary child soldier. Whereas some children join
armed groups for food, survival or to avenge atrocities
committed in their communities, others are physically
abducted for war by armed groups. Enticed by
promises of food, shelter and security and sometimes
plied with drugs, child soldiers are at times led to
commit atrocities against other armed groups and
civilian populations, sometimes even against their own
communities.

The use of children in armed conflict has been
aggravated by the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons worldwide. These weapons are inexpensive,
durable, small, lightweight, easy to maintain and small
enough for them to handle. Illegal arms trafficking and
poor monitoring of the legal trade make it easy for
them to gain access to such weapons. It cannot be
denied that in many conflict situations, the most
vulnerable members of the population, particularly
women and children, are targeted with impunity. While
no leniency should be shown on crimes perpetrated
against innocent children, we need to see in perspective
the fact that many children responsible for
reprehensible crimes have often been manipulated by
unscrupulous adults to take part in armed conflicts.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, deserves our commendation for his statement
and comprehensive report (S/2003/1053). We note his
recommendations on the road ahead, including the
challenge of launching the campaign for an "era of
application". The report demonstrates that significant
progress has been made in the mandate of
incorporating the impact of armed conflict on children
in the international peace and security agenda.

Before commenting on the specifics in the report
of the Secretary-General, a few general points made in
the past by the Indian delegation may need reiteration.

The first relates to salience. How useful is it to
have thematic debates in the Security Council on
subjects such as the present one? It is true that a large
number of children are victims of armed conflicts. But
it is also a fact that malaria and AIDS kill more
children than conflicts do, but in the Council we do not
deal separately with children and malaria or children
and AIDS or request reports from the Secretary-
General on them. An unconscionable number of
children have died as a result of sanctions, but we do
not recall the Council holding a debate on the effect of
sanctions on children or seeking a report from the
Secretary-General on that subject either. A sense of
balance and perspective should be retained in order to
make sure that too narrow a focus does not blot out the
larger picture of what the Secretary-General has
designated as the soft challenges to international peace
and security.

The second point relates to applicability. There
are recommendations relating to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol and to
international humanitarian law. No role is envisaged in
any of these conventions or other legal instruments for
the Security Council in promoting their
implementation. While only States are parties to
conventions, non-State actors are not bound by them.
More important, most armed groups obey no laws,
national or international. In some cases of internal
conflict, non-State actors or rival political groupings
may make offers to adhere to such instruments
precisely to gain legitimacy or a political locus standi.
Who is to decide whether they are entitled to that or
not?

The report of the Secretary-General
(8/2003/1053) refers to the comprehensive body of
instruments, norms and commitments that provide a
basis for enforcement of the protection and rights of
children exposed to armed conflict. While adhering
States stand automatically committed and accountable
to such norms, the accountability of non-State actors
has not been adequately considered or documented.
Many of them are infused by religious or political
ideology, economic interests or simply outmoded or
feudalistic social beliefs and are known for their gross,
massive and systematic violations of the rights of
children. We would urge the Special Representative to
pay greater attention to that aspect, for it, in our view,
is the root cause of many of the problems in this area.

Similarly, we would sound a note of caution on
the recommendation to establish a dialogue and engage
in negotiations with parties to armed conflict,
particularly when such parties are non-State actors.
Non-State actors are not bound by any legal obligations
or commitments, as they have not assumed any such.
By initiating a dialogue and engaging in negotiations,
we should not encourage a process that would confer
on them any legitimacy that they should not have.

The report does catalogue the deployment of
child protection advisers in many peacekeeping
operations. It is not clear, however, whether any
assessment has been made of their work in the area of
child protection and the involvement of children in
armed conflict. A purposive audit of the efforts
undertaken so far in the area is missing in the report. It
could have been more useful if the recommendations
had built on the lessons learned after providing a
critical assessment of the work accomplished in this
area. That would have added to the efficacy of the
recommended measures.

In the subsection on monitoring and reporting,
there is a conclusion that a body of standards
constitutes the basis for monitoring. The list consists of
a number of instruments that do not command
universal acceptance or adherence. How does the
Special Representative expect to deal with monitoring
the situation of a Member State that is not party to the
Optional Protocol, the Statute of the International
Criminal Court or ILO Convention 182? The Member
State in question - while otherwise committed to the
norms and commitments concerning the promotion and
protection of the rights of children - would be right in
maintaining that it was not bound by any instrument to
which it was not a party. The Special Representative
must recognize that neither he nor anyone else, for that
matter, can seek to impose on Member States the
standards derived from these non-universal
instruments.

We should like to voice one more concern about
the agenda for monitoring and reporting. There is well-
established machinery for dealing with alleged
violations of human rights by the Government of a
State that is party to a specific human rights
instrument. The procedures in that respect are well-
known and time-honoured. The likely interface
between that procedure and the monitoring-reporting
mechanism that would come into existence as a result
of the Special Representative's recommendations is not
at all clear to us. Moreover, the treaty bodies have their
own system of dealing with non-compliance by parties
with their treaty obligations. There is the ever-present
danger of duplication and overlap.

With respect to information gathering and data
collection, the report seeks to set much store by
information collected from non-governmental
organizations. But it is not clear which non-
governmental organizations would be depended on,
how they would be chosen, how their credentials would
be vetted or which type of reliability test would be
applied to the information and data provided by the
non-governmental organizations.

In the area of monitoring and verification, the
report recommends that increasing use be made of the
field presence of the United Nations. That raises some
pertinent questions. Do the country teams -
particularly the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) - have the necessary expertise to perform
that function? Would it be within their mandates? Will
UNICEF have the necessary expertise at the field level
to perform such functions wherever it is called upon to
do so?

One final point relates to the attempts to expand
on the areas of consideration of the Security Council to
include, for example, effective monitoring of
"especially egregious violations", as mentioned in
paragraph 81 of the report. While one cannot but
recognize the motives behind the strenuous efforts to
cover the entire gamut of violations that could affect
children directly or indirectly, it must be said that there
are other United Nations bodies - such as the
Commission on Human Rights - that are mandated to
undertake such tasks. By taking a continuously
expansionist role for itself, the Security Council would
not only overlap its functioning with that of other
mandated United Nations bodies, but would also be
committing its valuable time and resource allocations
to functions best handled elsewhere.

These concerns are not raised with a view to
belittling the importance of the problem or the urgency
of the need to deal with it. Any breakdown of peace
and security and the ensuing conflict can be expected
to have a tragic impact on children. All Member States
have a duty to soften the effects of armed conflicts on
children, because they are innocent and vulnerable and
should not be made to suffer. However, we feel that we
ought to make decisions and act in ways that will lead
to effective results. We should also bear in mind the
need for obtaining the most efficient and optimal
results, as the resources that are dedicated to any of
these mandates are finite and inelastic, especially in an
era of zero-nominal growth in most United Nations
budgets. We should strive for increasing efficiency,
cost-effectiveness and impact while dealing with this
important question of protecting children from the
effects of armed conflict.

