Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset to welcome the presence of
Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta and to congratulate
him on a strong and courageous statement. His
presence among us today is tangible proof of the spirit
of cooperation that inspires relations between the
United Nations and the Timorese Government.

Like preceding speakers, I also wish to thank
Mr. Atul Khare for his excellent briefing on the
situation in Timor-Leste.

I fully subscribe to the statement to be made by
the Permanent Representative of Germany in his
capacity as President of the European Union. I shall
thus limit myself to making a few additional remarks,
which are based on three points: the elections, the
national reconciliation process, and the role and
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

We know that the year ahead will be essential for
the future of Timor-Leste. First, it is an election year
with two important events: the presidential elections of
9 April and the legislative elections. On those
occasions, it will be important to ensure that order is
maintained in keeping with the law.

We are confident that, at all levels, the candidates
will demonstrate a sense of responsibility and seek to
overcome the divisions that appeared during the events
of 2006. They must avoid reopening past wounds and
reviving old hatreds, and instead look to the future.

I note that the most recent election certification
mission made a number of recommendations that have
yet to be implemented. Accordingly, I would
emphasize the importance of a transparent and
legitimate electoral process.

However, 2007 will also be essential for healing
wounds, both those that were the cause and those that
were the consequence of the crisis of last April and
May. Belgium wishes to recall the need to implement
the 21 recommendations of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry, whose endorsement by the
parliament we welcome.

As the Commission itself has rightly stressed,
justice, peace and democracy are mutually reinforcing.
In order to achieve peace and democracy, justice must
be effective and visible. We must at all costs avoid
giving the population the impression that impunity
continues to exist, as that could lead to further
instability. The demonstrations and the fighting that
took place last week are evidence of that risk.

Political leaders in Timor-Leste have in recent
weeks taken some important steps aimed at making
clear to the people the efforts at dialogue and
reconciliation that are being undertaken. Belgium
welcomes those gestures and expresses the hope that
that spirit of dialogue will be maintained.

Thirdly, let me touch on the role and mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). I should like to congratulate UNMIT on the
work it has accomplished. The signing of a trilateral
agreement among the Government of Timor-Leste,
UNMIT and the international security forces is
commendable. The measures taken against gangs
earlier this month are clear evidence of the fruitful
collaboration between the international forces and
UNMIT.

UNMIT can now increasingly work hand in hand
with the Timorese police force. However, much
remains to be done. That is why Belgium supports the
extension of its mandate for a period of 12 months, in
line with the recommendations of Secretary-General.
We support the addition of a supplemental integrated
police unit for the electoral period, as requested of the
Security Council in a joint letter from the President of
the State, the Prime Minister and the President of the
Parliament.
The people of Timor-Leste aspire to peace and
stability. Our responsibility is to provide a context for
those legitimate aspirations to be realized. It is in that
spirit that Belgium will contribute to the negotiations
on mandate extension.

