Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I welcome to the
Council Deputy Prime Ministers Ivica Dacic of Serbia
and Hashim Thaci of Kosovo, and I thank them for
their statements. I also thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative and the Head of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing.

Over the past few years, positive developments in
the region have been hard to miss. A new Government
of Kosovo was formed through dialogue and democratic
processes. We welcome its strong commitment to build
a democratic, peaceful, prosperous and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. We call for cooperation and collective
responsibility further to prevail when resolving
numerous open issues in the country, notably in the light
of recent protests on the ground. The new Government
and the Assembly need to build on the Kosovo's reform
agenda, strengthen the rule of law, including judicial
independence, and fight against organized crime and
corruption. We call to complete the necessary steps
concerning the establishment of the specialist court to
try cases stemming from the findings of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force without further
delay.

Lithuania remains a staunch supporter of Kosovo's
European aspirations. We look forward to the
finalization of the atabilization and association
agreement between the European Union (EU) and
Kosovo and encourage making progress on the visa
liberalization dialogue. We also commend the Kosovo
Government on the recent adoption of the action plan
for the implementation of the recommendations of the
European Commission progress report.

Next week, the EU-facilitated dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina is to take place in Brussels. We
welcome the commitment of both parties to continue
seeking progress on their way in the normalization
process. We encourage both sides and their leaders
to show the decisiveness necessary for the common
European future and to engage actively in further
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations, signed on
19 April 2013, translating the Agreement into results on
the ground and building trust among the communities.

We reiterate our support for the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). We note
its important role on the ground in the fight against
organized crime and corruption, the prosecution of

war crimes and the fight against impunity. Again, my
delegation wishes to remind the Council that over a year

ago Audrius Senavicius, a Lithuanian officer serving in
EULEX, was killed while on duty in northern Kosovo.
We ask the competent authorities to provide information
on the progress of the investigation.

We commend the solidarity Kosovo authorities
have demonstrated in the fight against terrorism. We
welcome the adoption by the Kosovo Assembly of the
law on the prohibition ofjoining the armed conflicts
outside State territory.

Finally, I wish to reiterate our view that debating the
UNMIK report twice times a year, instead of quarterly,
would be a reasonable step forward to acknowledge
the progress in the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina and the stability in Kosovo.

