Mr. Patriota (Brazil): We welcome this
opportunity to highlight the importance of diplomatic
tools in a world where we so often see a hastened resort
tO coercive measures.

I also thank the Secretary-General and Human
Rights High Commissioner Navi Pillay for their
briefings. I take this opportunity to congratulate
Ms. Pillay for her dedication, professionalism and
personal commitment to the promotion and protection
of human rights in a non-selective manner.

Two significant anniversaries that have close
relation to the issue of conflict prevention are being
celebrated in 2014. Two hundred years have passed
since the Congress of Vienna, when an exercise in
multipolar coordination, albeit circumscribed to the
European continent, was conceived, fostering a century
of relative peace. We also remember 100 years since
the onslaught of the First World War, a war considered
today by many historians as having been avoidable and
the result of a failure of leadership and diplomacy. As
we reflect on the legacy of those watershed events, it
is appropriate that we ponder the effectiveness of the
means available to prevent armed conflicts. In so doing,
let us not concentrate only on the Security Council's
business-as-usual approach, nor focus only on those
conflicts that draw the attention of the Council.

Brazil values and encourages efforts in mediation,
good offices, early warning and conciliation measures.
Preventive diplomacy, nevertheless, goes beyond those
diplomatic actions. The greatest threats to international
peace and security need to be addressed in a much more
encompassing way, touching on subjects on which the
Council rarely dwells. First and foremost, preventing
conflicts demands the fulfillment of commitments. In
the field of disarmament, for example, scarce progress
has been achieved towards the elimination of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.

Political commitments should also to be honoured.
The Council can make an important contribution to
conflict prevention if it truly engages in resolving
protracted disputes that sow the seeds for renewed
violence in many regions, as the latest conflict in Gaza
attestes yet again. Resolute action by the Security
Council to face its responsibilities regarding the Israel-
Palestine dispute would be a crucial measure to prevent
renewed conflict in the Middle East and beyond. It is
important to recall that resolution 1515 (2003), which
endorses the vision ofa region where two States, Israel
and Palestine, live side by side within secure and
recognized borders, remains unimplemented.

Ifwe are to focus on situations oftension and threats
to peace in parts of the world that are less developed,
another way we can help prevent conflict is through
the fulfillment of multilateral pledges to build more
just and inclusive societies. Commitments to official
development assistance remain far below the goals
set by the Monterrey Consensus in 2002, as very few
developed nations have achieved their national targets
regarding aid flows.

Above and beyond such considerations, perhaps the
most efficient way to prevent conflict is to support and
sustain a strong and functional multilateral system that
is able to respond to evolving challenges. The system,
founded on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, is being eroded by actions or behaviour that a
meeting such today's would do well to debate.

To strengthen the multilateral system and thus
strengthen our capacity to prevent conflicts, it is
necessary to abandon the reflex of resorting to coercive
measures as the very first option. Unilateral sanctions,
for example, corrode the credibility of the international
order, frequently harm the civilian population and have
demonstrably revealed themselves to be inadequate in
changing behaviour.

Blind faith in the effectiveness of military action
to promote stability is another threat to the kind of
multilateralism that is most conducive to peace. The
recent spiralling of violence in countries such as Iraq,
Syria, Libya and Afghanistan should give us pause
for reflection in that regard. In all of those scenarios,
serious setbacks have demonstrated the limitations of
strategies that attribute to the use of force a role that it
does not and cannot fulfil in today's world. To counter
such belligerent logic is to actively prevent conflicts.

The narratives of exceptionalism - the belief that
universal rules and obligations somehow do not apply
to a certain country or group of countries - equally
challenge the strong system we need in order to prevent
conflicts. Preventive diplomacy requires repudiating
double standards when dealing with threats to peace,
thereby avoiding incoherence when facing similar
problems.

Issues of governance also hinder our ability to
better prevent crises. To avert conflicts we should
urgently reinforce the credibility of the institutions
responsible for upholding international peace, the most
important of which is the Security Council. Updating
the composition of the Security Council in order to
make it more inclusive and legitimate in line with the
geopolitical realities of the contemporary world will
decisively strengthen its efficiency and credibility,
and thus enhance the overall preventive capacity of
the United Nations. If no action is taken, the Council
faces a real risk of becoming increasingly obsolete, in
which case efforts to promote preventive diplomacy
will ultimately suffer their greatest setback.

Among the various tools to promote conflict
prevention at the disposal of the United Nations, the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) deserves to be
highlighted. By fostering joint international strategies
on reconstruction, institution-building and policy-
development in vulnerable environments, the PBC has
a key role to play in averting the recurrence of conflict
and in promoting a culture of prevention of conflicts.
The issuance today of a PBC statement on the current
Ebola crisis in West Africa is a good example ofhow the
PBC can contribute to raise awareness - in that case
in helping to prevent a public health emergency from
becoming a post-conflict peacebuilding emergency.

As the current President of the PBC, Brazil
convened the first annual session of the Commission in
June, when we highlighted national ownership, regional
engagement and programmatic interventions as three
elements vital to the consolidation of sustainable peace.
We are confident that the 10-year comprehensive review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture in
2015 will strengthen the role of the PBC along with that
of the Peacebuilding Fund, to the benefit of prevention.

To conclude, let me recall that Brazil has inscribed
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes
into its Constitution. Along with our neighbours, we
are consolidating South America as an area of peace,
democracy and cooperation. The Member States of the
zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
have shown their commitment to consolidating the
South Atlantic as an area of peace, cooperation and
sustainable development, free from nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction.

Let me reiterate that Brazil, in the United Nations
and elsewhere, will always privilege diplomacy,
dialogue and persuasion over coercion and will continue
to be an active supporter of improving multilateral tools
to prevent and resolve conflicts.

