Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning.

Japan is deeply concerned about the serious and
worsening situation in Syria and profoundly deplores
the death of many thousands of people as a result of
the continued violence. Japan reiterates its call on all
parties in Syria to immediately halt the violence and
abuses of human rights, and condemns the Syrian
authorities for not keeping their own commitments and
responsibilities to protect their own citizens. The recent
deaths of Turkish civilians near the Syrian border are a
tragic incident that shows the increasing Violence is not
only causing harm to Syrian people but also spilling
over into neighbouring countries. Japan welcomes
the press statement issued by the Security Council on
4 October (SC/10783) and condemns in the strongest
terms such acts of transboundary violence.

Japan once again urges the Syrian authorities to
cease violence immediately and to carry out concrete
measures for a Syrian-led political transition, including
in the framework of the Friends of Syria. The ad hoc
ministerial meeting on Syria held last month provided
an important occasion to strengthen coordination
among parties towards a peaceful transition in Syria.
Japan has not just implemented significant economic
sanctions, but we will also soon host the next meeting
of the working group on sanctions.

It is necessary for the international community to
step up the pressure in a unified manner. In that regard,
Japan deems it extremely regrettable that the Security
Council has thus far failed to unite and speak in one
voice, in line with such international efforts.

Japan welcomes and strongly supports the
diplomatic efforts by the Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi. The unconditional and swift
implementation of Mr. Annan's six-point plan, together
with the transition plan set forth in the Action Group
communique' (8/2012/523, annex), are essential in order
to bring about a democratic and pluralistic political
system.

Japan is gravely concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation of the Syrian people. For
that reason, the Japanese Government has so far
provided emergency grant aid totalling $13 million,
and cooperated effectively with relevant international
agencies to improve the humanitarian situation of
Syria. Moreover, Japan commends the efforts by the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Valerie Amos, to coordinate humanitarian
assistance and bring the worsening humanitarian
situation in Syria to the attention of the international
community. As we enter into winter, we underline the
importance of allowing humanitarian personnel full
and unimpeded access to people in need of assistance.

The Middle East peace process represents a
linchpin to the peace and stability of the region. Japan
firmly supports a two-State solution, in which Israel
and a future independent Palestinian State would live
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition.
We would also like to remind both sides that a two-State
solution can only be achieved through sincere direct
negotiations between the parties concerned. Japan
deplores Israel's settlement activities and reiterates its
call upon Israel to fully freeze such activities, while we
also urge both sides to further their confidence-building
efforts.

Japan has been supporting the efforts of the
Palestinians towards establishing an independent State
and is committed to continue to provide assistance. We
strongly hope that the entire international community,
in particular donor countries, is united to assist the
Palestinians. Support to the fiscal stability of the
Palestinian Authority is a necessary task that Israel
should carry out. In that regard, Japan welcomes the
understanding between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority regarding the transfer of goods and related
tax procedures.

