Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): Reconciliation is
surely a critical issue for the Security Council. As we
have said before in this Chamber, peace is a process, not
an event. Silencing the guns is fundamental but does not
of itself bring societies together. Almost always, there
follows a long process of acknowledging past wrongs,
rebuilding trust and preparing for a shared future.

Ireland's understanding of reconciliation is shaped
most profoundly by our own peace process, founded on
the 1998 Good Friday agreement, which brought to an
end some 30 years of violence in Northern Ireland, and
where the work of protecting the peace and furthering
reconciliation continues today. The Irish and United
Kingdom Governments work in partnership within
the framework of that agreement, which commits all
parties to

"the achievement of reconciliation, tolerance and
mutual trust, and to the protection and vindication
of the human rights of all".

True reconciliation is surely at the heart of all
successful peace processes.

There can be little doubt that reconciliation in itself
is not an easy process. We in Ireland have also learned
that to be successful, it must be inclusive. One ofthe key
women involved in building peace in Northern Ireland,
Avila Kilmurray, spoke recently of the importance of
the work of local women's community groups, groups
such as the Foyle Women's Information Network and
the Training for Women Network in Northern Ireland.
Their brave efforts in their own communities to build
shared understanding has been key to building trust on
the ongoing road we follow to reconciliation.

It is precisely because we know the value of
local community efforts to build reconciliation that
the Irish Government established the Reconciliation
Fund in 1982. Last year the Fund supported 153
non-governmental organizations, community groups
and voluntary organizations, specifically to promote
reconciliation and to create a better understanding
between the people and traditions on the island of
Ireland, and between Ireland and Britain.

The International Fund for Ireland was established
in 1986 jointly by the United Kingdom and Irish
Governments as an independent body to encourage
contact, dialogue and reconciliation across the island of
Ireland. That organization continues its essential work
as part of our peacebuilding framework to this day. It
has benefited from support from international partners
including the United States, Canada, Australia, New
Zealand and, importantly, the European Union. As with
achieving peace agreements, the deeper subsequent
task of reconciliation can be significantly assisted
through the support, perspective and cross-learning of
committed international partners. While progress has
been made on so many fronts in our own peace process
in Ireland, challenges and obstacles remain.

While no two conflict situations are the same, it is
useful to share experiences ofreconciliation, from local
processes and dialogue to national truth commissions.
We believe that the United Nations should work to
capture and share those experiences across contexts
and across continents. Ireland supports principled,
locally-sensitive approaches to accountability and
reconciliation, which work to maximize peace and
justice and guarantee victims' rights and incorporate
what we like to call a critical analysis of the context in
which conflict occurred.

Too often reconciliation is left as the last issue
once the immediate violence has stopped and when the
attention of the international community has already
turned elsewhere. In particular, we see transitions
from United Nations peacekeeping operations as an
important moment to systematically ensure that we
have a focus on supporting continued reconciliation
efforts there and at all levels. We believe that this can
be done through strengthened United Nations country
teams, engagement with the Peacebuilding Commission
and support for the Peacebuilding Fund.

Our view is that the Security Council, too, can and,
frankly, must do more. As the resolutions on sustaining
peace pointed out, investment in peace requires a
cross-pillar approach, for which reconciliation is a
fundamental critical element. Putting resources behind
that work is a necessary and worthwhile investment,
and we urge the Council to play its role. As an aspiring
member of this body, we look forward to having our
opportunity to step up to the plate and play our part in
that endeavour in 2021-2022.

