Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Among
the issues in the precise and detailed overview
submitted to us by Mr. Annabi, it is obviously the
upcoming holding of municipal elections that
commands our attention. A major milestone was
crossed last week with the announcement of the date
for the balloting. We welcome the decision made by the
Special Representative, which, I emphasize, was in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the 8 July
regulations governing the elections.

These local elections come at the right time. This
is an indispensable phase for the establishment of a
culture of democracy in Kosovo. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
effectively and competently led by Mr. Kouchner, has
been methodically striving for a number of months now
to prepare for them as rigorously as possible. It must,
with our help, pursue these efforts.

That requires a climate of calm, which UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) are tirelessly striving to
restore. Reconciliation, of course, cannot be decreed. It
is a process that takes time and for which we must
mobilize all our efforts. Progress has been made over
recent months thanks, notably, to steps taken by the
Special Representative. We must build on them and in
no way cede anything to the extremists on all sides
who try to sabotage the results already achieved and to
cause the electoral process to fail.

The continuation of violence is unacceptable. In a
recent statement, the European Union condemned in
the strongest terms the intolerable acts perpetrated
recently against children, as well as the attack on the
building of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe mission in Pristina.

The holding of municipal elections under the
right conditions will make it possible to build on
progress made since June 1999. These strides have
been made thanks to the contributions made since the
start of the operation. The European Union continues to
be by far the major contributor for Kosovo, with a
contribution of over 3 billion euros in 1999 and 2000 in
the civil sphere. Its member States are providing
almost two thirds of the KFOR troops, which brings
the total contribution of the European Union to 8
billion euros over these past two years.

Recently, the European Union decided to support
UNMIK's efforts to fight against the major risks of
environmental deterioration caused by the industrial
and mining complex Trepca. Through the European
reconstruction agency, the European Union will thus
provide aid amounting to almost 6 million euros to
rehabilitate the Zvecan smelter that Mr. Annabi talked
to us about.

Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. McNamara and his team. If the humanitarian pillar
ceases to operate, it will be because it has completely
fulfilled its mission and this success should be hailed.

