Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this new opportunity to make a
statement before the Council. As you just stated, Sir,
the subject of the meeting this morning is the situation
in Darfur and the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2015/378) on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
which was transmitted to the members of the Council
on 26 May. My statement will focus on two main points.
First, I will make a few general observations on the
situation in Darfur and the activities of UNAMID; then,
I will weigh in on the process of drafting a withdrawal
strategy for UNAMID and related recommendations in
the report of the Secretary-General.

(spoke in English)

The report before the Council analyses a very
serious security situation, including the continued
need for substantial humanitarian assistance in Darfur
and the limited progress in the peace process. In
addition, it describes a deeply concerning increase in
violent attacks by armed assailants against UNAMID
and humanitarian personnel. Most worrisome is the
devastating impact that the security situation has had
on innocent civilians and the obstacles that violence
has created for their protection and for humanitarian
operations.

The second phase of the Government's military
offensive, called Operation Decisive Summer, has
resulted in high numbers of newly displaced people.
Humanitarian organizations estimate that at least
78,000 people have been newly displaced by conflict
in Darfur this year alone. In addition, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has received
reports of some 130,000 additional internally displaced
persons (IDPs), but has not yet been able to verify that.
Most ofthose unverified IDPs are said to be in the Jebel
Marra area, where the heaviest fighting has been taking
place and which is mostly inaccessible to humanitarian
partners. There is also significant concern about
reports of indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and other violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

In addition, the current year has seen intercommunal
conflicts leading to periodic outbreaks of violence.
Beyond the resource conflicts that ignited this Violence,
the destabilizing impact of broader political tensions
and numerous paramilitary groups and militias, the
proliferation of small arms and the manner in which
local authorities have responded to insecurity have all
contributed to aggravating the situation. Crime is also a
major source of insecurity, with various armed persons
taking advantage of the relative absence of security
forces in most areas to attack civilians. This worsening
security environment in parts of Darfur continues to
have significant implications for the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and UNAMID.

Despite the difficult operating environment,
including movement restrictions and other obstructions
imposed by the belligerent parties, UNAMID remains
resolute in its commitment to deliver on its three
strategic priorities.

As part of the continued implementation of the
strategic review, the United Nations Secretariat
continues to work with the mission's leadership,
the African Union and other partners to ensure that
peacekeepers in Darfur are able to carry out their
mandate effectively and efficiently. The adequate
responses by units when attacked and the proactive
approach shown when protecting IDPs are indicators
of continuous improvements as a result of the requested
changes in attitude, robustness and training.

On the civilian side, the focus has remained on
the streamlining of personnel and the process of
transferring some of UNAMID's mandated tasks to
the United Nations country team. An analysis has been
conducted to identify which of these tasks could be
carried out by UNAMID, which should be implemented
jointly with the United Nations country team, and those
in which the team could have a comparative advantage.
The operational plan for the implementation of this
process is being developedjointly by UNAMID and the
country team and will be based on specific benchmarks,
taking into account certain preconditions, including the
mobilization of adequate financial resources and the
necessary support from the Government of the Sudan.

With regard to UNAMID's achievements, I will
limit my remarks to the protection of civilians, which
has received sustained attention and effort by the
mission over the last few months.

UNAMID has continued to effectively implement
its protection-of-civilians mandate through the
provision of physical protection, logistical and security
support to humanitarian operations, the promotion of a
protective environment, and local conflict mediation. In
this context, the mission has revised its protection-of-
civilians strategy, which is now being implemented by
its relevant components.

The most significant achievements over the
reporting period were related to the establishment
of protective areas within or in the vicinity of team
sites and instances in which peacekeepers repelled or
prevented attacks against civilians, conducted robust
patrols to affected villages and escorted humanitarian
missions during intercommunal clashes. Protection
committees were also formed with IDPs to coordinate
relevantprotection activities in collaboration with
humanitarian personnel.

Let me turn now to the development of an exit
strategy for UNAMID. In February 2015, a joint
working group was established between the United
Nations, the African Union and the Government of the
Sudan to respond to the request of the Security Council
in its resolution 2173 (2014) for the development of an
exit strategy for UNAMID, as well as to address the
particular concerns raised by the Government of the
Sudan in this regard. As mentioned in the Secretary-
General's report, following a field visit and two rounds
of discussions, the Working Group has not yet produced
a conclusion, and consultations will resume in the
coming weeks. However, during the meetings, the
African Union-United Nations team explored the idea
of a two-pronged approach with the Government.

First, UNAMID's proposed exit strategy is based
on the achievement of the mission's benchmarks,
as endorsed by the Council last year and premised
on a political solution to the conflict based on direct
talks between the parties, starting with a cessation of
hostilities.

The proposed exit strategy is also based on the
gradual and phased withdrawal of UNAMID's force
from Western Darfur, where there have not been any
major activities by armed groups or intercommunal
fighting in the past two years. The gradual reduction
in UNAMID's presence in Western Darfur would be
complemented by a progressive handover of its tasks
to the Government and the United Nations country
team, as the necessary conditions for a consolidation
of security in the State are created by the national
authorities. This approach would reflect the mission's
efforts to concentrate on its three strategic priorities
while further demonstrating flexibility and efficiency
by reducing its size. As part of this, UNAMID would
also Close three other team sites in Northern and
Southern Darfur that, in accordance with the findings
of the recently concluded military capability study,
are assessed to be in areas that do not necessitate the
mission's presence.

(spoke in French)

Allow me in conclusion to make one last remark.
Resolving the conflict in Darfur now more than ever
requiresjoint efforts on the part ofthe Security Council,
the African Union and the international community
as a whole in order to make the belligerent parties
understand that there cannot be a military solution. The
suffering endured by the people of Darfur has lasted for
far too long and must cease immediately.

Despite the encouraging progress made in the
negotiations in 2014, the prospect for a lasting solution
to the crisis seems to be but wishful thinking in the
current context. The relaunching of direct negotiations
and national dialogue must remain the priority.

While reiterating our thanks to the Sudanese
authorities for their efforts to achieve better cooperation
with UNAMID, I should like to stress the fact that the

United Nations and the African Union have no objective
other than the well-being of the population, an end to the
violence and an negotiated end to the crisis, in order to
being a process of harmonious development in Darfur
and, following that, the entire country of the Sudan. We
know that the Government of the Republic of the Sudan
also shares this goal. That is why the preparation of an
exit strategy for UNAMID must be linked to the results
obtained vis-a-vis that goal and a specific improvement
in the situation on the ground.

When our efforts in this area have borne fruit
and the population has been freed from fear and
violence, that will be the time for us to disengage. In
the meantime, we must continue our cooperation on the
basis of mutual trust. That is why, in common accord
with the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, the Secretariat of the United Nations asks that
the mandate of UNAMID be extended for an additional
year, until June 2016.

