Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this urgent debate ofthe Security Council
on the issue of Ebola.

Today, more than ever before, West Africa is facing
an exceptionally critical and dangerous situation, in
particular in the countries most affected by Ebola:
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. The epidemic is of
unprecedented magnitude due to its geographical reach,
the number of cases and the number of victims, which
is increasing daily. The World Health Organization
figures, the reports of Medecins Sans Frontieres and
various international forums and the scenes that the
media describe daily are indeed horrible. Nearly 5,000
people are infected. More than 2,400 men, women and
children have already died due to the virus. And there
are fears that the actual death toll could be higher than
that.

With a public health system that is already very
weak and on the verge of collapse, the few hospitals
that still exist in those countries and the few treatment
centres are completely overwhelmed. Patients are
turned away, and people are dying, literally, in the
streets. Others are, right now, just sitting, waiting to
die alone and abandoned.

The situation is deteriorating by the day, since
there is no vaccine or specific treatment. The virus is
spreading rapidly. It is highly contagious and deadly in
25 to 90 per cent of the cases. It is an unprecedented
epidemic, absolutely lacking any controls. The number
of people infected could rapidly double, or even triple,
if not more, with profound implications not only for the
region, but for the entire planet as well.

The Ebola crisis requires an exceptional
international response to address the health crisis and
the wider political and economic and, as President
Obama said, security threats in the affected countries.
We must urgently control the epidemic and we must act
quickly. All parts of the international community are
therefore called on today to coordinate a greater global
response; control the outbreak and prevent its spread;
continue scientific research in the hope of finding
new treatments and, hopefully, vaccines; allocate the
financial and human resources necessary to support
strategies to combat the deadly virus; build additional
treatment units, including new insolation areas on
the ground; distribute information packets to local
families so they can better protect themselves; support
national efforts in the affected areas; help affected
countries to cope with the impact on the economies of
local communities to prevent a humanitarian disaster
and economic collapse; help those countries to build a
sustainable public health system; and finally create an
air bridge to obtain humanitarian assistance, medical
supplies and to ensure the movement of medical
personnel.

Concerned by the negative effects of the isolation
of the countries affected by Ebola and the restrictions
imposed on them, Morocco has decided, on the
instructions of His Majesty the King, in a gesture of
solidarity, to break the isolation and quarantine of
the African countries affected by the Ebola virus by
maintaining the Royal Air Maroc flights. To be sure,
Royal Air Maroc has maintained its regular flights to
the countries affected by Ebola. It continues to serve
those countries on a regular basis by providing three
flights per week to Liberia, four to Sierra Leone and
seven to Guinea, Conakry. The airports in Conakry,
Monrovia and Freetown will continue to receive Royal
Air Maroc aeroplanes. In another gesture of solidarity,
Morocco is providing appropriate assistance to those
three countries.

The decision to maintain the regular Royal Air
Maroc flight schedule reflects the fraternal feeling that
ties Morocco to its African brother countries, and the
feeling of belonging to a single future community and
of solidarity and commitment through good and bad
times.

In conclusion, allow me to simply say that this
Chamber customarily resonates with speeches on
human rights in Africa, on conflicts, on collapse and
on genocide. This time Africa needs the Chamber
to resonate not only with speeches of solidarity, but
also speeches about commitments and decisions and
measures to come to the assistance of the continent
and in particular West Africa, especially those three
African countries. As the Minister of Sierra Leone
said, Ebola cannot be isolated. However, it will gravely
harm the countries who drown in their misfortune. We
are therefore called upon to ensure that this does not
ever happen again.

