Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): First, I
thank you, Sir, for having invited the Security Council to
join in the mourning and sorrow of the royal family of
Morocco for the passing of His Majesty Hassan II. We
are also grateful to the Secretary-General for having
represented the United Nations through his presence at
His Majesty's funeral. The King of Morocco embodied a
vision and a policy of peace, openness and tolerance. He
was respected and loved by his people. France was
honoured to be among his friends.

In her statement to the Council at its meeting in May
on the situation in Kosovo, the High Commissioner for
Refugees concluded with an appeal to the members of the
Council. Mrs. Ogata invited us to ensure that the entirely
necessary and justified emergency mobilization on behalf
of the Kosovar refugees not lead to neglect of the other
hotbeds of crisis throughout the world, first and foremost
in Africa. The High Commissioner's recent visit to Africa
and presence here with us today are reminders of that
appeal. Indeed, there have been many indications of the
high priority attached to the situation of refugees in that
part of the world, not only by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), but
by the entire United Nations.

Our debate here in the Security Council - for
which initiative we thank you, Sir - should also be an
opportunity for us to confirm and strengthen the
international community's commitment. We are
responsible for doing everything possible to ensure that
Africa not feel that, once again, it is the victim of
imbalanced policies, of which the Ambassador of China
cited examples.

 

As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees just reminded us, the situation of refugees in
Africa is of great concern. The figures speak for
themselves: of the world's approximately 22 million
refugees, more than one third are located in Africa. In the
Great Lakes region alone there are 6 million refugees and
displaced persons. Given the magnitude of the task, all our
energy must be mobilized and every solution explored.

In his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace in Africa (S/1998/318), the
Secretary-General dealt with the question of refugees in the
more general context of humanitarian assistance. A number
of priorities are urgent, and they were identified at that
time. First, there is the issue of the protection of civilians
in areas of hostility. As the fighting continues to rage, we
might ask ourselves whether this objective has been
attained. There is also the issue of the creation of zones of
peace for children. Once again, despite the efforts of Olara
Otunnu, we are very far from having truly succeeded in
implementing this basic requirement.

With regard to the negotiation of provisional ceasefires
to provide foodstuffs and emergency assistance, I believe
that some real progress has been made in the field. We
know that ensuring the security and protection of refugee
populations, particularly by separating them from armed
elements, is a fundamental problem, and some have found
it to be the source of the continued fighting in the Great
Lakes region. Finally, there is the issue of assistance to host
countries, which are frequently destabilized by the massive
influx of refugees. The representative of Gabon earlier told
us how his country has had to cope with the problems
created by receiving refugees. We should also consider the
situation of a poor African country such as Guinea, which
was obliged to receive a very large number of refugees.

The implementation of all of these measures thus has
a cost, as does the day-to-day management of emergency
situations, a problem which the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees must continually
confront. In this context, we can only welcome the money-
saving measures already taken by UNHCR as well as its
efforts to bring about budgetary and administrative
restructuring. With regard to Africa in particular, we
welcome the reforms that are being carried out within
UNHCR to create a new, single structure for the entire
continent. The introduction of results-based human resource
management methods should also be emphasized to show
that UNHCR is doing its part, spontaneously, under Mrs.
Ogata's authority, in order to attain, to the extent possible,
the objectives that have been set.

The financial situation of UNHCR's African
programmes, of course, remains worrying. Only the
programmes for Angola have more than 50 per cent
financing. For Eritrea, Ethiopia and Sierra Leone, funding
is at about 25 per cent. For the Democratic Republic of
the Congo it is less than 25 per cent, and for the Republic
of the Congo it is less than 10 per cent. Those statistics
relate to what refugees or displaced persons receive in
Africa as compared with Europe. That should prompt us,
the Members of the United Nations, to assume our
responsibilities.

Of course, as the Secretary-General has reminded us,
a great deal depends on the Africans themselves. The
question of refugees cannot be resolved without
conclusively resolving the problems being experienced in
Africa: underdevelopment, an increase in conflicts and the
difficult transition to democracy and good governance.
But again, on all these points, we - and the Security
Council in particular - can and must act. We must help
the African States in their transition to good governance
and democracy and, in particular, in settling regional
conflicts. We must also provide material and financial
assistance to UNHCR. For its part, despite the bilateral
obligations that it is striving to fulfil with all developing
countries, my country has sought in recent years to
maintain the level of its contributions.

We have already heard Mrs. Ogata tell us that there
are some signs of hope following recent events and the
agreements that have been reached. But I should like to
invite her to give some thought to several issues. The first
relates to Guinea, which is the primary host country in
Africa. It has almost 500,000 refugees on its territory,
most of them from Sierra Leone and Liberia. Guinea,
which is a poor country, is in no position to respond
alone to this major challenge. Last June's progress report
from the Office of the High Commissioner revealed the
inadequacy of funding for UNHCR's programme. I am
not certain that the trust fund that we asked to be set up
has been properly provided for. My question, therefore, is
whether Mrs. Ogata has been able recently to detect
progress in the financial replenishment of the programme,
which is essential for Guinea.
In Sierra Leone, what prospects for the return of
refugees have been opened up by the new agreements?
Has UNHCR already prepared a repatriation plan?
Outside Freetown, where it has recently re-established
itself, UNHCR has recently observed a significant
population of displaced persons who are not receiving any
assistance whatsoever. What is the situation today, given

 

that the parties signed a peace plan last month in Lorne,
and what is the distribution of tasks between UNHCR and
the International Committee of the Red Cross? As for
Angola, we would of course appreciate anything that Mrs.
Ogata can tell us about what seems to have been a serious
deterioration in the situation.

Lastly, with regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the first reports from the Office of the High
Commissioner mention a large number of refugees moving
towards Tanzania, and some of the accounts of the refugees
unfortunately leave us in no doubt about the cruelty of the
fighting and its tragic consequences for the civilian
population. We are aware of the signs of hope and the
improvement in the situation, about which Mrs. Ogata has
informed us, particularly with regard to the possibility of
the return of refugees. But any additional information about
what is happening, in particular with regard to the flows of
refugees to Tanzania, would enable us better to direct our
assistance and gain an awareness of the urgent needs to be
met.

