Mr. al-Istrabadi (Iraq): I should like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Council for
again convening this important and timely debate on
protecting civilians in armed conflict. Regrettably, this
topic is all too poignant and relevant for Iraq, as it is in
too many places around the globe. We suffer daily from
repeated and senseless attacks on our civilian
population - children, women and men. Our schools
are targeted by terrorists, as are the playgrounds in
which our children play. Houses of worship and
religious leaders, particularly in the Shia community,
have often been the targets of terrorist attacks. Funerals
and even hospitals have also been repeatedly targeted.

The ubiquity of light and automatic arms and the
ease with which they are transported across
international borders feed the terrorists' assembly line
of death and mayhem. In Iraq, this has resulted this
year alone in an estimated death toll of 30,000 civilian
men, women and children. The goal of this senseless
carnage, whether committed in Iraq or elsewhere, is
clear: to disrupt ordinary life and engender fear and
panic in the civilian population. In the specific case of
Iraq, it is also designed to dissuade the international
community from engaging with us in the reconstruction
of our country. Sadly, many have become inured to this
condition. It is rare indeed that a colleague, even here
in the halls of the United Nations, thinks to condole us
on any given day when another hundred or so Iraqi
civilians have been killed.

The new Iraq stands today along with the
civilized countries of the world in condemning the
senseless and unjustifiable targeting of civilians. Our
position is clear and unequivocal: the targeting of
civilians is wrong at all times and in all places,
regardless of the cause. Nothing can justify a
derogation from the universally applicable principle
that all belligerents must protect civilians at all times.
No grievance, however legitimate, no religion and no
political dispute can justify any deviation from this
settled principle. It is fundamental in international
humanitarian law, as it is in the conduct of the affairs
of all civilized peoples.

But it is time to do more than just accept and
debate another report on this issue. The United Nations
and Member States should undertake practical steps to
combat this scourge. In his report, the Secretary-
General has made several concrete proposals to deal
with States and groups that fail to discharge their duties
to protect civilians. We urge the international
community to take up those proposals.

To the extent that the Council again uses
economic sanctions in the face of aggression against
civilians, it is particularly appropriate for Iraq to
remind it that it must ensure that such sanctions do not
exact a toll from the most vulnerable in society,
including children.

It is also time to establish strict protocols
safeguarding against the transportation of light and
automatic weapons across international boundaries.
Unequivocal condemnation of terrorism wherever it
may occur, coupled with controls on the transport of
weapons, will undoubtedly result in decreased
suffering by civilian populations worldwide.

As a country which itself is suffering from a
terrorist campaign which targets civilians as a matter of
course on a daily basis, we are disappointed that
momentum has stalled on completing a convention on
terrorism in the General Assembly. A clear and
unequivocal condemnation of terrorism by the
Assembly would go a long way towards affirming the
commitment of the international community to enforce
the duty to protect civilians at all times in all places.

We congratulate the Security Council for
repeatedly taking a unanimous stand to condemn those
who target civilians, not least in resolution 1618
(2005), which condemns such tactics in Iraq. We
pledge to redouble our efforts to achieving progress on
this vital issue in the General Assembly and urge all
Member States to do the same.

