Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to express our
condolences and sympathy to our United Kingdom
colleagues, all the victims and the families of those
who were killed in yesterday's terrorist attack in
London. We strongly condemn that murderous attack,
which once again confirms the need for coordinated
action to effectively counter the global terrorist threat.
We believe that that tragic event clearly demonstrates
the timeliness and necessity of our initiatives to
unify the efforts of the international community to
combat terrorism.

The successful completion of the electoral process
in Somalia and the election of the new President,
Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, has been
an important milestone in moving the country forward
on the path of national reconciliation, re-establishing
State authority and consolidating democratic
institutions. A Prime Minister has been appointed, a
new Government has been formed and the process of
establishing a system of territorial administration has
practically been completed.

However, we must note that a clan-based approach
continues to prevail, unfortunately, in the domestic
political life of the country. We need to gradually move
away from that tendency and eliminate the fragmented
nature of the Somali State at every level. We expect that
the new Government will address the issues associated
with internal political reforms, socioeconomic
revitalization and development. We look forward to
the positive outcome of the serious work currently
under way on preparing a new version of the country's
Constitution and on adopting a law on political
parties. At the same time, the most important tasks
for the Government continue to be the strengthening
of the security sector, solidifying the foundations
of federalism and promoting a lasting national and
interethnic reconciliation in Somalia.

In our estimation, the security situation remains
far from stable. We note the importance of continuing
coordinated efforts by the international community to
provide multidimensional assistance to Mogadishu so as
to enhance the combat readiness of the Somali National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia, which
bear the primary burden for combating Al-Shabaab.
We are concerned about the increase in destabilizing
activity by that terrorist group beyond Somalia and the
coordination of its actions with other terrorist groups in
Africa. However, to date, achieving a decisive turning
point in the fight against extremists has been impossible.
In that regard, we call for a resolution ofthe issue of the
delays in paying salaries to African peacekeepers and
Somali soldiers and officers, who shed their blood to
ensure Somalia's safety and security.

The arms and coal embargoes against Somalia are
an important and effective instrument in preventing
extremist and terrorist forces from resupplying
and re-arming. It is those forces that prevent the
normalization of the region. The policy of partially
lifting the embargo on arms to benefit the security
forces of Somalia has proven its effectiveness.

The seriously deteriorating humanitarian situation
in several parts of Somalia demands close attention
and an appropriate international response. It was
caused primarily by a combination of the catastrophic
consequences of the drought and the persistent internal
instability. Hundreds of thousands of people in the
country are on the verge of starvation, and forecasts
for the near future are far from encouraging. The
international community must provide humanitarian
assistance to ensure that the population is provided
with drinking water, food and medicine. Russia is
actively taking part in developing coordinated steps
aimed at resolving the crisis, as well as in providing
multidimensional assistance to the authorities in
Mogadishu. We will continue training Somali civilian
experts in Russia, the funding for which will be
provided by the Russian federal budget.

Our country has regularly provided humanitarian
assistance to the Federal Government of Somalia and
Somali refugees in neighbouring countries through
targeted contributions to the relevant funds of the
United Nations system. Since 2011, our overall share
in providing assistance has exceeded $16 million,
including $2 million for Kenya, which has hosted
approximately 1 million Somali refugees. We intend
to continue to provide similar humanitarian assistance
to Somalia.

