Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): If I
may, I should like to thank those who have briefed us,
and especially to extend a warm welcome to the High
Representative of the European Union.

Let me begin by aligning myself with the
statements or comments made earlier on behalf of the
European Union by Ambassador Matussek.

What we have heard is a very good and welcome
example of the cooperation between the European
Union and the United Nations. It is also indicative of
the welcome progress being achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno set out very starkly what that
represents. What we have to do now is build on it and
all of us maintain our strong continuing support for the
new Congolese authorities in what is going to be a
crucial stage of reconciliation and peace consolidation.
It is not unqualified support, however. Again, the
Under-Secretary-General set out what we expect of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities, and that
is absolutely right.

What we look forward to as the Council are
recommendations from the Secretary-General as to
how the United Nations should carry forward its
support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
that next phase, and how we can assist and follow up
the existing mandate, which expires on 15 February.
We are inclined to believe that the principal role will
be to maintain stability, to allow the institutions to take
root, and to redirect resources towards the priorities.
Those must include tackling the activities of the armed
groups in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo that are at the moment preying on civilians and
undermining the chances for lasting peace.

I would also note that the Lord's Resistance Army
is in Garamba, for the most part despite the discussions
in the Juba process. That remains, for many of us, a
keen interest, and one way or another we must tackle
that issue, too.

If I may, I should just like to say a few words
about European security defence policy. What this
operation demonstrates very clearly is the real-world
contribution which the European Union is making
through that policy to tackling international issues. In
many cases, it is in support of and in partnership with
the United Nations. That, as far as the United Kingdom
is concerned, is one of the major objectives of
European security defence policy. It is to project a
foreign policy and, as appropriate, a military dimension
in support of operations out there which not only
conform to common policies of the European Union,
but which sit very neatly with objectives of the United
Nations. It is the capacity of the European Union as it
is now developing to be able to deploy forces rapidly
and to do so in an efficient manner, as we have
demonstrated in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which actually highlights the path that the
European Union can, does and, I hope, will
increasingly play.

I put that in stark contrast to what we tend not to
do in United Nations peacekeeping, but I do want to
flag up that, whereas the European Union and its
member States are less active in United Nations
peacekeeping, there is another dimension that is very
important. The capacity to rapidly deploy when
necessary is something which contributes very
strongly, I believe, to the international effort.

The European Union battle group concept takes
that further forward, the intention being that a battle
group could be deployed with 15-days' notice to areas
of need. That is a capacity which the United Nations

and the world often need, and which is very rarely
available, so I very much welcome that development
by the European Union.

If I may, I have two specific questions for High
Representative Solana. The first concerns the fact that,
as the European security defence policy is created, it
has a particular link with NATO. I am struck by the
fact that one of our institutional problems in the United
Nations is how the Organization relates to the African
Union not just as we take forward the African Union
Mission in Sudan, but also as we move towards the
hybrid operation in Darfur, which we all want to see as
soon as possible. Are there any lessons from how the
European Union has learned to work with other
organizations that Mr. Solana might want to share with
us to suggest how the United Nations can carry
forward that very necessary cooperation with and
direct support for a nascent operational capability
within the African Union?

Secondly, is what we have heard described this
morning potentially an exemplar, a good practice, that
one could look at to determine where the European
Union might be more active in helping tackle the many
different and, in many cases, difficult situations that we
confront in Africa?

