Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/254) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). My
thanks also go to his Special Representative for
Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for introducing the report and
for his sustained personal endeavours to promote the
reconciliation of the Kosovo communities. We are also
grateful for the words that we have heard from the high
authorities with us today.

As others have done, we welcome the "First
agreement of principles governing the normalization of
relations" reached on 19 April within the framework of
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union. This
represents a historic step forward with the potential
to achieve regional reconciliation, stability and
prosperity. The most challenging part now is to ensure
that the results of the dialogue are implemented and
their positive impact on the ground.

We believe that UNMIK has a key role to play
during this implementation phase. We support the
assertions in the report that UNMIK, in supporting the
positive achievements reached through dialogue, will
henceforth focus its efforts on promoting reconciliation
among the Kosovo communities.

The escalation of tensions and violence in northern
Kosovo remains a cause for concern to my delegation.
We note that the alarming trend of incidents involving
explosive devices continues. Likewise, securityincidents
continue to affect returnee areas. We appreciate that the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), the
Kosovo Force and local authorities have increased the
visibility of their regular patrols and stepped up other
preventative measures to the north of Mitrovica.

We also deplore the desecration of cemeteries of
the Serbian Orthodox Church that took place during
the reporting period. It is imperative that all of those
incidents be fully investigated. In that regard, reform
of the security and justice sectors must be undertaken,
in particular with regard to the administrative and
procedural problems that lead to delays in the processing
of cases.

The situation facing minority communities in
Kosovo still has not shown sufficient improvement,
with a climate of tension and discrimination prevailing.
We regret that the first quarter of 2013 saw the decrease
in voluntary returns continue from the last quarter of
2012.

Turning to the work of the Special Investigative
Task Force charged with looking into the reports of
inhumane trafficking in persons and human organs,
we note with interest the information included in the
EULEX report annex and will follow developments
in that regard closely. We support the operational
cooperation objectives and therefore continue to support
the reaching of an arrangement that would allow the
United Nations to be involved in the investigation of
these reports, all the more in the light of the report's
affirmation that this is a complex investigation that
will take time to complete and because it covers several
jurisdictions and acts that would have been committed
some 13 or 14 years ago.

This debate has confirmed that the United Nations
continues to play an irreplaceable role as guarantor of
stability and neutrality in Kosovo and the region and
as a presence conducive to reconciliation among the
different communities that coexist in that geographical
space. A strong United Nations presence with sufficient
resources remains necessary. We reaffirm the relevance
of resolution 1244 (1999) as the applicable legal
framework in Kosovo, as well as the importance of
ensuring full respect for international law.

In conclusion, we draw some hope from the
progress observed recently, which nevertheless does not
yet imply any change in the position of my Government
on the non-recognition of the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo.

