Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express our gratitude to our
friend Ambassador Samantha Power, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America, for
her continuous efforts and her engagement on the
Yemeni issue, most recently expressed here during her
statement, in which she referred to the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Taiz as a result of the policy
of collective punishment practiced by the militias of
Houthi and former President Saleh against the people
of this long-suffering governorate. We also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for according the
Yemeni crisis great attention through his Special Envoy
for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, who is
making serious efforts to find a negotiated solution for
the implementation of resolution 2216 (2015). On behalf
of the Government of Yemen, I also thank the team of
the Special Envoy for its major efforts in organizing the
talks at the Magglingen centre in the Swiss town of Biel
from 15 to 20 December.

We have just closed another chapter in the efforts
to bring about peace in my country based on resolution
2216 (2015), which informed the Biel negotiations
agenda with the aim of reversing the putsch by the
Houthis and Saleh against the legitimate authorities and
ending the suffering of millions of our people, whose
blood has been shed as a result. The coup has destroyed
their homes, deprived them of their livelihoods and
inflicted a toll of death and hatred - a situation alien
to our social fabric, which has shaped our people over
centuries of coexistence. Much success was achieved in
the Biel talks, in spite of the challenges and difficulties
in the consultations, including the lack of readiness by
the putschist side and the fact that its leadership did
not authorize its interlocutors to engage effectively to
achieve the points set for the negotiations.

We look to our supporters in the Security Council,
the international community and the 18 sponsors of
the political process in Yemen to bring more pressure
to bear with regard to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all regions in Yemen, especially to Taiz.
The long-suffering city Taiz is being blockaded in an
unprecedented manner, to the point of genocide. Its
citizens look forward to a spirit of solidarity in the form
of the delivery of humanitarian, medical and emergency
relief assistance to vanquish the spectre of death.

We also look for a major role by the United Nations
and the Red Crescent in securing the release political
detainees as a building block ofthe confidence-building
measures in the consultations. The Government of the
Republic of Yemen seeks to revive economic life and
commercial activity as the lynchpin of normalization.
The Government reached an agreement in early
August with the United Nations and the coalition
forces to implement the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism. However, financial and
organizational impediments, which the Yemeni
Government has nothing to do with, has prevented its
operationalization to date. The Mechanism can achieve
a lot to guarantee the restart of commercial activity.
In addition, the representative of the Office for the
Coordiantion of Humanitarian Affairs mentioned at the
Biel talks the presence of numerous shipments in the
Port of Aden, which are intended for the central and
northern governorates. However, the local warlords,
loyal to the Houthis and Saleh, seek to impede its transfer,
plunder it instead in order to enrich themselves on the
black market. There are also large quanties of supplies
awaiting distribution at the Port of Al-Hudeidah. But
the putschists are deliberately obstructing it, in an act
of cheap political blackmail that brazenly ignores the
suffering of the Yemeni people.

Based on its from responsibility to the patient
Yemeni people - from Sana'a to Al-Mahrah - the
Government expresses its readiness to spare no effort to
deliver food, medicine and supplies to all areas of Yemen
without exception. My Government is also committed
to peace, and to ending the war and the suffering of
the Yemeni people, as well as to providing a conducive
environment for the consultations, as reflected
President Mansour's letter addressed to the Secretary-
General on 6 December. The President declared an
unconditional ceasefire 10 days before the launch of
the consultations in order to foster an atmosphere of
confidence. He is continuing to extend his hand for the
sake of peace, but the putschists refuse even reveal the
fate of the detainees or to allow the Red Cross to visit
them. Refusing to release them or to allow them access
to relief supplies is a violation of humanitarian law as
well as an affront to human dignity.

Against that backdrop, on the instructions of
President Mansour, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Abdul Malik Al-Mukhlafi,
head of the Yemeni delegation to the Biel consultations,
confirmed another one-week extension to the ceasefire,
thereby abiding by the letter and spirit of the President's
letter to the Secretary-General.

Flagrant violations by the putschist forces of the
Houthi and Saleh militias are still occurring daily all
over Yemen. Those militias are violating human rights
through abductions, threats and intimidation of young
men, as well through the illegal financial fees imposed
on businessmen under the flimsy pretext that the
extorted funds are contributions to a legitimate military
effort. Further human rights violations by the Houthi
and Saleh militias include the arrest of journalists, who
now languish in prisons run by the militias. Many of
the detainees have been subjected to psychological and
physical torture.

The putschist forces continue to target children with
a long-term plan. Numerous militia leaders regularly
visit schools to recruit children for military purposes,
despite the fact that children should clearly remain in
school rather than be put in harm's way at the deadly
military front. We know that members of the Council
have followed press and other media reports of the
visits by those militias members to schools in Sana'a to
spread their discourse designed to stoke violence and
extremism.

Finally, I cannot but affirm that all segments of
Yemeni society, throughout the homeland and in the
diaspora, hope that the putschists willjoin, in a sincere
and credible manner, the next round of consultations
scheduled for 14 January, and that the suffering of
the country, which has been triggered by the militias'
theological project, which is entirely alien to the
Yemeni social fabric, will touch their humanity and
move them to seek reconciliation. As we express our
appreciation for Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed and his team,
we call upon them, before they embark on a new round
of consultations in mid-January, to address the issue of
confidence-building measures. More importantly, we
call for the release of the political detainees from the
putschist prisons, pursuant to those detainees' rights
under international law. We also call for the lifting of all
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
all affected regions, for the resumption of commercial
activity in order to revive Yemen's economic life, and
for the end of black market trade by the Houthi warlords.

My Government will continue, with the same
momentum, to sincerely engage in the United
Nations-led consultations and in the implementation
of resolution 2216 (2015) and all the other United
Nations resolutions relevant to the question of Yemen.
We will spare no effort to eliminate all the effects of
the putsch, restore the Government's legitimacy and
pursue the dream of all of the children of Yemen for a
democratic federal Yemen, in accordance with the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and the outcomes of
the comprehensive National Dialogue. This is our joint
vision with the United Nations, the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the sponsors ofthe Yemeni political process,
namely, to shape a future in which the community of
Yemeni men and women will be free from the myths
of dynastic hegemony and will remain within the Gulf
family, bound together in amity, solidarity and a single,
shared destiny.

The meeting rose at12.35p.m.
