Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, my country wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
a topic that concerns all States Members of the
Organization. My country would also like to align

itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Without prejudice to that, in its national capacity,
my delegation wishes to reiterate its great concern at
the serious humanitarian and security situation to
which the Palestinian civilian population finds itself
subjected as a direct result of the occupation of
Palestinian territory by Israel, the blockade on the
provision of humanitarian assistance, food, medicine,
fuel and construction materials, the widespread
destruction of public and private infrastructure in
Palestine and the ongoing military aggression that
continues to raise the toll of thousands of dead and
wounded Palestinian civilians, including innocent
women and children.

In that regard, on behalf of the President of the
Republic, Rafael Correa, I wish to reiterate the
solidarity of the Government and people of Ecuador
with all innocent victims of the ongoing Israeli
aggression. At the same time, I would like to make an
urgent appeal for an immediate end to the hostilities, a
solution to the humanitarian crisis, resolute
international economic support to improve the grave
living conditions of the affected population and, in
particular, a resumed search for a definitive solution
and lasting peace in the region, in accordance with all
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions.

As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Ecuador is an advocate for the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and conflicts and emphatically
rejects the threat or the use of force as a means to
resolve them. Ecuador therefore believes that any
comprehensive solution that makes it possible to
achieve and preserve lasting peace in the Middle East
must be a political rather than a military one. It must
also include the strictest respect for international law,
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Above all, it must include an
enduring commitment to non-aggression and
recognition that includes the withdrawal of Israel from
the territories occupied since 1967 and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
To achieve that, my country believes that -
without prejudice to the responsibilities of the Security
Council established in the United Nations Charter -
there are a number of legal alternatives in other bodies
of the international system that could enable the
international community as a whole to ensure that
justice is done, thereby effectively responding to the
urgent appeal of the Palestinian people and, at the same
time, paving the way for the restoration of lasting
peace and security in the Middle East.

Clearly, that effort must complement other
processes that are under way. In particular, we would
like to refer to the one recently established by the
Human Rights Council to investigate human rights
violations perpetrated during the latest attacks on the
Gaza Strip at the start of this year. We look forward
with great interest and anticipation to the steps to be
taken and the handling of that matter by the Human
Rights Council, including the special mission that it
has requested.

In all those efforts, my country is ready to extend
its support and cooperation in developing any initiative
aimed at consolidating a lasting peace that would
benefit not only the peoples of Palestine and Israel but
those of the whole region.

