Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to begin
by thanking the United States presidency for convening
this important open debate on threats to international
peace and security and securing borders against illicit
cross-border trafficking and movement. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Azerbaijan joins the position of the Non-Aligned
Movement on the issue reflected in the letter and
annexes that will be circulated as a document of the
Security Council (S/2012/257).

Illicit cross-border trafficking in weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials; trafficking in arms, drugs, human beings and
conflict minerals; and the cross-border movement of
terrorists, organized criminal groups and their funds
have an impact on international peace and security and
the potential to undermine the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, jeopardize domestic and
regional stability and economic development and fuel
conflicts. While each of those phenomena separately
constitutes a broad matter for discussion, and has been
extensively dealt with by the United Nations, today we
are focusing on the border aspects and on how to better
secure our borders against illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement.

As a critical pillar of national security, border
protection is a matter of national sovereign authority
and the responsibility of States. Through better
protection of their borders against threats to national
security, States prevent the cross-border spillover of
illicit trafficking and movement from inside and
outside of their territories and thereby contribute to
international peace and security.

Illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
involves a network of actors in different countries.
Such a network often spreads its zone of operation
beyond the boundaries of just one region and becomes
transnational, linking up local actors with a much
broader web of players in other regions who take
advantage of malfunctioning border management
systems and other factors existing in a country in order
to establish and enhance their operations.

At the same time, securing borders against illicit
trafficking and movement does not imply toughened
border crossing procedures, which may create serious
impediments to legal cross-border activities. States
must therefore ensure that strong national border
control, management and export control systems are in
place that will effectively prevent illicit cross-border
activities while promoting the free and secure
movement of persons, goods, services and investments
across borders.

It is also obvious that, in a globalized world,
developing and maintaining cooperation among
neighbouring States on border-related issues at the
political, executive and operational levels is of
paramount importance. In fact, such cooperation only
adds to the effectiveness of national border-control and
management systems. However, cooperation among
States will not be possible without due regard for the
basic norms and principles of international law,
namely, respect for each other's territorial integrity and
sovereignty, the inviolability of internationally
recognized borders and the principle of good
neighbourly relations.

Weak border control and management systems
are among the main factors conducive to the spread of
illicit cross-border trafficking and movement.
International organizations, including United Nations
entities and the World Customs Organization, as well
as regional organizations, have initiated various
projects and programmes on improving the border
control and management capacities of States. While
welcoming such initiatives, and in certain instances
becoming a beneficiary State, we nevertheless want to
emphasize that the relevant projects and programmes
must not be based on the one-size-fits-all approach.
There are some situations where certain border-related
initiatives have been designed with total disregard for
the national security concerns and border priorities of a
beneficiary State.

Instead, such initiatives must be tailored to
address the individual needs of States, upon their
request and with their involvement, and take into full
account the security situation of a State and its
surrounding political geography. It is also absolutely
necessary that those organizations exert the maximum
effort to avoid duplication with other existing
initiatives.

The sensitive geographic location of Azerbaijan
makes it vulnerable to transborder threats such as
international terrorism; illegal migration; transnational
organized crime; arms, drugs and human trafficking
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The existence of those threats requires devoting
particular attention to the security of our borders. At
the same time, border management and export controls
are important components of critical energy
infrastructure protection. Azerbaijan is therefore doing
its utmost, at the national level and through close
cooperation with our neighbours and international
partners within our bilateral security programmes, as
well as with international organizations, to maintain
comprehensive national border control and
management, as well as export control systems.

Despite such efforts, Azerbaijan is unable to
exercise control over a considerable part of its State
border owing to the continued military occupation of
its territories. The lack of sovereign control by the
legitimate authorities of Azerbaijan over those borders
creates favourable conditions for illicit cross-border
trafficking and movement in and beyond those
territories.

Azerbaijan looks forward to a report by the
Secretary-General on a survey of United Nations
assistance to Member States to counter illicit cross-
border trafficking and movement. At the same time,
any survey and assessment should, in our View, be
confined to the activities of United Nations entities and
should avoid providing an assessment of the border-
related needs and capabilities of individual Member
States in an attempt to justify the relevance of certain
programmes.

