Mr. Ayrault (France) (spoke in French): Faced
with the unbearable horror of Aleppo's martyrdom, the
Security Council must again assume the responsibility
entrusted to it by the international community to
guarantee peace, ensure security and protect civilians.

We heard yesterday from Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Staffan de Mistura. His description
resounded like a warning cry. If this situation continues,
by the end of the year we will bear witness to the
destruction of Aleppo. The message Staffan de Mistura
addressed to the Security Council is unambiguous. If
we do not act, the city will soon be no more than a field
of ruins and will go down in history as a place whose
inhabitants were abandoned to their executioners.

Fifteen days ago in this Chamber, on behalfofFrance
I called for an immediate ceasefire (see S/PV.7774).
Since then, following a stillborn agreement, the Syrian
regime has confirmed its objective with breathtaking
brutality - and it has nothing to do with the fight
against terrorism. Its objective is the capitulation
of Aleppo. Daraya, Hama, Aleppo - with each,
the tactics of the Syrian regime have been the same:
indiscriminate bombing and the methodical destruction
of civilian infrastructure to inflict maximum suffering
on the population. Most recently, this has included
eliminating the supply of drinking water in Aleppo
and the systematic targeting of hospitals and health
personnel. Each time, those who back Damascus
provide decisive support for a strategy that seeks
exclusively to secure the surrender of fighters and the
exodus of civilians through operations that involve a
cycle of potentially devastating ethnic cleansing.

How can we collectively tolerate this? The
Secretary-General has spoken of war crimes. We
all recall Guernica, Srebrenica and Grozny. What is
happening before our eyes in Aleppo is the sinister
repetition of those tragedies. If it does not pull itself
together, the international community will share the
responsibility for these events.

The regime and its supporters claim to act on
behalf of the fight against terrorism. I denounce that
fraudulent claim with great force. Bashar Al-Assad does
not fight terrorism; he feeds it. Since the beginning of
the conflict, he has targeted the moderate opposition
above all because it embodies the only hope for the
eventual restoration of a united and peaceful Syria. He
has organized a lethal understanding between himself
and Da'esh and Al-Qaida, groups with which he has
shared goals and which he deliberately spares.

France has paid the price of terrorism. It cannot
allow this critical fight, which should bring us all
together, to be derailed by punitive actions that
ultimately only strengthen those it claims to wish to
eliminate. Destroying hospitals, starving civilians,
massacring women and children, and besieging cities
as in the Middle Ages merely fuels radicalization and
terrorism. We must therefore halt this vicious cycle on an
urgent basis. Today, faced with this horror, the Security
Council must make a simple and obvious decision. It
must demand immediate action to save Aleppo, an end
to all bombing by the regime and its allies, and the
unhindered and unconditional delivery of humanitarian
assistance to a population that desperately requires it.
That is what the situation in Aleppo calls for.

And that is what France, alongside most members
of the Council, has promoted tirelessly. A week
ago, alongside Spain, we submitted a simple draft
resolution in response to this emergency. What does
it say? It reaffirms the obvious unacceptability of the
indiscriminate repression by the Syrian regime of its
own people. It recalls all the decisions taken by our
Council since the onset of the crisis. It sets out the
conditions for a just and lasting peace - a political
solution whose outline we defined long ago. Finally, it
expresses a desire for unity around the goal that brings
us together - the fight against terrorism.

The draft resolution also makes clear and precise
demands, including an immediate halt to the bombing
and military flights over Aleppo; humanitarian access;
respect for the truce, guaranteed by an effective
verification mechanism whose modalities are open; the
withdrawal of all forms of support or collaboration with
terrorist groups designated by the Security Council;
and the resumption of the political process.

Some would impose conditions on the halt to the
bombing, including the precise identification of the
whereabouts of terrorist groups and their separation.
That is a sham because it is unachievable so long as the
bombing continues. That much is obvious. Moreover,
smashing a city with bombs and massacring civilians is
tantamount to doing the terrorists' work for them, not
fighting them. I reiterate that the genuine emergency
is an end to the bombing, which is the only valid
precondition because it determines everything else.

We patiently negotiated the draft resolution in
good faith and with the desire to unite the international
community around a single goal. The legitimate
concerns raised by some have been taken into account,
and it is with an open heart and extended hand that I have
personally striven in recent days and hours to create the
conditions for consensus, in all sincerity and without
ulterior motives, driven by the sole desire to promote
the return of peace in Syria, to end the martyrdom
of a people and to promote a solution to the plight of
millions of refugees and displaced persons. I feel that
the broad majority of Council members understand and
approve of this approach.

The adoption of the draft resolution could restore
to the inhabitants of Aleppo, the Syrian people and the
rest of us a glimmer of hope for an end to the spiral of
violence and for a new political dynamic based on the
immediate resumption of negotiations for a transition,
the outlines of which were unanimously defined by the
Security Council a little less than a year ago.

If instead our draft is rejected, despite enjoying
broad support, what will we have left? There will be
more death, more refugees, and more displaced. But we
must neither reject it nor give up. Each of us will have
to imagine the consequences and take the serious and
necessary decisions to ensure that the perpetrators of
war crimes do not go unpunished, that those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons are identified and
punished, and that those who abet an exhausted regime
shoulder the consequences. All those who refuse to
give up must come together and act.

In 2011, a people rose up peacefully
against oppression. For five years, despite savage
repression, that people has not given up. Let us not
leave that sorely tested and suffering people to choose
between an inhumane executioner or the abject terrorism
of Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front. I call on every
member of the Council to assume its responsibilities to
save the population of Aleppo, come together for peace
and send the Syrian regime the message it should have
heard long ago.

What is at stake today is, first of all, the fate of
Aleppo and its population, but it is also above all the
hope of finally ending a conflict of whose catastrophic
costs we must all pay the price. Faced with such dire
stakes, to hinder the adoption of the draft resolution
before us today would be to allow Bashar Al-Assad
to keep on killing. It would above all be offering a
senseless gift to the terrorists. My dearest wish is that
the Council does not offer such a gift.

