Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, and your country for
convening this important debate. We listened closely
to the statements made this morning by the Secretary-
General, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and His Beatitude and to the moving
words of parliamentarian Dahkil.

Colombia would like to join its voice with those
of many previous speakers today, for in the face of
barbaric acts that show complete disregard for the
values of the human condition we cannot be silent.
The seriousness of the violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in the areas affected
by the presence of the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and the groups associated with it require
us to speak with one voice and commit to protecting
the values and principles shared by humankind. The
people and Government of Colombia offer their sincere
condolences to the families and Governments of the
Victims of this terrorist group. There were Colombian
nationals among the Victims of the recent attack on the
Bardo Museum in Tunis, so we share the pain of those
who have suffered at the hands of terrorist groups. Their
murder shows that terrorism affects us all. The case of
Boko Haram is another manifestation of this serious
problem, and we firmly condemn that terrorist group's
abduction of women and children and its murder of
thousands of innocent people.

As the reports of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and its investigative
mission on human rights in Syria show, Violence and
the persecution of minorities and ethnic or religious
groups are one of the manifestations of ISIL's recurring
Violations of human rights, such as the beheading of
Coptic Christians in Libya, the persecution, murder
and forced displacement of Yazidis in Iraq and the
abduction of hundreds of Assyrian Christians in Syria.
They are just a few of the examples that indicate the
existence of repeated attempts to exterminate ethnic
and religious minorities and groups, which, as the High
Commissioner said, could constitute genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. As many have said
before me, we cannot resort to facile categorizations
or identify a particular religion or culture with
violent extremism, terrorism or genocide. These are
unacceptable acts on the part of individuals and groups,
not cultures or religions per se.

We must consider the effectiveness of the
mechanisms we have to combat these situations of
human barbarity, and we must recognize that we are
dealing with an enemy that shocks us with its lack of
boundaries. We have seen acts and deeds that we did not
imagine were possible in the twenty-first century, and
we wonder how well prepared we are to combat them.
The Secretary-General and the High Commissioner
have made specific proposals that deserve our
consideration and analysis.

We are concerned by the fact that we seem unable
to respond together. We must put aside the divisions
that create obstacles to the international community's
ability to take concrete action together. Consistency
between discussion and action is crucial to responding
to barbarism, and we must show ourselves capable of
overcoming our differences, since terrorists can exploit
them to their advantage. The basis of our action should
be ensuring that the legitimate interests of the various
sectors of the population are served. We should therefore
identify the areas we must work on with States where
such acts have occurred in order to make progress with
investigations, ensure that the situation will continue to
be monitored and that we will work to build societies
that are inclusive and that respect diversity, and in which
the rights of all citizens are respected and guaranteed
without discrimination.

Finally, we cannot forget that in the short term there
is an urgent need for response to the dire humanitarian
situation. Millions of refugees and displaced persons
need help, and while the international community's
response has been generous, the magnitude of the
situation requires a sustained, flexible and timely
commitment.

