Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this urgent meeting
jointly requested by the United States, the Republic of
Korea and Japan.

I also thank Mr. Jenca for his briefing.

North Korea once again launched a ballistic missile
in blatant violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. This is totally unacceptable. Japan lodged a
strong protest directly against North Korea immediately
following the launch and condemned the act in the
strongest terms. Here I express once again our strong
condemnation of this utterly unacceptable provocation.
Japan demands that North Korea immediately cease all
ballistic-missile and nuclear-development programmes
and provocations. Japan will never accept a nuclear-
armed North Korea.

The North Korean official media has announced
that North Korea successfully carried out the launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile. The missile
reached an altitude of more than 2,500 kilometres,
flew for approximately 40 minutes and landed within
the Japanese exclusive economic zone, approximately
300 kilometres off the Oga peninsula. A number of
Japanese fishing vessels were at sea at the time of the
launch. That shows how dangerous and irresponsible
North Korea's action was. If it had not been such a
high-altitude launch, the missile would have flown for
more than 5,500 kilometres and could have reached
many other Member States' soil.

Those provocations by North Korea trample upon
international efforts towards the peaceful settlement
of nuclear and missile issues and present an enormous
global threat. As North Korea claims that it is capable

of hitting any part of the world, its threat has literally
become global. The most recent provocation has made
it even more evident that circumstances are not right for
dialogue with North Korea at this time. No other choice
for us is left other than to work together to increase
the pressure on North Korea. The thorough and faithful
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions is critically important. All States Members
must work together to pressure North Korea into taking
concrete action leading towards denuclearization. We
need to send a clear, united message that it is North
Korea that needs to change, not our side.

We must recall the Council's determination to take
further significant measures in the event of a further
nuclear test or launch by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The latest launch requires a swift
response from the Council in the form of a resolution
with robust sanctions. Japan looks forward to working
closely with Council members to that end.

