The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes that the Special
Commission and the Government of Iraq previously
agreed that the investigation of unilateral destruction
of proscribed items is a fundamental area to accelerate
the verification of the Iraqi Declarations. In this
regard, the Council deplores the refusal by Iraq to
allow the Special Commission to remove
approximately 130 missile engines from Iraq for
analysis by a team of international experts under the
Special Commission. The Council notes that such
action complicates the implementation by the Special
Commission of its mandate.

"The Security Council reaffirms that a full
accounting for Iraq's missiles with a range greater
than 150 kilometres is a necessary prerequisite to
enable the Commission to report that Iraq has
complied with the requirements of section C of
resolution 687 (1991). The Council fully supports the
intention of the Special Commission to carry out
thoroughly the examination and analysis in the
missile area, either on the basis of dispatching
international teams of experts to Iraq or examining
the relevant items abroad.

"The Security Council reminds the Government
of Iraq of its obligation to comply with the
provisions of the relevant resolutions and the need to
cooperate fully with the Special Commission in
order to enable it to report that the requirements of
section C of resolution 687 (1991) are met. In this
perspective, the Council affirms that Iraq is required
to allow the Special Commission to remove the
missile engines from its territory. The Council
welcomes any proposal from Member States to offer
their national facilities to the Special Commission in
order to enable it to conduct the necessary analysis,
if and when the Commission deems it necessary.

"The Security Council strongly reaffirms its full
support for the Special Commission in the conduct
of its mandate under the relevant resolutions of the
Council. The Council reaffirms the right and
privileges of UNSCOM. as stated in its previous
relevant resolutions, and in particular its resolutions
687 (1991), 707 (1991) and 715 (1991)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/49.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
