Ms. Mohammed: Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Sir, for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and for
having taken the initiative of convening this important
debate on investing in peacekeeping operations,
training and capacity-building. In so doing, Indonesia
is demonstrating its commitment to an improved and
robust peacekeeping operation through the enhanced
capacity and professionalism of peacekeepers. We
highly appreciate the invaluable contribution of
Indonesia to peacekeeping operations in Africa.

Also, let me pay tribute to our personnel in green
and blue helmets serving in African Union (AU)
and United Nations peace operations under extreme
circumstances to protect civilians and sustain peace.

Certainly, today's debate is timely, as it is taking
place against the backdrop of an ever-increasing
engagement on the ground by the United Nations,
in close partnership with regional and subregional
organizations, for conflict prevention, management
and resolution. We cannot overstate the urgent need
to look at the overall operations of peacekeepers and
agree on practical measures to enhance their capacity
and efficiency to address the challenges they face in
maintaining peace, security and stability. Against this
background, allow me to focus my intervention on the
following three points.

First, the African Union attaches great importance
to this issue for multiple reasons. As Council members
are aware, currently 7 out of the 14 peacekeeping
missions are in Africa. Peacekeeping operations alone
account for approximately 80 per cent of all authorized
uniformed personnel approved for United Nations
peacekeeping missions. As of 31 December 2018,
African States represented 18 of the top 30 contributors
of uniformed personnel in peacekeeping operations.
Almost 50 per cent of all uniformed peacekeepers come
from AU member States and, as of 31 December 2018,
the African region contributed 63.4 per cent of women
in United Nations peacekeeping.

Therefore, Africa deserves to be supported by all
means to address the gaps that need to be overcome in
peacekeeping, as wellasthe difficulties ourpeacekeepers
face every day while they navigate the difficult terrain
of their mandates, less equipped and with only their
determination. Our peacekeepers deserve to be better
enabled and qualified to face their difficult assignments
and discharge their responsibilities effectively.

Secondly, the AU has exerted serious efforts in
enhancing the performance and effectiveness of our
peace support operations, including our approaches in
ensuring the protection of civilians. AU peace support
operations have been entrusted with mandates that
include the protection of civilians and engagement
in combat operations to ensure that those mandates
meet the type of robust and comprehensive responses
required to address conflict challenges - in line
with AU doctrine - and noting the volatile contexts
and asymmetric threats that peace support operations
personnel are exposed to.

The African Union has been consistent in striving
to guarantee joint training and human rights standards
in its peace support operations in line with the
AU's compliance and accountability framework for
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, and conduct and discipline.

In partnership with the United Nations, the
African Union adopted two important policies in
November 2018, on conduct and discipline in peace
support operations; and on the prevention of, and
response to, sexual exploitation and abuse in peace
support operations. Both policies aim to promote the
professional conduct of AU peace support operations
personnel and reinforce the AU's comprehensive efforts
to protect civilians. They also reinforce the Peace and
Security Council's directive that the mandates of all
peace support operations should include the protection
of civilians.

In addition, the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union issued a directive in May 2018 that
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
be incorporated into the African Union's work on the
protection of civilians and implemented within the AU's
broader compliance and accountability framework.
That directive will enable the African Union to ensure
a level of comprehensiveness that will continue to help
us to guarantee performance and effectiveness.

My third, and final, point is that we would like to
underscore the important elements that, in our view,
can boost the performance of our peacekeepers to
effectively protect civilians and discharge their other
important duties. First, troop- and police-contributing
countries should provide the best of their personnel and
capabilities for peace operations. Secondly, mandating
authorities like the United Nations and the African
Union should provide realistic mandates and all the
prerequisite means to enable our missions to effectively
implement their tasks and protect civilians, while
assisting countries to move from conflict to sustainable
peace, and thereafter to engage in exit strategies.

That brings me to the issue of financing and the
need for the Security Council to respond positively to
the AU's long-standing and legitimate calls for access to
United Nations assessed contributions to fund African
peace support operations. We remain convinced that,
by providing responses to multiple threats to peace
and security, those operations are doing so on behalf
of the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We call on the Security Council to take a fresh look at
that issue in view of the ongoing efforts by the African
Union, including the recent operationalization of the
Peace Fund.

In conclusion, we recognize that neither the United
Nations nor the AU alone will be able to guarantee the
highest level of performance and effectiveness of AU
peacekeepers. That is why we embrace the Secretary-

General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
call for an enhanced strategic partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations to provide
the means for effective performance, which, together
with the support of our member States, should give us
the optimal ability to implement required mandates
and tasks.
