Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

Here we are again, discussing the situation in Middle
East and Palestine, but there does not seem to be reason
for hope. The deteriorating political, humanitarian and
security situation in Gaza remains extremely worrying.

The escalation ofviolence in Gaza and southern Israel is
deeply concerning, and we want to express our sorrow
over the loss of lives, particularly children.

It is vitally urgent that all sides exercise maximum
restraint, and everything must be done to de-escalate
the tension in Gaza to avoid endangering the lives of
innocent civilians and exacerbating the humanitarian
situation. Further escalation of the situation will not
help but will undermine ongoing efforts to improve
the lives of Palestinians and support the return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza.

Undoubtedly, the humanitarian situation cannot be
alleviated unless essential services are fixed, including
water, fuel, electricity and heath-care services, and
the movement of people, goods and services is eased.
We note the discussions that are under way, and we
appreciate the continued engagement of the Special
Coordinator with the Israeli and Palestinian sides and
with regional and international partners to reduce
tensions, support intra-Palestinian reconciliation
and resolve all humanitarian challenges. The role of
partners in scaling up their support is very important
to help humanitarian agencies on the ground provide
the necessary services to the people of Gaza, and we
appreciate those who have done so.

The humanitarian situation will not be effectively
addressed in the absence of any meaningful progress in
the reconciliation process between Fatah and Hamas.
That is why we continue to support the efforts of
Egypt to restore control of the legitimate Palestinian
Government in Gaza and commend its continued
efforts to revive the process by holding talks with
senior Hamas and Fatah officials.

Over the past few months, we have been preoccupied
with the human tragedy in Gaza, but the situation in
Gaza cannot be looked at in isolation. It is only by
addressing the wider Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
that a lasting and durable solution can be found. Our
position on that has always been consistent and clear.
We fully support the goal of two States living side by
side in peace and security as the only viable option.
Unfortunately, the same known obstacles continue
to work against any prospect for peace between the
Israelis and the Palestinians, and the prospect of a two-
State solution seems to be an objective of which the
possibility is receding.

In the meantime, it is our hope that all activities on
both sides that will not help but continue to undermine
the two-State solution as a viable option will cease.
But here, of course, in light of the latest developments
one finds it difficult to be hopeful about democratic
possibilities providing a way out. We believe that
everything must be done, no matter how unrealistic
it may seem, to reverse the dangerous trajectory and
help create a situation that supports the two sides in
returning to direct and meaningful negotiations. The
sooner that is done, the better it will be for Israelis and
Palestinians alike, and indeed the whole region.

