It is an esteemed privilege to deliver this statement on behalf of the African members plus one (A3+1) - the Niger, Tunisia, South Africa and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We extend warm greetings to Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Affairs of Colombia, and thank both our briefers this morning. The A3+1 welcomes the decision of the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional (ELN) to heed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We hope that this decision will culminate in a permanent ceasefire and re-open channels for constructive dialogue. We also laud the decision by the Government to continue implementing the peace-related programmes despite COVID-19. Additionally, we call on the international community to support Colombia in fighting the pandemic. The Colombian peace process remains a global exemplar of bringing together parties that have been divided by a deep-rooted social and political history, including extreme violence. As Colombians strive for lasting peace, we stress the importance of the comprehensive implementation of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We remain encouraged by the spirit of compromise exhibited in reaching the final peace accord and by the progress highlighted in the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2020/239. In that regard, we wish to reiterate that the only viable sustainable solution to the conflict in Colombia remains in the implementation of the peace agreement and an inclusive political settlement that is nationally led by, and in the interests of, the people of Colombia. The peace process is at a critical stage, and neither Colombians nor the people of Latin America and the Caribbean region can afford for it to relapse. In view of the foregoing, the A3+1 makes the following points. First, we urge all stakeholders to comply with their obligations and make full use of the follow-up mechanism, the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Final Agreement, to deepen dialogue and settle differences. Furthermore, we welcome the measures effected as part of the comprehensive rural reforms, particularly the road map for stabilization and the development programmes with a territorial focus. Holistic rural reform, including agricultural and land reforms, access to economic projects for former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the implementation of the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, is paramount for the social and economic transformation of the rural communities where violence and social inequality are prevalent. Equally, we urge the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization and the National Reintegration Council to address delays in the allocation of lands, as well as the situation concerning former combatants residing outside of the territorial areas for training and reintegration. These outstanding issues are crucial for the collective social and economic reintegration of former FARC-EP combatants. We also echo the call by the Secretary-General for strengthening efforts towards longer- term reintegration, with benefits made available to all former combatants, which will ultimately determine the long-term sustainability of peace in Colombia. Secondly, we welcome the advances within the transitional justice mechanisms. We support the full implementation of all aspects of the Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition aimed particularly at ensuring that communities and victims of the conflict are priorities in the peace process. Furthermore, we commend the efforts thus far in addressing the accreditation of former FARC-EP combatants and implore the authorities to build on the momentum in order to resolve the legal situation of those individuals pending definition. In that context, we welcome the continued progress with regard to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, within the principles of transitional justice, aimed at promoting justice, reconciliation and sustainable peace. Hearing the different views and versions of events of all communities in Colombia will ensure that the road to peace is based on an inclusive political process. The A3+1 remains concerned that women, including former combatants, continue to face significant challenges in their enrolment in educational and training programmes owing to structural limitations surrounding childcare and employment. We reiterate our view that women have been instrumental in the peace process and are central to its success, and we call for their increased, safe and unhindered participation in it. Thirdly, the A3+1 is disturbed by the continuing acts of violence, particularly against social leaders, human rights activists and the most vulnerable groups, such as persons with disabilities, women and children. We condemn the assassination of indigenous and Afro-Colombian leaders, as well as former FARC-EP members. We acknowledge the progress made by the Special Investigation Unit in the investigation of several cases of killings of former FARC-EP members, and we welcome the launch of the road map for the effective protection of social leaders from the departments with a view to tackling violence against communities, social leaders and human rights defenders. We also renew our call for the strengthening of institutions, thus guaranteeing the safety of the most vulnerable groups, for preventative actions and prosecution and for regular meetings of the National Commission on Security Guarantees. Finally, we observe with distress the forced recruitment and displacement of children and adolescents, sexual violence, the presence of landmines and unexploded ordnance, and the interruption of education services owing to the actions of illegal armed groups and crime syndicates. It is fundamental that our most vulnerable always be protected, and as such, we encourage the Government to redouble its efforts to combat these scourges. In conclusion, the A3+1 reaffirms its support to the Government and the people of Colombia in their pursuit of lasting peace, as well as to the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and the country team in assisting with the comprehensive implementation of the final peace agreement. We reiterate: the onus of a successful peace process remains on the Colombian people. Furthermore, it is important that the parties remain committed and that they strengthen efforts to implement the peace agreement in order for communities to continue to benefit from a more peaceful and secure environment, particularly in the context of the spread of the global pandemic.
