Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I too would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Haris Silajdzic', Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank him for his
informative briefing. I would also like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for the quality of the presentation of
his third report (S/2010/235) on the implementation of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace in that
country. Gabon takes this opportunity to commend him
highly for his ongoing efforts to effectively implement
the Dayton Peace Agreement.

As noted in the report, significant progress has
been made in several areas, including the construction
of infrastructure, visa liberalization with the European
Union, and Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards
membership of NATO. To these advances we must also
add the status of non-permanent member of the
Security Council, to which Bosnia and Herzegovina is
making a very significant contribution. This represents
the manifest recognition of the international
community of the efforts being deployed by the
authorities of the country to improve its future in the
political, institutional, economic and security sectors.

Although we welcome the achievement of these
steps, we are concerned about the various stumbling
blocks that continue to hinder the full implementation
of the Peace Agreement. The delay in setting up the
Office of the Special Representative of the European
Union, for example, has hindered the attainment of
some goals of the Agreement and the candidacy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for the European Union.

A few months from the holding of general
elections in October 2010, it is very important that the
parties respect the obligations that they voluntary
undertook when they signed the Peace Agreement. In
this respect, we would encourage them to cooperate
fully with those involved in implementing the Peace
Agreement, including the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. To that end, we
welcome the decision taken by NATO to maintain its
presence in this country in order to continue to
contribute to the effectiveness of the Peace Agreement,
with the reassuring cooperation of the military mission
of the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

My country remains committed to the sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and praises the efforts of
the authorities of that country to launch a national
dialogue and reconcile with its neighbours. I would
therefore urge them to continue along this path and to
remain committed to the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement.

