Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): First,
let me thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for his sobering briefing today. I would also like to
thank the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and the entire international community
for their ongoing efforts in Yemen to save lives on a
daily basis, under increasingly difficult circumstances.
We supported the urgent request for today's briefing
because we have seen the situation in Yemen deteriorate
rapidly this week. We appreciate the fact that you,
Madam President, were able to accommodate the
request for today's briefing at such short notice.
The images coming out of Yemen of starving
children on hospital beds put the international
community to shame. They compel us to speak out
and take action. With the fighting again flaring up
around Al-Hudaydah, an additional 1 million already
severely food-insecure children in Yemen risk falling
victim to famine. Behind those shocking numbers lies
the harsh reality of the daily lives of innocent Yemenis
in a man-made crisis waged at their expense. I will
address three issues here today: first, the increase of
access constraints around Al-Hudaydah; secondly, the
effects of the economy on the humanitarian situation
and, thirdly, the protection of civilians.

First, we are extremely concerned about
the consequences of this week's clashes around
Al-Hudaydah on the already strained humanitarian
access to the millions of Yemenis in need. The main
road to Sana'a can no longer be used. I am concerned
to hear from Mr. Lowcock that alternative routes
are heavily damaged. Access to the Red Sea Mills
warehouse has been cut off and the port is under
threat now more than ever before. The shutdown of
Al-Hudaydah port operations or the disruption of its
supply chain to the heavily populated areas behind it
would be the tipping point for a full-blown famine.
The Council recognized the need to break the vicious
circle of armed conflict and food insecurity when it
unanimously adopted resolution 2417 (2018), on the
24 May. Now we must take that text to heart and ensure
that we prevent any further deterioration. I would like
to thank Mr. Lowcock for putting three concrete asks
on the table to address the situation. In that context,
we also call on OCHA to keep the Council informed
about the food security situation. The warring parties
and their supporters have a responsibility to keep the
port open and fully functional and to ensure that the
desperately needed supplies reach Yemenis in need all
throughout the country.

My second point concerns another major driver of
the increasing food crisis: Yemen's failing economy.
The recent devaluation of the Yemeni riyal to its lowest
point in history has severely hit the purchasing power
of the Yemeni population. That, together with rising
food prices and the non-payment of public-sector
salaries for more than two years, is proving to be a
lethal combination for ordinary Yemenis, including in
parts of the country that have been less affected by the
fighting. Experts warn that economic collapse has the
potential to kill even more Yemenis than the violence
underlying it. The parties need to come together and
address the issue with the utmost urgency.
Thirdly, we just adopted a presidential statement
on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2018/18) The
words in that statement will be meaningless if we do
not insist on their full implementation in the crises on
the Council's agenda. All parties need to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and address its violations. Ending impunity should be a
key ingredient in the solution to the conflict in Yemen.
The political transition in Yemen in early 2012 was a
positive example in the region in many ways, but if
it has taught us anything it is that postponing justice
only fosters further conflict and feeds the notion that
transgressions do not have consequences.

In conclusion, the drivers of famine in Yemen are
manifold. The immediate steps to be taken are clear. The
parties need to respect international humanitarian law,
keep the ports open, protect the supply roads and agree
once and for all on the modalities for resuming salary
payments. The one thing that can permanently end the
suffering of the Yemeni population is a sustainable,
peaceful political solution to the conflict. We call
again on all parties to demonstrate their commitment
to peace, to de-escalate - first and foremost around
Al-Hudaydah - and to engage without preconditions
with the Special Envoy. The children of Yemen deserve
protection from violence, hunger and disease. They
deserve a future.

