Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing. We
also welcome the presence of Ambassador Konfourou
of Mali in the Council today. As an observer member of
the African Union, we commend and associate ourselves
with the statement made by the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire and statements that will be made today by other
members of the African troika, namely, Equatorial
Guinea and Ethiopia. We endorse the recommendations
in the Secretary- General's quarterly report (S/2018/ 866)
and would like to make the following observations
regarding the situation in Mali.

At the outset, we would like to congratulate the
people of Mali on the peaceful and successful conduct
of their presidential elections. We commend the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for its logistical and
technical assistance to the electoral process, and praise
Special Representative Annadif and the representatives
of the African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), as well as France
and Operation Barkhane, for their important role in
facilitating peaceful dialogue among the political
parties and ensuring stability in the country.

Every effort should now be made to accelerate
the implementation of the remaining provisions of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Kazakhstan acknowledges the progress made in
appointing interim authorities, operationalizing mixed
units in the northern regions and adopting a national
security-sector reform strategy. My delegation also
welcomes the signing of a pact for peace between the
Government of Mali and the United Nations, which we
believe will significantly contribute to the fulfilment of
the Agreement. The genuine inclusion of women in the
peace process and in decision-making is also important

for lasting stability. In that regard, we recognize and
appreciate the important work done by the Government
of Mali so far to improve the human rights situation
in the country, and encourage it to continue its much-
needed efforts in this direction.

At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the growing cycle of Violence in northern and central
Mali, which has led to a significant deterioration in
the humanitarian situation there. We urge all sides to
comply with the relevant provisions of international
law and call on international partners and donors to
fund the humanitarian response plan for 2018.

Violent extremism and terrorism remain the
main sources of instability. To counter these scourges
with the overall goal of establishing a terrorism-
free Africa, we need an approach that links security
and development efforts. The challenges in Mali are
common to all countries of the region and elsewhere
in Africa. I would like to underline that during the
Council's recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its previous visits to Lake Chad,
West Africa and other conflict zones, we have heard
the desire of host countries to devote more resources
to economic development and the promotion of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), based on
a regional approach. Indeed, a regional approach is
crucially important to progress on the political, security
and environmental fronts. Unfortunately, that focus is
missing from the mandates of almost all peacekeeping
operations, but we understand that there are objective
reasons for that.

In that regard, we welcome General Assembly
resolution 72/279, on the repositioning of the United
Nations development system in line with the Secretary-
General's new agenda for peace and his United Nations
reform programme, one of the main elements of which
is a revamped regional approach. For instance, in
West Africa and the Sahel, we see an obvious need for
introducing a separate team for specifically addressing
the SDGs so as not to overload the existing regional
United Nations offices, and which we believe could
function in close collaboration with ECOWAS. In
that regard, the proposed launch of an SDG centre in
Kazakhstan for our part of the world could serve as a
pilot project that could be further implemented in the
African region.

Priority should also be given to national
reconciliation, ensuring basic services,
resilience-building, a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, good governance and the
rule of law. Equally important are educating children
and employing young people, who together constitute
about 65 per cent of the Malian population. These are
all essential to achieving lasting peace and stability
in Mali.

Combating terrorism and other cross-border
threats in Mali and its neighbours will succeed only
if these measures are implemented comprehensively
throughout the Sahel region as a whole. We support the
full operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel and underscore the importance of
sustainable funding for it. We also call on all parties
in Mali and the countries of the region to make every
effort to implement the recently recalibrated United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel, which is a
good basis for strengthened regional cooperation.

With regard to MINUSMA, we welcome the
Mission's measures to reprioritize its tasks aimed at
expanding its role in advancing the peace process. We
also praise its successful implementation of its action
plan to reduce peacekeeper fatalities. At the same
time, it is critical to address the Mission's remaining
capability gaps by providing better equipment and
predeployment training that prepares contingents for
the asymmetric conflict situations that Mali presents. It
also important to protect the Malians themselves.

In conclusion, we commend Special Representative
Annadif and all the brave men and women representing
the United Nations for their commitment to peace in
such a hazardous, hostile and challenging environment.
Lastly, we fully support the outcome document
proposed by the Permanent Representative of France.

