Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the French presidency for
convening today's meeting of the Security Council and
also to Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Malcorra and Mr. Annabi for their substantive
presentations on United Nations peacekeeping.

The rising numbers of peacekeeping operations
and the personnel involved in them, the growing
complexity of peacekeeping mandates and the lack of
financial and logistical support for them make it
necessary to review existing United Nations
peacekeeping practices and to formulate a
comprehensive strategy for their planning and
implementation.

We believe that any measures designed to reform
United Nations peacekeeping should be aimed at
enhancing the efficiency of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and should be evaluated
precisely according to that criterion. It is of
fundamental importance that they be carried out in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and the
norms of international law, with unfailing respect for
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
and in accordance with the universally recognized
principles ofpeacekeeping.

We see ways for improving United Nations
peacekeeping, above all in the areas of peacekeeping
operations management, making use of the potential of
regional organizations and United Nations capacity-
building and preventive diplomacy. As regards
peacekeeping operations management, we advocate
further improvement in the practice of operational
consultations among Security Council members, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat on all aspects
of peacekeeping operation activities, including in the
planning stage, on the basis of existing formats and
previous decisions of the Security Council. We believe
that, to establish this dialogue, it is essential to involve
more actively the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. In this connection, we look
forward to the initiative to be undertaken during
Japan's chairmanship of the Group.

The Security Council bears a particular
responsibility in formulating realistic peacekeeping
mandates. We believe that the decisions of the Council
on the deployment of United Nations operations must
be based on preliminary agreements with potential

troop-contributing countries to provide peacekeeping
operations with the necessary personnel and
operational capacity. This conclusion has been
confirmed by the experience of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

In the context of the increasing complexity of
modern peacekeeping operations, there is a growing
need now to differentiate their functions in specific
areas of peacekeeping and in promoting post-conflict
reconstruction. We believe that it would be rational to
mandate peacekeepers only with the primary tasks of
post-conflict reconstruction, while the actual processes
of peacekeeping and socio-economic recovery should
more actively engage the relevant United Nations
bodies, in particular the Peacebuilding Commission,
and regional organizations, international financial
institutions and bilateral donors.

Special attention must be given to the issue of
ensuring the required level of military expertise for the
Security Council, which remains unsatisfactory. We
support the involvement of the military experts of
Council members in the formulation and review of
peacekeeping mandates. At the same time, we must
ensure a more systematic approach by the Security
Council to the military aspects of peacekeeping.

In that regard, we believe that it is now time and
justified in all respects to revitalize the activity of the
Military Staff Committee, with the full participation of
the 15 members of the Security Council. The Military
Staff Committee's assessment of the military situation
in countries in which peacekeeping operations are
deployed, its formulations of recommendations
regarding operational aspects of peacekeeping and its
participation in missions to assess the readiness of
troops and services assigned to peacekeeping
operations would ensure that the Council is provided
with reliable and timely information and would also
enhance United Nations peacekeeping military
expertise as a whole. My delegation is ready to share
our specific proposals on the possible organization of
the Committee's work.
We also wish to stress the responsibility of the
Secretariat for improving the integrated planning of
operations and coordination between Headquarters and
the field. My delegation believes that, in the context of
the recent restructuring of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field

Support, the strengthening of the Office of Military
Affairs and the establishment of the Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions, the Secretariat has all
the necessary potential to effectively address those
tasks. The achievement of a systematic approach is
possible only through the effective redistribution of
labour and responsibilities among the various
departments and offices of the Secretariat, while
preserving the unity of command and control. Those
objectives are particularly important now in the light of
the deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

It is clear that, in order to enhance United Nations
peacekeeping, it is essential to increase cooperation
with regional operations during the deployment of such
missions. Experience has shown us that the greater
involvement of regional organizations is justified
provided that they act in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter and when
their relationships with the United Nations and
especially with the Security Council are regulated on
the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter.

Given the growing scale of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, it is becoming increasingly
urgent to strengthen the Organization's potential on
parallel tracks, above all in the areas of preventive
diplomacy, mediation and peacebuilding. In that
context, the forthcoming reports of the Secretary-
General on mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding
should provide us with food for thought with regard to
enhancing United Nations mediation capabilities by
combining the peacekeeping and peacebuilding
components of peacekeeping mandates and by creating
a roster of United Nations civilian experts.

Russia attaches great importance to increasing its
participation in United Nations peacekeeping Russian
peacekeepers have been participating in peacekeeping
operations in the Middle East, various regions in
Africa, Haiti and Kosovo. A Russian helicopter unit is
operating as part of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan and another Russian aviation group is being
dispatched to the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad.

Another important area is the involvement of the
Russian Ministry of the Interior in the training of
African specialists at its All-Russian Institute for
Enhancing the Skills of Staff Members. We are
planning to render further assistance to the United
Nations in the area of police training. In particular we
are working on the issue of training and contributing
officers to formed police units, and on the training of
senior police staff.

Russia is ready to engage in constructive dialogue
on enhancing the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping, both within the framework of the
Security Council and in close cooperation with the
Secretariat, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations of the General Assembly, the Peacebuilding
Commission and other bodies of the United Nations
system.

