Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Ian
Martin, for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
Jose Luis Guterres to the Security Council and to
congratulate him on his assumption of the post of
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste.

Denmark fully associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by Finland on behalf of the
European Union. I would only, at this stage, like to add
a few points.

The security situation in Timor-Leste has
stabilized, thanks in large part to the troops provided
by Australia, Portugal, Malaysia and New Zealand, and
thanks to the recent reconciliation efforts and political
progress. Nevertheless, Timor-Leste's security and
political situation remains fragile and some of the key
institutions, including the Timorese police, are no
longer functioning. Significant international assistance
is therefore required to bring the peacebuilding effort
in Timor-Leste back on track, and we support the
Secretary-General's idea of a Timor-Leste compact.

It is clear that the future mission in Timor-Leste
will need to be sufficiently large to effectively address
such urgent issues as the need for a United Nations
police force, training of the national police and support
to ensure that next year's elections will be free and fair.
There is also an urgent need for institutional support,
particularly in the justice sector, the rapid
implementation of quick-impact projects and
sustainable economic development, in large part
through assistance from traditional development
agencies and bilateral donors. Despite the increase in
the international presence, it is, at the same time,
important that the Timorese remain in the driver's seat
and that any advice and assistance be provided on a
sustainable basis.

We strongly support the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the issues of human rights and
justice and reconciliation, including the proposal for
the mandate of the new mission to include assistance
for the resumption of the investigative functions of the
former Serious Crimes Unit. However, we believe that
the international support and legitimacy provided to the
bilateral Commission of Truth and Friendship should
be conditioned on a revision of its amnesty clause. As
mentioned by the Secretary-General, that clause is
currently inconsistent with the requirements of
international law, which bars amnesty for serious
violations of international law. The new mission should
support efforts that ensure that justice will prevail for
past and future crimes, including those that took place
earlier this year and led to the recent crisis.

Many challenges remain, including to address the
root causes behind the recent Violence. It is our hope
that the future United Nations mission will allow
Timor-Leste to establish sustainable institutions as well
as sustainable peace and development.

