Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Whether we like it or
not, Burundi has been bleeding for some time now. There
were at first conflicting reports and denials from
Bujumbura about what was actually happening, but the
international community is increasingly unanimous in its
assessment of the frightening and deteriorating security
situation in that country.

The authorities in Bujumbura are finding it
increasingly difficult to protect the lives of their people,
and they have our sympathies. The political leaders and
parties accuse each other of "ethnic cleansing", and, by
their own admission, the country is in a state of civil war,

 

as the Secretary-General's letter contained in document
S/ 1996/36 clearly states. The political atmosphere has been
poisoned by extremist views that threaten to destroy
national institutions, and political discourse is characterized
by incitement to hatred and violence.

Botswana is deeply disturbed by these developments.
We are convinced that the international community can no
longer watch in an impassive manner the human tragedy
that is unfolding in Burundi. Something needs to be done,
and done urgently, at the political and diplomatic levels to
arrest the situation before it gets totally out of control.

The draft resolution which the Security Council is
about to adopt is direct and unambiguous. It calls upon the
people of Burundi to enter into serious and meaningful
negotiations to bring an end to the daily killings and to
establish conditions conducive to national reconciliation,
democracy and the rule of law. It is important that
Burundians take the message seriously and begin to create
conditions that would enable them to enter into a
comprehensive political dialogue without further delay.

The international community has long realized that the
people of Burundi cannot reach political accommodation by
themselves. The Secretary-General of the United Nations,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the European
Union and the facilitators appointed by the Cairo
Conference of Heads of State of the Great Lakes Region,
held on 29 November 1995, stand ready to assist them. The
people of Burundi should take the opportunity presented by
this international goodwill to promote national healing and
reconciliation, democracy and the state of law.

Operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution mandates
the Secretary-General to develop contingency plans to
enable the Security Council to respond timeously and
effectively should the security situation in the country so
demand. It is important that the international community,
especially member States of the Organization of African
Unity, render the Secretary-General all assistance while he
develops the contingency plan, but on the understanding
that the international community will not leave the problem
of Burundi to Africa alone.

The situation in Burundi threatens regional peace and
stability, and it therefore calls for the urgent attention of the
Security Council. In any case, any action that would be
considered appropriate in Burundi would require the
provision of substantial financial and logistical resources
that would not be readily available in Africa. We look
forward to the report of the Secretary-General concerning
the outcome of his consultations with Member States and
the OAU, as stated in operative paragraph 7. But, as
operative paragraph 8 (a) and (b) clearly indicates, the
Security Council will in no way wait for the Secretary-
General's report before considering developments in
Burundi. It is the understanding of my delegation that the
Security Council will be informed, if necessary on a daily
basis, about developments in Burundi, so that measures
envisaged under operative paragraph 8 (a) and (b) can be
imposed as the situation dictates.

Botswana attaches the utmost importance to the
security of international personnel, who are doing a
commendable job under trying circumstances in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the Burundians.
The Secretary-General's letter contained in document
S/1996/36 indicates that any interruption in the delivery
of humanitarian assistance could have far-reaching
consequences for human lives and population movements.
We therefore appeal to the Government of Burundi to
cooperate with the Secretary-General's technical security
mission. The outcome of the mission's work is important
to the continuation of humanitarian operations, which are
so vital to the well-being of the people of Burundi.

