Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this informative meeting on the
humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and
congratulates Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, on his excellent briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire is particularly concerned about the
resurgence of fighting in north-west Syria, where peace
seemed to be returning gradually following the signing
by the Russian Federation and Turkey, on 17 September,
of the agreement establishing the demilitarized zone.
Following allegations of the use of chemical weapons
by armed groups in Aleppo and the total control of Idlib
province by the jihadist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
the situation is a serious obstacle to the ongoing
peace process. It also poses a real threat to the living
conditions of millions of civilians living in the area,
which is already facing a humanitarian crisis, with
more than 2 million people deprived of food, water and
health care.

In addition to Idlib province, other areas are also in
great need ofhumanitarian assistance. According to the
United Nations Children's Fund, at least eight children
were killed in Rukban, a camp for displaced people in
southern Syria, while seven others died as their families
fled a jihadist stronghold in eastern Syria. My country
condemns the continued attacks and threats against
civilians, as well as the restrictions imposed on their
freedom of movement throughout Syria.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates the need to ensure safe,
prompt, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access in order to provide the necessary assistance
to populations in distress in Syria. In that regard, we
welcome the Security Council's one-year renewal,
on 13 December, of the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic.

My delegation also commends the efforts of the
European Union that led to the adoption ofa €1.6 billion
humanitarian aid budget in 2019, part of which will be
used to mitigate the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic
and to assist Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries.
In that connection, Cote d'Ivoire reminds all parties to
the conflict of their obligations to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law, including with
regard to the protection of civilians.

Cote d'Ivoire believes that humanitarian aid to
Syria, which is of crucial importance for populations in
distress, would be more effectively delivered if a lasting
political solution were found to the crisis in the country.
We therefore call on all parties to the conflict to cease
hostilities and resolutely commit to implementing
the provisions of the agreement establishing the
demilitarized zone in Idlib province.

Convinced that the Syrian conflict cannot be
resolved militarily, my country urges the belligerents
to choose the path of negotiation under the auspices
of the United Nations and rely on the Astana and
Sochi processes.

In conclusion, my delegation also calls on the parties
to the conflict to agree on the effective establishment of
the constitutional committee responsible for drafting a
new constitution.

