The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Afrah
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing it received on 17 December 2007 from
the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for Somalia, Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, in which
he made proposals on the political and security
fronts and called on the international community
to commit itself to a clear course of action. The
Security Council looks forward to hearing more
details on the proposals of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Security Council strongly supports the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to work towards lasting peace and
stability in Somalia.

"The Security Council reaffirms its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of the new Prime Minister of Somalia
and looks forward to the early establishment of
an effective Government. The appointment of
Nur Hassan Hussein offers a renewed opportunity
to make further progress on dialogue and political
reconciliation, on addressing the humanitarian
crisis in Somalia and on implementing the
outcomes of the National Reconciliation
Congress, leading to a road map for the
remainder of the transitional period and
democratic elections in Somalia, as set out in the
Transitional Federal Charter. The Security
Council urges all Somali parties to reject violence
and, with the support of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to enter
into a substantial dialogue aimed at achieving a
full and all-inclusive national reconciliation.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
briefing on 6 December 2007 by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, John Holmes,
which included an account of his visit to Somalia.
The Security Council expresses its deep concern at
the deteriorating humanitarian situation, aggravated
by the prevailing security conditions in Somalia,
and emphasizes again the need for strengthened
efforts to provide humanitarian relief assistance
to Somalia. The Security Council demands that
all parties in Somalia ensure unfettered access for
all humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
populations, fulfil their responsibilities and
obligations under international humanitarian law
and take the necessary measures to protect
civilians.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), calls on all Somali parties to
cooperate fully with it, urges again the
international community to provide financial
resources, personnel, equipment and services for
the full deployment of AMISOM. and repeats its
request that the Secretary-General consult with
the African Union Commission on what further
support might be provided to AMISOM.

"The Security Council also reiterates its
request that the Secretary-General develop the
existing contingency plans for the possible
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to succeed AMISOM, as set out in
resolution 1772 (2007). The Security Council
07-65287
requests the Secretary-General to report by
8February 2008 on progress made in this
regard."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/49.
07-65287

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

