Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Spain for
his excellent presentation and for his role in leading
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
for their work in preparing the latest report.

We are now nearing the start of the implementation
of the Iran nuclear agreement under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action signed in July by the
Iran and the P5+1, as well as the issuance of the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
confirming Iran's fulfilment of its obligations. We
stress the importance of the nuclear agreement and
the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
which provide essential guarantees for the Iranian
nuclear programme. We hope that the launch of the
implementation of the Plan of Action will help to
strengthen international efforts aimed at addressing
the challenges threatening the security of the Middle
East, promoting the principles of good-neighbourliness
and strengthening peace and security, while at the same
time reinforcing the nuclear non-proliferation regime
in the Middle East, which of course will also have an
impact on international peace and security.

In regard to the report on the work of the 1737
Committee, Jordan supports the Committee's efforts
to prepare for the effective implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. We call on the
Committee to continue implementing its mandate and
the relevant Security Council resolutions until the
Council receives the IAEA report confirming that Iran
has effectively undertaken measures pertaining to its
nuclear programme, pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015).
The world will thereby by reassured of the peaceful
character of its nuclear programme.

By the same token, Jordan is concerned about the
contents of the 11 December report of the Panel of
Experts, especially in regard to violations mentioned
therein and Iran's launch on 11 October of a ballistic
missile capable of carrying a nuclear weapon. We call
on the Committee to look into the matter.

In conclusion, we welcome the role played by the
Committee and its request for various bodies of the
United Nations system to provide technical assistance
to assist Iran in implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

