Major General Paul Cruz: I thank the Council
for giving me the opportunity to clarify some issues. I
will begin with engineer participation, which has been
reinforced in our mission. We were not only reinforced,
but well reinforced by the Japanese and Korean
companies of engineers. They are doing remarkable
work on main roads that had major damage; they are
now repaired. There was a big effort made to remove
debris, so we are opening sites, mainly Government
facilities, hospitals, schools and orphanages. This
process is ongoing. We have had very good
reinforcement on those issues.

On the issue of sexual and gender-based violence,
one month after the earthquake, when the main camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs) were being
established - in the area of Port-au-Prince there are
now about 900 IDP camps - we began to notice an
increase in violence against women, and we changed
our approach to address this problem. This problem
must be addressed from a broader perspective that

includes community violence reduction personnel and
humanitarian people, as well as the presence of the
military, the police and the local police. We encourage
various actors in this joint strategy, which exists
mainly in the larger camps - such as the Jean-Marie
Vincent camp - where we had many problems that
were reduced by major operations involving the United
Nations police, formed police units, the military and
the Haitian National Police. This was carried out not
only through a security approach, but also with a View
to improving living conditions and to spreading the
message that persons most at risk, such as women and
children, must be protected. This is an ongoing process
by which we hope to reduce the number of threats
against women in the camps, because their lives there
are already difficult.

Our deterrence posture is part of what we are
doing, mainly in the poorest areas of Port-au-Prince
and other cities. My guidance to the military is: "Be
there on foot. Stay there as part of the local
community. Be part of the community. Be accepted by
them, work with them and thus maintain their
confidence in our job and our work." And this has
resulted in a very good approach towards the local
Haitian people and the local leadership, and it has
made our lives much easier than before.

With respect to humanitarian efforts, in the
emergency phase we had the challenge of quickly
distributing large quantities of food, water and shelter,
which was done by a joint operations task centre,
where all requests were posted and tasks assigned to
the proper sector for appropriate action development,
not just towards the military or the police, but also
towards all the humanitarian organizations and United
Nations agencies that were on board.

But after the emergency phase, under the
direction of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Edmond Mulet, the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Humanitarian Coordinator established a strategy to
bring coherence to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. This delivery needed to be coherent with
the Haitian Government's plan and with that of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. We studied their
documents and, under the direction of the Deputy
Special Representative, we prepared a plan for a more
coherent delivery of assistance in the recovery phase in
order to prepare for the next phase.
Today, our major logistical challenge is debris.
We are working on opening the roads and streets of
Port-au-Prince. Of course, delays are expected.
Progress can be achieved only in a safe and stable
environment. Notwithstanding all the things that have
happened in Haiti, with the electoral process that is
currently being launched, we are optimistic that the
country will recover, that it will soon enter a new phase
of greater stability and that it will be better in general.

