Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like preceding speakers, I thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Darfur, for their briefings to the
Council.

The situation in Darfur is a source of profound
concern for Costa Rica. We are facing a humanitarian
crisis that is deepening daily, despite the enormous
efforts and resources deployed by the international
community. Nevertheless, the Council must bear in
mind that the humanitarian crisis is a manifestation and
a consequence of a previous crisis - a political crisis,
taken to extremes, that culminated in the irresponsible
sacrifice of hundreds of thousands of persons,
including a great number of women and children.

Therefore, in analysing the situation in Darfur
and the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), we
cannot lose sight of the fact that a solution to the
humanitarian crisis will depend on a solution to the
political crisis, which can be overcome only through a
political process of consultation involving all the
parties.

My Government calls on the parties to commit
themselves to peace and to seek areas for dialogue and
mechanisms for negotiation in order to resolve their
differences. We applaud the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoys to that end.

This is an Organization of sovereign States -
States with equal rights, but also equal responsibilities.
Costa Rica is convinced that sovereignty is not so
much a right as an obligation, and that the principal
obligation of every State is to protect those who live
within its territory. Therefore, we call respectfully but
forcefully on the Government of the Sudan to exercise
its sovereignty by protecting the hundreds of thousands
of persons who are suffering daily the consequences of
a fratricidal war.
We regret the increasing reports of crimes
committed against civilian populations, including
children, as well as the increase in the number of cases
of sexual Violence. We energetically condemn the use
of those practices as tools of political pressure. Thus,
we reiterate the importance and validity of Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1612 (2005) and 1674 (2006).

The replacement of the African Union Mission in
the Sudan (AMIS) by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
constituted an important step towards facilitating an
effective solution to the conflict in Darfur. However,
the implementation of the mandate entrusted to the new
mission has been seriously compromised. The
postponement yet again of the signature of the status-
of-forces agreement by the Government of the Sudan,
the absence of the team necessary to carry out the
assigned functions and the precarious regional stability,
particularly in regard to the relationship between Chad
and Sudan, cast a dark shadow over the hopes of the
thousands who are affected by this conflict.

Positive results in peacekeeping operations
largely depend on the existence of conditions
facilitating rapid and effective deployment offering
maximum possible security guarantees to those who
carry out these operations. Unfortunately, this remains
a challenge to be overcome for UNAMID. Therefore,
we vehemently echo the repeated appeals by the
Secretary-General to the Government of Sudan to
facilitate the full deployment of the mission as
promptly as possible, and to Member States to provide
the equipment and helicopters necessary to fulfil the
mandate.

Justice is an essential component in the
achievement of lasting peace. Perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity or the crime of
genocide are attacking human dignity and the
conscience of the international community, and should
therefore be answerable to justice without delay.

Costa Rica restates its commitment to the
International Criminal Court and would like to
emphasize the obligation of the Government of Sudan
to cooperate with that high Court, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). The international community's
commitment to peace requires the Security Council to
go beyond rhetoric and thus guarantee the
implementation of its resolutions and of the mandates
emanating from them.
We believe that the crisis in Darfur will not end
merely through the adoption of resolutions by this
collegial body; nor will the humanitarian needs of the
affected populations be met by 15 votes. It is through
constant and detailed monitoring of all aspects of the

conflict, the effective requirement that the provisions
adopted by this body be enforced, the timely
assignment of responsibility and support for the sincere
desire of the parties to overcome obstacles and the
underlying conflicts that the maintenance of
international peace and security in the region will
ultimately be guaranteed.

