Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am pleased to see you, Sir, a representative of
a friendly country, presiding over the Security Council.
I congratulate you and the members of your delegation
on assuming the presidency. I also thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her important briefing today.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm Libya's full
determination to ensure that the work of its national
judiciary and the ICC complement one another in
delivering justice and fighting impunity for crimes
that fall under the Rome Statute. I again stress that
the Libyan judicial authorities are determined to meet
their obligations pursuant to national and international
laws, despite the challenges and pressures facing them,
particularly the Office of the Prosecutor General, in the
absence ofa law enforcement agency under Government
control. The Libyan Government is currently unable
to ensure the independence of the judiciary or the
issuance of fair sentences when courts operate in areas
not subject to its authority. However, it will strive to
ensure accountability, fight impunity and promote the
rule of law, and spare no effort to investigate all crimes
committed, including those of torture, abduction and
any other violation of human rights. We will punish all
perpetrators when circumstances allow.

Despite these factors, we must note that no Libyan
Government can protect human rights or deliver justice
when itsjudges, officials and the Office ofthe Prosecutor
General feel that their lives are at risk because the
Government has no control over the security situation
and is not functioning in a safe environment. All
prisons will remain beyond State control so long as the
Security Council continues to marginalize the Libyan
Army and to prevent its units and battalions, as well
as the Libyan Security Forces, from receiving weapons
despite the Libyan Army's achievements in fighting
Da'esh, Al-Qaida and Ansar Al-Sharia militias.

Despite the dire need for concerted international
efforts to fight Da'esh in Libya, we must take extreme
care about who we are supplying weapons and equipment
to. We were greatly concerned to learn that a senior
military official of an important country has affirmed
his country's plan to train and supply militias, which
are to declare their allegiance to Mr. Fayyez Al-Sarraj,
Chair of the Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord, under the pretext of fighting Da'esh.
We believe that this would simply lead to keeping power
split between the Army and the militias and to further
chaos and instability in the country. It will prevent
the Government of National Accord from having any
control of the security situation.

Prosecutor Bensouda notes in her report that her
Office, in line with its effort to ensure the surrender
of Saif Al-Qadhafi to the ICC, filed a request to the
Pre-Trial Chamber for an order directing the Registry
to transmit the request for arrest and surrender of
Mr. Al-Qadhafi directly to Mr. Al-'Ajami Al-'ATiri.
In that regard, I wish to clarify that neither the ICC
nor any other foreign entity has the right to directly
address a Libyan citizen without first going through the
appropriate Libyan Government channels. The Court,
it if were to take such a path, would violate Libyan law
and interfere in the internal affairs of Libya.

Mr. Al-'Ajami Al-'ATiri is a commander in the
Libyan Army, and has no right to have any direct
dealings with a foreign entity or to directly decide
the fate of another Libyan. If he should attempt to
do so, he would violate Libyan law and be subject to
prosecution when circumstances allow. Whatever
the circumstances, the decision of whether or not to
surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the ICC is the
sole purview of the Libyan Government and judiciary.
The Government of National Accord does not currently
oversee any prisons; therefore, we cannot discuss any
decision about Al-Qadhafi or any other prisoner at
this stage.

I would be remiss if I failed to welcome the
ongoing constructive cooperation between the Office
of the Prosecutor of the ICC and Libya's Office of the
Prosecutor. We reiterate our appreciation for all the
efforts made by her Office and underscore the need to
provide all the necessary resources so that it can continue
and expand its investigations into crimes committed in
Libya. The Prosecutor and her colleagues are always
welcome in Libya to continue their investigations, once
the security conditions allow for that.

There can be no justice in the absence of security,
and there can be no security in the absence of the army
and the police and in the presence of militias. The
militias will never disappear as long as they continue
to receive salaries from the State coffers - very high
salaries and much more than police and army officers
earn. They also receive unchecked financial support
from the Ministry of Defence, while army officers and
soldiers do not even receive their meagre salaries on
time. I therefore emphasize that those who care about
the well-being of the Libyan people and genuinely want
to help them to overcome this crisis and establish justice
must help us to reconstitute the Libyan army and build
its capacities, as it is the only guarantor of the unity of
the country and its recovery.

There is also a need to support the Government as
safeguard the country's sovereignty. The international
community must be resolute in adhering precisely
to the Libyan Political Agreement while following a
specific timetable, not overlooking any violations and
rejecting any pre-emptive acts that could make this
political situation even more complex. We must begin
by implementing the security measures and providing
weapons to the police force. That is the real role that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Libya must
play at this stage. Anything short of that will be of little
value - in fact, it could serve to undermine the Political
Agreement, which remains the single glimmer of hope
for the Libyan people, in spite of its shortcomings.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
