Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I would like
to join others in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative, for his report on the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement (S/2013/263, annex).
Mr. Inzko has brought forward a typically thorough
and objective account of the continuing challenges to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress and its European
and Euro-Atlantic integration. I express Australia's
strong support for him and for the work of his Office.

Australia has a close association with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In the 19905, Australian peacekeepers
served alongside their European Union (EU) and
NATO counterparts to help build peace. During
that period, through our humanitarian immigration
programme, we were proud to receive in Australia
more than 30,000 people displaced from Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Today, they are valued members of our
society. We are demonstrably committed to seeing
Bosnia and Herzegovina consolidate itself as a stable,
unified country that can provide for the needs of all of
its citizens.

Seventeen years after the signing of the historic
Dayton Peace Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina
finds itself in the midst of a difficult political phase.
There have been some positive recent developments.
We welcome, for example, regular meetings between
the Presidency and the Council of Ministers. We
also welcome the fact that the 2013 State budget was
adopted on time, for the first time in two years. We
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders to display
the unity of purpose that will allow them to build on
those achievements.

We are, however, concerned by other developments
that threaten to role back the progress achieved since
the mid-1990s. In particular, challenges in some
quarters to the fundamentals of the Peace Agreement
and the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
risk eroding the fragile gains that have been made in
nation-building.

Australia fully supports the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is
the fundamental pillar of the Dayton Peace Agreement
that has underwritten peace and stability. It also
remains critical for broader peace and stability in the
Balkans. We encourage all political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to respect the status of the country
as an independent sovereign nation and to engage in a
constructive dialogue to strengthen the Government in
ways that deliver on the aspirations of the people. That
is all the more important as Bosnia and Herzegovina
approaches the election schedule for next year.

We also encourage political leaders to commit
to constitutional reform in order to establish strong
and representative State structures. Agreement on
constitutional amendments to implement the European
Court of Human Rights ruling in the Sejdie-Finci case
should be an immediate priority as a strong signal that
Bosnia and Herzegovina guarantees to all of its citizens

an equal stake in the country's future. It is also needed
to place Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly back on the
path towards its goal of European and Euro-Atlantic
integration.

Australia acknowledges the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains relatively safe and secure for its
citizens. We share the View that stability, at present, is
in no small part backed by the presence of the European
Union and NATO military missions. That is another
example of the role that regional organizations can
and must play in securing regional stability and the
importance of the Council in engaging closely with
them.

Australia endorses the ongoing presence of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR); its
ongoing monitoring and reporting and arms disposal
activities contribute to peace and stability every day.
EUFOR will not and should not stay forever; but, for
now, it remains important to sustaining confidence
among communities.

So long as the remaining objectives and conditions
for closure of the Office of the High Representative
remain unmet, we should continue to support the efforts
of the High Representative to help deliver sustainable
peace and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In a
climate of fiscal constraint, we applaud the efforts of
the Office of the High Representative to reduce costs.
Those efforts ensure the Office's ongoing financial
viability.

In conclusion, the leaders ofBosnia and Herzegovina
themselves have the ultimate responsibility to put their
country where we all want to see it - on an irreversible
path to peace and greater prosperity. To do so, we
encourage them to put aside their differences and
work together to implement the outstanding objectives
and conditions of the 5+2 agenda. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, has an
important supporting role to play. We must continue to
engage to help realize the goal of a stable, sovereign
Bosnia and Herzegovina, at peace with itself and united
in building a prosperous future for its own people.

