Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea deeply regrets that Iraq's non-
compliance with its disarmament obligations has led to
the current situation.

Over the past 12 years, Iraq has repeatedly
refused to comply with its disarmament obligations
under the relevant Security Council resolutions. Iraq's
record of compliance with its obligations has been
dismal. The initial deadline for Iraq's disarmament was
flatly ignored and the subsequent resolutions, as many
as 17 over the 12 years, have all been met with Iraq's
persistent refusal to comply.

We believe that Iraq has been given more than
enough time and opportunities to disarm. Since Iraq
has failed to comply with its disarmament obligations
for the past 12 years, we cannot but conclude that Iraq
has had no genuine intention to disarm. If Iraq today
faces the serious consequences of which it was warned
in resolution 1441 (2002), it has no one but itself to
blame for failing to take advantage of the time and
opportunities provided.

Under these circumstances, the coalition action
by the international community should be construed as
last-resort, but inevitable measures taken after the
exhaustion of all possible diplomatic efforts to resolve
the issue peacefully.

With the hostilities now unfolding, we are deeply
concerned over the plight of the innocent Iraqi people
who may suffer directly from the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. Given the magnitude of the
conflict, it is urgent for the international community to
take necessary measures to meet the acute
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, expeditiously
providing key humanitarian supplies, in particular food
and medicines.

The Republic of Korea fully supports the
Secretary-General's efforts to facilitate humanitarian
assistance and relief for Iraq through the necessary
adjustments to the oil for food programme, as
envisaged in his recent letter to the President of the
Security Council. For its part, the Republic of Korea
will provide humanitarian and other assistance,
including refugee relief, to Iraq, as well as economic
support for Iraq's neighbouring countries.

We sincerely hope that the ongoing hostilities
will come to the earliest possible conclusion with
minimum casualties, particularly among the civilian
population, and that peace and stability can be restored
to the region.

