Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): Today, I come to
the Council to deliver a message of hope. Last week
marked the hundredth day since the earthquake of
12 January. These days have been among the darkest
that Haiti has experienced in its tempestuous history. In
less than 60 seconds, on 12 January, Port-au-Prince and
neighbouring regions suffered greater damage than if an
atomic bomb had been dropped. The losses are in the
order of between 50 and 100 per cent of the country's
gross domestic product. More than a quarter of all civil
servants fl 18,000 public sector employees fl died
10-33326
during the disaster. One person out of 10 in the capital
was killed. Survivors, Haitians and citizens of other
countries alike, found themselves unprepared, plunged
into mourning, without shelter. Successive waves of
announcements of horrible losses struck. At a personal
level, those were among the darkest days of my life. I
know that that was also the case for my friend, Prime
Minister J ean-Max Bellerive.

Today, however, I am more optimistic, and I
believe that the Prime Minister shares that feeling.
Although the humanitarian crisis is far from over, I
believe that Haiti, in cooperation with friendly and
neighbouring countries, has made significant progress
in assisting the most vulnerable.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/200)
describes the various ways in which the United Nations
has responded to the crisis, and the role played by the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which, despite its losses, continued to
work in the hours following the earthquake to save
lives and facilitate humanitarian assistance. I shall
dwell on only a few of the Mission's activities in order
to give Council members an overview of the scale of
the challenges we face today and of what has been
achieved thus far.

MINUSTAH troops and police provide security
throughout the country and logistical support to
facilitate the distribution of humanitarian assistance to
over 1 million individuals. The provision of temporary
shelter and sanitation facilities are the main priorities
at a time when the rains are falling ever harder and the
hurricane season is fast approaching.

Over the past few weeks, our priority has been to
assist the thousands of displaced persons in Port-au-
Prince living at dangerous sites at risk of flooding and
mudslides. Alongside the Government and
humanitarian partners, we are helping those people
urgently to find alternatives, either by returning to their
homes, when these are certified as structurally sound,
or by moving temporarily to new sites that are
considered to be safer. In the past months, MINUSTAH
military engineers have built two such sites, the largest
of which can host over 25,000 people, in zones
identified by the Government as secure. We provide
transport and security support to assist our
humanitarian partners to relocate those individuals. To
date, some 3,500 persons have been moved to the
Corail Cesselesse site in metropolitan Port-au-Prince,
10-33326
and a few hundred more have found refuge at the
nearby Tabarre Issa.

I shall now pause to screen a brief video
illustrating the work of the MINUSTAH military
engineers at Tabarre Issa.

The members of the Security Council viewed a
video presentation.

Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): At the same time,
MINUSTAH engineers are working to rebuild the main
roads between Port-au-Prince and the Dominican
border and between the cities of Leogane and Jacmel
that were damaged by the earthquake. Those two roads
are and will be important conduits for humanitarian
assistance in the coming months.

MINUSTAH police units, including those newly
constituted and deployed, are patrolling 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, to provide a visible presence,
strengthen security and gain the trust of the population.
We do not possess sufficient forces to deploy them in
adequate numbers throughout the country, but in the
regions where they work with the Haitian National
Police (HNP) we have received positive feedback from
the population.

It is absolutely essential to ensure the recovery of
the economy. Over 250,000 persons have participated
to date in the cash-for-work programmes implemented
by the United Nations and other partners. MINUSTAH
has considerably stepped up its community violence
reduction programme, which employs thousands of
young people threatened by the violence of armed
gangs. For example, we are implementing watershed
management projects that will protect communities
against new natural disasters.

Three months after the earthquake, hundreds of
thousands of Haitian continue to live in conditions of
great vulnerability. However, the international
community's humanitarian efforts, alongside those of
the Haitian Government and people, are beginning to
make a difference.

(spoke in English)

I believe the next 12 to 18 months will be a
period of great challenge and risk in Haiti, but one that
we can help the Government to weather. Haiti's path to
stability depends above all on adherence to the political
and electoral timetable to enable a constitutional
handover of power in February 2011. This will require
3
great effort, both in consensus-building across the
political spectrum and in a massive technical and
logistical endeavour to prepare for timely and inclusive
elections. Falling behind on that track would seriously
undermine the stability we have been working towards
in Haiti for many years.

At the same time, in the coming year we will
continue to see new security pressures. Many
dangerous criminals, whose capture helped stabilize
Haiti over the past few years, are now again at large.
Criminal networks will be looking for opportunities to
take advantage of the weakened police and rule of law
institutions. And people's concerns about whether aid
is adequate and being distributed fairly may be
manipulated for political advantage. There are many
economic risks with millions living in very vulnerable
conditions. And of course there is the risk of new
natural disasters: rains, hurricanes or even future
earthquakes.

However, I believe that there is good reason to
think that Haiti and its international partners can
manage and mitigate those risks. If we do so, I hope
that within two years we may again be in the position
we had reached in 2009 - a Haiti that is relatively
stable and growing economically. We could then start
planning again for the consolidation and drawdown of
MINUSTAH. The need to manage this critical period
of risk is why we have recommended the surge of
effort, described by the Secretary-General in his report,
based on an integrated United Nations approach across
five areas of work.

First, we will intensify the good offices role of
the Mission to provide as much assistance as we can to
Haiti in keeping to its political critical path. As I speak,
a United Nations technical mission is in Haiti
discussing with the Government feasible options to
ensure that elections can be held on time.

Secondly, the Mission will continue to support
the lead role of the Government and humanitarian
partners in meeting needs and reducing vulnerability to
new disasters. Services and opportunities need not only
to be delivered to the capital, but also to communities
outside Port-au-Prince, to avoid a large-scale return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs).

Thirdly, MINUSTAH must step up its efforts to
support security and the rule of law. While the Haitian
National Police has responded admirably to the
earthquake, its capacity has been reduced by the deaths
of officers, the destruction of police stations and the loss
of already scarce equipment. At the same time, it is
facing a vast increase in policing needs. The training of
the HNP, which had been progressing well for several
years, has stopped since the earthquake. The force,
which stands at just under 10,000 officers, must now
restore the plan that was in place before January to build
up to the target level of 14,000. We have requested a
surge in the MINUSTAH police presence to help bridge
the gap between the HNP's current capacity and the
minimum levels needed to ensure a visible presence on
the streets and in IDPs camps. The additional officers
we have requested will enable a presence in the seven
largest camps 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The
increase will also allow some United Nations police
involved in emergency tasks after the earthquake to
resume training of the new HNP officers.

Fourthly, we recommend that MINUSTAH,
working closely with the United Nations country team,
provide some critical short-term assistance in the form
of embedded advisors and logistical and operational
help to some of our key Haitian partner institutions.
That includes police stations and courts in the
earthquake-affected area, and local officials at the
departmental level who are hosting IDPs but lack basic
facilities and capacity.

Long-term assistance to and capacity-building for
these institutions will come, but it will take time. By
providing some additional advisors under our existing
programmes of support, and in some cases offering
United Nations assets to establish temporary office
locations and equipment, we can provide an essential
stop-gap solution to enable these institutions to deliver.
I emphasize that these will be exceptional measures,
which we believe will not add significantly to the
overall cost of the Mission but will have a
disproportionate effect in bolstering the capacity of our
Haitian partners and reducing both political and
humanitarian risks.

Finally, in all these activities, MINUSTAH will
continue to work in support of the broader United
Nations effort to promote a balanced social agenda and
to build the human capital that will make Haiti a more
stable and equitable society. That is the progress we all
want to see and that will lead to a stable environment
in which MINUSTAH can safely withdraw.

I have in my front office in Port-au-Prince a
Haitian painting which depicts Haiti as a patient in a
hospital. This patient is surrounded by international
doctors and United Nations Blue Helmets, and by the
bedside a row of friends and supporters are praying for
recovery.

The message of hope I want to communicate
today is that, after three months back in Haiti, where I
last served in 2007, I believe that the patient is stronger
and more resilient than we might have thought. After
two centuries of deep political and social division, and
despite the tragedy that befell it in January, Haiti has a
vision for State renewal that is clear, simple and
broadly shared. That vision, which the Government has
articulated in its national Action Plan, offers an
approach to tackling the historical challenges of
governance, to encouraging investment and
confronting long-standing inequalities. Although much
work remains to be done, there is remarkable
consensus across the political spectrum, and between
the public and private sectors in Haiti, on the broad
lines of what must now be achieved.

So I believe that, in the face of tragedy, this is a
moment of historic opportunity for Haiti. If we can get
through the next year of risks, there is a good prospect
that 2010 could also mark the start of new era of
stability. What Haiti needs now is the supporting arm
of a companion on which it can lean as it gets back on
its feet. That is the role which we, the international
community, can play. Since 12 January, offers of
assistance to the Haitian people have come from all
continents. The challenge for the United Nations is to
help create an environment in which this goodwill and
generosity can be translated immediately into much-
needed practical support. Its impact must be visible to
give the psychological boost needed to face the tasks
ahead.

I believe that, with just a little more of the
support that we are already providing, Haiti will make
its own way forward. That would be the best end to the
terrible story of 12 January and a necessary and fitting
tribute to the lives of those we have lost. It is in that
spirit that I ask for the Council's support of the
Secretary-General's recommendations.

Finally, I want to thank United Nations Member
States and the Council for all the extraordinary support
they have provided to MINUSTAH and to Haiti in the
past few months. I would like to leave the Council with
a promise of my own commitment to continuing to
10-33326
work with all my energy in the coming months to meet
the challenges that are still before us.


