The Secretary-General: I am delighted that my
Special Representative, Sergio Vieira de Mello, is with
us today. I am sure I speak for all of us in expressing
warm gratitude to him, his staff and all of his team for
their outstanding work so far. I should also say a
special word of gratitude to the United Nations staff in
Iraq - international and national - for their dedicated
work in often difficult circumstances.

Let me also welcome the presence here of the
representatives of the Iraqi Governing Council; its
formation is an important first step towards the full
restoration of Iraqi sovereignty.

The Council has before it my report
(S/2003/715), which we have sought to make as
comprehensive as possible under rapidly changing
circumstances. I will leave it to my Special
Representative to give a detailed account of his mission
so far.

I wish, however, to take this opportunity to
reiterate the following fundamental principles
underlying the activities of the United Nations under
resolution 1483 (2003) - principles which we all
share: the need to respect the independence and
territorial integrity of Iraq; the need to restore
sovereignty to the people of Iraq as soon as possible;
the need to respect the Iraqi people's right to determine
their political future; the need to respect Iraq's
sovereignty over its territory and natural resources; and
the need for Iraq to be restored to the position of a full
and responsible partner in the international community,
at ease with its neighbours.

Resolution 1483 (2003) provides a mandate for
the United Nations to assist the people of Iraq in a wide
range of areas. In all we do, we need to keep the
interests of the Iraqi people at the forefront of our
minds. We should listen to their needs, expressed by
them in their terms, and we should try to respond. I
believe that Sergio Vieira de Mello has been doing
precisely that throughout his weeks in Baghdad and his
visits to the region.

Our collective goal remains an early end to the
military occupation through the formation of an
internationally recognized, representative Government.
Meanwhile, it is vital that the Iraqi people should be
able to see a clear timetable with a specific sequence of
events leading to the full restoration of sovereignty as
soon as possible.

In practical terms, this means that the
establishment of the Governing Council must be
followed by a constitutional process run by Iraqis for
Iraqis. The United Nations will continue to play an
active role in facilitating and supporting the political
process, working together with the Governing Council
and the Coalition Provisional Authority.

The people of Iraq are anxious for their country
to become a stable, democratic and prosperous State.
To succeed, they will need the support of their
neighbours and the region as a whole. What happens in
Iraq does not happen in vacuum. A stable Iraq - one
that is at peace with itself and its neighbours - is in
our collective interest, particularly that of the region.

That is why I have instructed Mr. Vieira de Mello
to engage in an ongoing dialogue with leaders of
neighbouring countries and the region. He has already
consulted senior officials or heads of State from a
number of countries and intends to expand these
consultations to include all States concerned. I trust I
can count on their cooperation.

The challenge that awaits us in Iraq is enormous.
Let us all do our utmost to rise to meet that challenge.
We owe no less than that to the Iraqi people.

