Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): I would like to extend my
gratitude to Ambassador Robert Fowler for the informative
presentation he made this morning with regard to the
outcome of the activities of the Panel of Experts on
violations of Security Council sanctions against UNITA.

Since the report of the Panel, contained in document
S/2000/203 of 10 March 2000, distributed yesterday, has
references to my country, I feel obliged to take the floor
and to share with the members of the Security Council
my preliminary observations on it. At the same time, I
would like to reserve the right of my delegation to
respond more comprehensively to the accusations raised
against my country at a later stage.

Allow me at the outset to express my Government's
frustration with the violation of the established procedure
requiring all countries concerned to be acquainted first
with the report, before it is given to the mass media. We
hope that the way in which this document was issued will
not set a precedent in the activities of the Council.

In order to avoid similar unacceptable situations in
the future, my delegation would like to put forward for
consideration two concrete proposals. First, the Chairman
of the relevant body should not only bear the primary
responsibility for the content of the report, but he or she
should be responsible for any unauthorized leakage.
Secondly, to assist the Chairman of the relevant body in
fulfilling this responsibility, the document should be given
to the interested States mentioned in it in the original
language in which it was produced at the same time or
before it is given to the Secretariat for translation and
general distribution.
After these procedural remarks, I would like to bring
to the Council's attention that the report of the Panel of
Experts was duly forwarded to the respective Bulgarian
authorities for further consideration, examination and
analysis. However, it is absolutely clear at this point that,
despite some speculation in the mass media, the report
does not, and could not, contain even a single piece of
concrete evidence linking Bulgaria as a State or its State
policy with any violation of Security Council resolution
864 (1993) or of the internationally recognized standards
and norms of arms control regimes. The report itself
states in paragraph 15 that

"arms procurement by UNITA was not by means of
direct contact between UNITA and arms producing
countries." (S/2000/203).

The Bulgarian Government has extended its full
support to the Security Council resolutions on Angola,
and our political position with regard to UNITA and the
situation in Angola has been categorically confirmed by
our adherence to the declarations and decisions made by
the European Union on this issue. Bulgaria has
demonstrated its willingness to fully cooperate with and
assist the sanctions Committee and the Panel of Experts

 

established to investigate violations of sanctions against
UNITA.

During the visit of the Expert Panel - led by its
Chairman, Mr. Anders Mollander - to Bulgaria from 19
to 21 January 2000, a number of meetings were held at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Economy and
the Interdepartmental Council at the Council of Ministers.
The latter is the only authorized licensing body in Bulgaria
in the area of arms trade. Comprehensive and substantial
written information was provided, including a response to
the additional inquiries, which was submitted to the Panel
on 11 February last. All information thus presented to the
Panel attests to the fact that the Bulgarian authorities have
acted in strict compliance with domestic legislation and
with the Security Council resolutions on Angola.

That is why we would like to share with the Council
our great concern in respect to the following. It is our full
conviction that the States that extend their full support and
assistance to control and monitoring bodies should not be
punished by the distortion and misinterpretation of the
information they submit to the experts, whatever the
reasons for such handling of the facts. One might even get
the impression, on the other hand, that the countries that did
not provide substantive information in a timely manner are
on the safe side, since they are not being extensively
referred to in the report. Such an approach is totally
unacceptable and is harmful to the effective monitoring of
the implementation of the Security Council resolutions. It
can only discourage the willingness, and increase the
cautiousness, of those Governments with regard to the
activities of the expert bodies. These bodies should pursue
their mandates with objectivity, impartiality and
non-selectivity, and they should base their findings and
recommendations on sound legal evidence.

Let me at this stage briefly comment on some of the
major allegations raised in the report that involve Bulgaria.
First, the assumption that the arms transaction referred to in
paragraph 38 of the report was carried out is groundless.
The deal was cancelled when the end-user certificate
believed to be provided by the Ministry of Defence of
Zambia was proved false. The equipment mentioned in that
paragraph can still be found and verified in the storage
premises of the Ministry of Defence of Bulgaria. The
approach followed by the Panel in this case raises serious
doubts about the credibility of the information sources used
in the preparation of the report.

Secondly, no legal obstacles were seen to the arms
supply to Togo cited in paragraph 42 of the report, since
the country was not subject to an arms embargo, either by
the Security Council or by the European Union.
Furthermore, the transaction was approved on the basis of
genuine end-user certificates submitted by the Ministry of
Defence of Togo.

Thirdly, the training of Zairian military officers in
Bulgaria took place on the basis of a bilateral agreement
between the two Ministries of Defence in 1996, when no
restrictions applied to military cooperation of this type.

Having said this, on behalf of the Bulgarian
Government, I categorically reject as absolutely
unfounded and unacceptable any accusations raised or
presumed in the report of the Expert Panel of possible
violations by my country of the Security Council
sanctions against UNITA.

As we have repeatedly declared in recent years,
Bulgaria has been applying the most stringent controls to
its foreign arms trade, based on a specific law adopted by
Parliament in 1996. Each foreign transaction in arms and
dual-use goods and technologies is considered and
approved on an individual basis, after a meticulous review
of the required documents. This legally binding procedure
is strictly observed. The established regulations for export
control licensing are being consistently improved, with the
aim of achieving the standards of the European Union in
this regard. A legislative amendment is currently being
put on the high-priority agenda of the Government and
Parliament for the first half of this year. The amendment
is intended to introduce more developed mechanisms for
the control and implementation of international
restrictions imposed on the arms trade with regard to
specific countries and regions.

Not only is Bulgaria active in the improvement of its
national legislation, but it is sparing no effort to enhance
international and regional cooperation in this area. A
regional conference on export controls was held in
December 1999 in Sofia, at the initiative of the Bulgarian
Government, under the auspices of the Stability Pact for
South-Eastern Europe. The Conference adopted two
important political documents: a joint declaration on
responsible arms transfers and a statement on
harmonization of end-user certificates. The 12
participating countries agreed on a number of concrete
measures to combat illicit arms trafficking in the region,
thus contributing to the fulfilment of the common goal of
the international community in this field.

 

Finally, I would like to assure the Council that the
Bulgarian Government will seriously consider the report
and is ready to cooperate further with the Security Council
Committee on sanctions against UNITA.

