The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
speak in my capacity as Permanent Representative of
Colombia.

In April of last year, during Colombia's previous
presidency of the Security Council, we saw the first
signs ofa spiral ofviolent repression that has not ceased
and has become more acute by the day. Thousands have
died, disappeared, become refugees, been tortured or
arbitrarily detained. The world stands appalled at the
terrible human tragedy, unusual levels of violence and
flagrant lack ofrespect for human rights that Syrians are
enduring. It is deplorable that the Syrian Government
has not taken the measures necessary to implement the
Joint Special Envoy's plan and resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012), and that the opposition has made no
contribution to this either.

Colombia voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2012/53 8) submitted by the United Kingdom, France,
Germany, Portugal and the United States, because we
believe that its text provides the necessary support and
sends a clear message to all parties in Syria on the
importance of complying with the commitments and
obligations in the six-point plan and the aforementioned
resolutions, as well as with the agreements reached
in Geneva within the framework of the Action Group
for Syria (S/2021/523, annex). We deplore the fact that
differences have prevailed on the many views on and
ways of responding to the Syrian crisis, and that we
have not been able to arrive at concrete proposals that
could help achieve effective progress among the parties.
It could have enabled us to find a political way out that
met the legitimate aspirations of all sectors of Syrian
society.

However uncertain Syria's future may seem, its
people have taken the irreversible road of change. The
negative results of today's vote are frustrating, but we
must not abandon our efforts to arrive at a political
solution to the crisis in Syria. Colombia will continue
to contribute to efforts to end all forms of violence and
violations of human rights, and to find ways to help the
Syrian people establish the democratic institutions that
will enable them to live together in brotherly peace.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

Upon the request of the sponsor of the draft
resolution contained in document S/2012/547/Rev.2, the
Council will not take action thereon.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

