Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join my
colleagues in welcoming you, Mr. President, to your
role as President of the Council for the month of
August, and express our thanks to Ambassador Le
Luong Minh and his team for the excellent way that
they guided the Security Council last month.
I would also like to join colleagues in thanking
the Under-Secretary-General for his presentation on the
Secretary-General's report. We also thank the United
States representative for his presentation on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq. It was very good to see
the Iraqi ambassador here again today, and I express
my thanks to him for the work that his Government is
doing and for its cooperation with the coalition forces,
which are pleased to work with strong Iraqi leadership.

The United Nations continues to play a vital role
in Iraq's development as a democratic and stable
country, and on behalf of my Government I would also
like to thank the United Nations and the whole of its
Iraq team for the important work that they do.

As the Secretary-General acknowledges in his
report, and as echoed by most of the speakers today,
thanks to operations led by the Iraqi Security Forces
with support from coalition troops, violent incidents
across Iraq are at their lowest level since 2004, and
more generally the security situation across the whole
of Iraq continues to improve. The Iraqi Government
has taken tough action against armed groups and
militias, regardless of sectarian affiliation, and Iraqi
security forces are delivering on their responsibilities.
The improved security situation has provided a
platform for further essential progress on
reconciliation. We have seen not only increased
cooperation between Sunni communities and the Iraqi
Government in areas such as Anbar and Mosul, and the
return of the Tawafuq Sunni bloc to the Government,
but also the passage of key legislation that is helping to
embed democracy. The next stage will be provincial
elections, which will reinforce the political progress
made at the national level. They will allow those who
did not participate in the last provincial elections in
January 2005 to enter the political process and they
will contribute to the political reconciliation that the
Secretary-General rightly highlights in his report as
required for long-term stability.

As previous speakers have said, we recognize, of
course, that progress is fragile and that we cannot take
it for granted. Millions of Iraqis remain displaced, the
infrastructure continues to suffer the impact of 30 years
of mismanagement, and the level of unemployment
remains too high. The attacks in Baghdad and Kirkuk
last week remind us that there are groups that are still
determined to inflict violence and create instability.

I would like to use this occasion, ifI may, to say
a few words about the British role in Iraq, particularly
in the light of some recent misinformed press
speculation. It was very good, also, to hear from the
Iraqi Ambassador just now how successful Iraqi-led
military operations have been in parts of Iraq.

The British Prime Minister explained the latest
United Kingdom plans in a statement made on 22 July

2008, but I would like briefly, if I may, to summarize
those plans here. Ten months ago, we set out the key
elements of our strategy for handing over security in
Basra to the Iraqis and we set up stages for completing
the tasks we had set for ourselves.

The initial phase was completed when Basra was
transferred to provincial Iraqi control in December of
last year. That transfer reflected a judgement on our
part that the Iraqi authorities and security forces were
ready to take the lead in delivering security in Basra, a
judgement that has been borne out by the Iraqi Security
Forces' subsequent decisive action to establish the rule
of law in Basra and to conduct successful operations,
to which we were pleased provide support.

The Iraqis are now very much in the lead in
Basra, and the over 4,000 British troops remaining in
southern Iraq are focused on completing 13 key tasks
in support of that Iraqi lead. Those key tasks include
completing the training and mentoring of the
fourteenth division of the Iraqi army in Basra,
including through the embedding of around 800
personnel in the fourteenth division command
structure; finalizing the preparation of Basra airport for
civilian control; and continuing to develop the capacity
of the Iraqi navy and marines to protect territorial
waters, the port and oil platforms.

As we complete those tasks, and as progress
continues in those different areas, we will continue to
reduce the number of British troops in Iraq. Of course,
future decisions will, as they have always been, be
based on the advice of our military commanders on the
ground and will be taken in consultation with the
Government of Iraq and our coalition partners. We
expect a fundamental change of mission in the first
months of 2009 as we make the transition to a normal
bilateral relationship with Iraq similar to those that we
have with other key partners in the region.

Sustainable progress in Iraq will be achieved only
with continued support from the international
community. As we have heard today, important
challenges lie ahead. Some of these include the need
for progress on key nation-building issues, such as the
review of the constitution and disputed internal
boundaries; the provincial elections scheduled for later
this year; the humanitarian situation, both inside and
outside Iraq; developing the infrastructure essential for
promoting and protecting human rights; and the need to
support the maturing Iraqi democratic structures and
institutions. We welcome the involvement of the
United Nations in these issues and we will continue to
work with the Organization to ensure that these
challenges are overcome in a timely fashion.

Let me conclude by saying that the United
Kingdom remains committed to Iraq through our
United Nations and coalition obligations. I would like
to take this opportunity to encourage all Member States
to support both the United Nations work in Iraq and the
work of the Government of Iraq. But above all, I would
like to make it clear that we will stand by the
commitment we have made to the people of Iraq to
ensure that Iraq continues to develop as a democratic,
prosperous and stable country, free from terrorist
Violence and secure within its borders, and a stable
presence in the region.

