Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): First of all, allow
me to congratulate you, Madam President, and Sweden
on its membership in the Security Council and for
immediately taking the initiative to hold this important
debate on conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I
also congratulate the other newly elected members of
the Council: Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan and Italy.
I am happy to be here together with my colleague
Mr. Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy,
who has already made reference to the Italian-Dutch
cooperation in the context of our split term in the
Council. I fully support the statement delivered by
Mr. Alfano on behalf of Italy, and we also do so in the
spirit of European cooperation.

We welcome Sweden's initiative to organize this
debate. It comes at a pivotal moment in time, a moment
of major geopolitical upheaval and competition, dubbed
a "tipping point". It is a moment when history seems
to cast doubt over the Charter's promise of peace just
when it is needed more than ever before, for instance,
in Syria, Yemen and South Sudan. It is a moment
when I think the citizens of all those countries feel
forgotten and do not understand why more action is not
undertaken to assist them and promote their interests
in the Council as well. Moreover, in countries like my
own, people want to see concrete results.

At this moment in time, it is up to us all to lay the
groundwork for a reinvigorated multilateralism, for a
coalition of States from all regions that can effectively
relink effectiveness and legitimacy, thereby enabling
the United Nations to be "fit for purpose" for this
new era again. That means an Organization equipped
and ready for action at all stages of a conflict, as the
Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing. It also
means putting prevention up front. The entire United
Nations system, as well as Member States, should
develop a prevention-up-front mindset and action mode.
Previously, I have likened the United Nations to an
orchestra which, at times, sounds shrill and somewhat
out of tune. Indeed, we have not always been able to play
the music the way it was meant in the original score,
that is the Charter. Why is that so? It is certainly not
because the United Nations is just a club for people to
get together, talk and have a good time. On the contrary,
the professionalism of the United Nations workforce is
beyond any doubt. That includes, first and foremost,
our new top-level conductor - the new Secretary-
General, whose credentials and dedication are beyond
any doubt. Neither is it because the necessary elements
for a perfect performance are not there.

On the contrary, the potential of the unique
and rich United Nations toolbox, all United Nations
organizations, funds and programmes combined,
working globally and across the entire spectrum of
issues - from climate to development, disarmament,
peace and security - is enormous. Together they
can truly perform miracles, and they have on many
occasions. The examples are there. Let us consider
Liberia, where the United Nations mission and the
development and peacebuilding organizations work
together seamlessly under the strong vision and
leadership of the country itself.
But United Nations organizations do not always
coordinate as closely as they should. I did not come here
to point fingers. My own experience has shown me how
complicated it can be. We have seen different degrees
of success in Cote d'Ivoire, Mali and elsewhere. But let
us make one thing clear - we have to be explicit about
what we want, our goals and ours means, and we must
translate our words into action. We should also learn
from these cases.

The different pillars of the United Nations
system can work better together. We have said that
for many years. Whether there is an imminent crisis
to be contained, fragile peace to be sustained, or
preventive action has to be taken - for lasting peace,
it is necessary that all the United Nations organizations
work in concert. When they work together with one
goal in mind there are results on the ground. They can
each have their own comparative advantage and yet still
deliver as one. I am glad, therefore, that the Secretary-
General has put forward a concrete agenda for the
implementation of the sustaining peace resolutions. We
support him wholeheartedly in his efforts to streamline
and de-silo the United Nations peace architecture. I
would like to stress four points here.

First, we are glad to see that the most recent
quadrennial comprehensive policy review gave
the Secretary-General the mandate to shake up the
development section of the orchestra. That will be
vital for the concrete implementation by countries of
essential agendas set out by his predecessor - the
Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. As the Secretary-General said, achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals is a key prevention
tool, and we could not agree more. The Sustainable
Development Goals are instruments not only for
inclusion but also ofpeace, making it possible to address
structural weaknesses well before people see no other
alternative but violence. And in my view, that requires
looking much more precisely at country-specific
analysis and conflict dynamics and bottlenecks. Here
also, the silo mentality is hindering us. It is up to all of
us - Member States, donors and the Secretary-General
alike e to hold these parts of the system accountable
and to give the Secretary-General the time necessary
to carry out those reforms. Only one criterion remains:
results on the ground in each country, for the people.

Secondly, the proposed strengthening of the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General as a centre
for effective strategic conflict analysis and planning is
an important step, especially in a time of regionalization
and internationalization of internal conflicts in a very
violent way. An empowered core group of United
Nations decision makers across the system will help
guide the system as a whole, develop strategies to
deal more effectively with imminent crises, and play a
coordinating role in the prevention of violent conflict.
It could help bring preventive diplomacy back up front,
where it should be, based on objective norms - as was
mentioned by a number of representatives - and build
trust in the key role of the Council and the Secretary-
General. And of course, the responsibility to protect
and to end impunity, as norms that we have put forward,
should obviously be analysed in an objective manner.

Thirdly, the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism of the former Secretary-General successfully
generated national strategies and United-Nations-led
capacity-building support. The Office of the Secretary-
General catalysed global efforts to prevent violent
extremism. The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum is a
case in point. We kindly ask our new Secretary-General
to continue to remind us that the prevention of violent
extremism is the only truly strategic answer to the
horrors of worldwide terrorism working in the social
fabric of our societies.

Fourthly, a deadlocked Council does not mean the
United Nations has to be broken winged. In situations
where the Council does not act, the Secretary-General
can still employ his good offices and other tools to
foster mediation and dialogue between the parties in
emerging crises. This has happened in the past. The
often discrete and behind-closed-doors efforts of the
Secretariat made a huge contribution in countries like
Nigeria, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso and Nepal. Ibelieve
that the new Secretary-General can build on that and
continue to play that important role using his vast
experience. The Secretary-General needs our support
in that respect. We should strengthen the Mediation
Support Office and United Nations early-warning
capacity at the local level as well. The United Nations
regional offices have done essential work behind the
scenes to prevent conflicts. The work of Said Djinnit
is a case in point; I believe that, to a large extent, he
prevented a civil war in Conakry, Guinea, two years ago.

Preventive diplomacy up front means the Security
Council should also play its part. It has done so
successfully in the past, as is illustrated by the situation
in many countries. In that respect the Council's early
engagement was helpful. Now, however, the Council
needs to maintain its engagement in order to secure a
positive outcome. That also requires the proactive use
by the Secretary-General and others of Article 99 of
the Charter. Visits to countries and missions allow the
Council to gather first-hand information and to support
peace, mediation and peacebuilding processes. We
welcome the Council's more frequent use of visits. The
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
a case in point.

In our view, a stronger compact is needed in
that orchestra between the Security Council and the
Secretary-General when it comes to sustaining peace.
They can combine their respective responsibilities
and act more in unison - in joint approaches or
consultations, including with regional actors. In our
view, greater use could also be made of the advice of
the Peacebuilding Commission. That could include
inviting them to brief on specific situations. The same
goes for the instrument of international contact groups,
which is useful in the event that a country is identified
as a potential site of crisis. That could be supported
further, if possible, by benign neighbouring countries
and the relevant regional organizations.

Lastly, there is deterrence. Much of conflict
prevention focuses on dialogue. However, prevention
is not only about carrots. Sometimes, as Theodore
Roosevelt advised, it is a question of speaking softly
but carrying a big stick. It is part of the toolbox. The
Security Council has seldom made use of the most
coercive measures to prevent conflict; but we cannot
completely avoid it.

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm the continued
support of my country in the implementation of the
agenda for prevention. In today's volatile world, our
global orchestra is not short of tour dates. We should
be better prepared to play the full symphony together.
Although it will not be easy, we should start rehearsing
to achieve the true sound of lasting peace, in concert.
We will only get there if we all start putting prevention
up front. The Netherlands stands ready to do its part.

