Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefing by Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).

Peru is following closely recent developments in
Iraq. We note the conclusion of the electoral process.
We believe that the recount of votes and the resolution
of registered complaints reflect the proper functioning
of the institutions and the rule of law that the country
requires to peacefully resolve disputes. We expect the
rapid establishment of a new Government capable of
facing the country's important and urgent challenges
and responding to the legitimate demands of citizens
with a view to building sustainable peace in Iraq and
the region in a new phase following the terrorism
of Da'esh.

We emphasize the importance of the greater
participation by Iraqi women in the political life of the
country. We join the Secretary-General in calling for
political leaders and the Council of Representatives to
fulfil their commitment to elect women to high-level
political positions.

Moreover, we note with concern the protests in
Basra, among other places, where the population has
mobilized to demand more effective action by the
authorities to solve such basic problems as a lack of
water, fragile infrastructure and basic services, and
high youth unemployment. We regret that the violent
nature of some protests and the subsequent repression
produced fatalities. We recognize the right of citizens
to protest peacefully and stress the need for law
enforcement to always act with caution, proportionality
and full respect for human rights.

We underline the importance of the State enjoying
the support of all sectors of Iraqi society and the
international community to deal with the remaining
terrorists and ensure that those responsible for the
atrocious crimes committed in Iraq are duly prosecuted.
In that connection, we reaffirm the importance of
the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Ms. Nadia Murad,
increasing the visibility of the issue and encouraging
adequate attention to be paid to the thousands of Iraqi
women victims of Da'esh sexual violence.

We also consider it necessary to overcome the
reported disagreements regarding the structure and
deployment of the popular mobilization forces. As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, Iraq must be able to
pursue its national interests without becoming a theatre
for the clash of regional interests.

We consider it important that the new Government,
with the support of the international community, be
able to promote greater investment in reconstruction
and in the inclusive and sustainable development of
the country, generating employment and opportunities
to reverse the lack of confidence among the citizens
and prevent new outbreaks of extremism and
insurgency - especially considering that Da'esh has
been defeated but not eliminated. In that regard, and
by way of conclusion, we welcome the progress of the
recovery and resilience Programme proposed by the
Secretary-General and highlight the support offered
within its scope by UNAMI, the United Nations country
team, the United Nations Development Programme and
the World Bank.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our appreciation
to Mr. Jan Kubis for his outstanding work at the Head
of UNAMI as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General during a difficult and crucial period for
Iraq. It is work that we are sure will be continued
with equal success by his successor, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert.

