Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Resolution 1973 (2011),
which was just adopted, was necessitated by the
persistently grave and dire situation in Libya.
Notwithstanding the clear expression of our common
will and the comprehensive measures instituted under
resolution 1970 (2011), the Libyan authorities have
continued to violate the terms of the resolution and
fundamental principles of international law.

The current state of affairs leaves an indelible
imprint on the conscience and moves us to act. The
magnitude of this humanitarian disaster is indeed what
compelled Nigeria to vote in favour of resolution 1973
(2011). Our persistent calls for peace are rooted in the
need to ensure the safety and dignity of and the
availability of humanitarian assistance for a population
in need, many of whom are Nigerian nationals. The
emphasis of the resolution on the protection of
civilians under threat of attack and the provisions for
humanitarian assistance do much to address these
concerns.
The League of Arab States and the African Union
have spoken with one voice in condemnation of the
situation in Libya - and rightly so, as the crisis is one
of regional import.

As a member of the Security Council and a
member of the African Union, Nigeria maintains that
foreign occupation is not an option to secure peace in
Libya. We acknowledge the language in resolution
1973 (2011) that specifically carves out that possibility,
constraining the actions of States seeking to play a role
in the quest for peace. Moreover, we are guided by an
overriding determination to respect the unity and
territorial integrity of Libya. We are also encouraged
by the fact that the resolution supports the political
path to conflict resolution, underscoring as it does the
efforts of the African Union high-level committee, the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy and other
interlocutors.

Today, we have sent an unequivocal message to
the Libyan people that the dignity and safety of every
man, woman and child is paramount. It is important
that when civilians in grave danger cry out, the
international community, undaunted, is ready to
respond.

