Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/631) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on
recent developments in Kosovo during the period from
16 July to 15 October. I would like to thank Mr. Ivica
Daeie, Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaci
for their clarifications.

We welcome the commitment of UNMIK to
promoting constructive dialogue between the parties
concerned in close cooperation with regional and
international stakeholders, highlighting in particular
the positive rule of Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). At
the political level, we also take note of the high-level
meetings held during the reporting period between
the Serbian Prime Minister and Mr. Hashim Thaci in
Brussels under the auspices of the European Union as
part of the implementation of the first agreement on
principles governing the normalization of relations
reached between Belgrade and Pristina on 19 April.
In that regard, we welcome the important role
played by the High Representative of the European
Union, Baroness Catherine Ashton, and her unswerving
efforts to resolve all stalemates between Kosovo and
Serb officials. The aforementioned meetings and the
technical discussions in working groups have been very
useful in overcoming the inflexibility of the parties
in a number areas, particularly in terms of preparing
the Kosovo municipal elections on 3 November
and the rapprochement of views with respect to
telecommunications, energy, security and justice
issues.

That having been said, the 19 April agreement on
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina continues to encounter difficulties due, inter
alia, to the failure to adopt laws for its implementation
and to the scepticism of certain political factions,
which has led to political tensions in northern Kosovo,
above all with respect to the elections, leading even to
campaigns against voter participation in the municipal
elections. The dissolution of the administrations of
four municipalities in northern Kosovo and fears of
socioeconomic repercussions have also exacerbated
tensions.

The efforts of UNMIK in a number of
areas - in particular in promoting a convergence of
Views, assisting the parties in making positions more
flexible, facilitating the circulation of INTERPOL Red
Notices, fostering regular communication between
Kosovo, INTERPOL and its member States, certifying
documents, as well as its efforts to uncover the fate
of missing persons - should be encouraged and
appreciated. We also welcome the efforts of the Office
ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which has repatriated 313 people between January
and September 2013 and between July and September
registered 90 persons from minority communities
brought to be repatriated in Kosovo.

The International Migration Organization plays an
important role that is worth highlighting, in particular
in terms of assistance given to host communities,
returnees and members of the minority communities
in Kosovo with assistance from the European Union
stabilization programme. Those collective efforts
have helped to keep the security situation generally
calm, giving rise to the high-level dialogue. They have
contributed to the reduction in the number of incidents
in the period concerned.

Nevertheless, the grave incident of 19 September
that cost the life ofa EULEX customs officer interrupted
the period of calm and plunged the region into a climate
of political uncertainty, raising fears that could have
repercussions on socioeconomic life. We condemn that
loss of human life. That reversal calls for additional
efforts to establish a lasting climate of trust to resolve
all pending issues.

The protection of cultural heritage and religious
shrines is a shared responsibility. Moreover, the holding
of interreligious dialogue through a conference attended
by representatives from the Islamic, Serbian Orthodox,
Catholic, Evangelical, Protestant and Jewish faiths can
help to calm tensions and establish tolerance with a
View to definitively turning the page on a tumultuous
period in order to start a new period based on tolerance
and dialogue.

Finally, we welcome the commitment and efforts
of UNMIK and KFOR, which continue to play an
extremely important role alongside the parties with
a view to making progress on issues where there
are divisions and to move them towards a political
solution that should be comprehensive and inclusive,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999).

