Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I wish to congratulate China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November.

For the past nine years in its appeals before the
Council, the delegation of Eritrea has sought an end
to the unwarranted punitive measures imposed on the
people of Eritrea. The long-overdue call for justice has
finally been answered through the Council's unanimous
decision to adopt resolution 2444 (2018).

The lifting of the sanctions will mark an end
to a difficult period for Eritrea and the region. The
actions and inactions of the Council have had harmful
consequences for the people of Eritrea and the Horn of
Africa, resulting in two decades ofmissed opportunities
for peace and socioeconomic progress.

On this historic day, I humbly congratulate the
people of Eritrea, who have endured persistent external
pressure designed to taint their heroic history and thwart
their vision for durable peace and economic progress in
the Horn of Africa. Eritreans will not look backwards
and are not resentful. While mindful of the historical
lessons of the past two decades, they are determined to
create a peaceful and prosperous nation that is worthy
of the sacrifice made for over seven decades to build a
harmonious, peaceful and confident country.

Eritreans are extremely pleased to have witnessed
the recent positive regional developments. Eritrea as a
nation is committed to working with all its neighbours,
including Djibouti, to consolidate the gains made
since the historic rapprochement between Eritrea and
Ethiopia, the Agreement on Peace, Friendship and
Comprehensive Cooperation between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, and the tripartite agreement of cooperation
between Somalia, Eritrea and Ethiopia, which mark the
beginning of a new dawn. Eritrea would like to take
this opportunity to thank Ethiopia and Somalia, which
have called for the immediate lifting of the sanctions,
for their courageous position.

While proud of the region's capability to resolve
intransigent conflicts at an unprecedented speed, we
are not complacent. Eritrea recognizes that a more
difficult and complex task lies ahead. The country is
determined to redouble its efforts and work closely with
its neighbours to build a region at peace with itself that
fulfils the desires and aspirations of every woman, man
and child for a dignified life.

Eritrea welcomes the good wishes and the
encouragement of the international community and
applauds its willingness to show support for this new
era. However, more than good intentions, the region
needs an understanding approach on the part of the
international community and the freedom to chart its
own policies and future based on the shared history,
culture and interests of the people of the region.

In conclusion, I thank all those who have advocated
and supported the lifting of the sanctions against the
people of Eritrea. I would also like to thank Kazakhstan,
as Chair, and the United Kingdom, as penholder,
for the constructive engagement they have had with
my delegation.

The meeting rose at 11.10 am.
