Mr. Denktas (Turkey): Turkey was a sponsor of
resolution 2457 (2019), adopted this morning, and
aligns itself with the statement made by the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union. I would
like to offer the following additional remarks in our
national capacity.

I would first like to express our appreciation to the
presidency of Equatorial Guinea for convening today's
important open debate on an issue of great significance
for all States Members of the United Nations. It testifies
to the international community's willingness to pursue
the ambitious but noble goal of creating an African
continent free of conflict. We value the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union and
other regional and subregional bodies on the continent.
Turkey encourages the expansion of the United Nations-
African Union partnership in areas such as institutional
capacity-building, security-sector reform, the protection
of civilians, human rights, gender mainstreaming and
combating organized crime. This is crucial in tackling
the root causes of conflicts, terrorism and violent
extremism and fostering peace and stability. In that
regard, the African Union initiative on silencing the
guns by 2020 is a bold step in the right direction.

Peacekeeping is one of the areas where the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union is most visible. Indeed, the African
Union has become an established player in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. We all acknowledge
that restoring and maintaining peace in Africa is
challenging. These efforts are being conducted in
difficult security environments, as we have sadly seen
in the recent attack near Bamako on peacekeepers
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. Here I would like to pay
tribute to the United Nations peacekeepers who have
lost their lives in the line of duty or who continue to put
their lives at risk to that end.
We have already witnessed the positive effects of
tangible cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union in a number of cases. Nowhere is that
more evident than Somalia, where the African Union
Mission in Somalia, working in collaboration with the
Somali National Army, has created the political space
that has helped to enable an environment for Somalia to
lay the groundwork for restoring stability.

The international community must be vigilant in
order to protect the hard-fought gains and investments
in post-conflict areas recovering from devastating
wars. Our commitment to supporting the positive
changes on the continent should be unwavering. It will
have far-reaching effects in improving the stability of
the region, building a lasting peace and normalizing
relations among the countries in the region. Again,
the international community, the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations all have a
role to play in helping to forge conditions that enable
reconciliation through the various instruments at their
disposal, including prevention, mediation and other
conflict resolution approaches. We acknowledge the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union as a model of cooperation that will
offer useful lessons in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. In that regard, we commend
the African Union's efforts to further strengthen all its
existing tools for diplomacy, including the Panel of the
Wise and the Continental Early Warning System.

I also want to underline, as have other speakers, the
importance of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, as
well as the Arms Trade Treaty, which Turkey has signed
and hopes to ratify in the period ahead.
Mediation is at its best when we complement one
another's efforts and facilitate ongoing endeavours
rather than competing and duplicating. Together with
Finland, Turkey co-chairs the Group of Friends of
Mediation. With our extensive diplomatic network
across the continent, we will continue to support
diplomacy, mediation and other tools in the peaceful
settlement of disputes in Africa. Turkey will continue to
be an active member of the United Nations and a close
partner of the African Union in the pursuit of silencing
the guns and ending conflict on the African continent.

