Mr. Akasaka (Japan): First of all, I would like to
welcome your presence here today, Mr. Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, and the assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council by your country.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for affording non-
members of the Council the opportunity to express
their views on this important subject. I would like also
to convey my appreciation to the Secretary-General for
issuing his long-awaited comprehensive report on the
prevention of armed conflict (S/2001/574).
Since the last time the Security Council discussed
this issue, we have witnessed growing international
awareness of the importance of conflict prevention. I
fully agree with the Secretary-General's view, as
expressed in his report, that the time has come to
translate the rhetoric of conflict prevention into
concrete action.

Today I would like to offer Japan's preliminary
comments on the roles of the Security Council and of
the Secretariat in conflict prevention, on the
understanding that we will have another opportunity to
offer our views when the General Assembly takes up
the same topic in mid-July.

First, let me speak of the role of the Security
Council. We share the view that the Security Council
needs to discuss cases of prevention on a continuous
basis. As for the Council's efforts with regard to
preventive deployment, the dispatch of missions and
new mechanisms suggested in the report, I would like
to make the following comments.

On preventive deployment, the Secretary-General
states in his report that past experience shows that
preventive deployment can make a crucial contribution
to conflict prevention. While we tend to concur with
that statement, we consider it essential that the Council
itself undertake a thorough appraisal and examination
of its past preventive deployment efforts, such as the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force in
Macedonia and the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic, taking into account what has
happened since the departure of those missions. In that
context, it should be noted that traditional
peacekeeping missions, such as the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force and the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in the Middle East,
have prevented the recurrence of the conflicts in their
respective areas of deployment. It should also be noted
that a United Nations presence in East Timor after the
departure of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor could be considered from
that perspective.

Concerning the Security Council's fact-finding
missions to regions at risk, my delegation agrees that
such missions can be effective, particularly when
deployed at the initial stages of a conflict. Before the
Security Council decides to dispatch fact-finding
missions in future, we would further like to see it
identify concrete needs and clear objectives, based
upon the assessment of the outcome of past missions.
Clear criteria for sending such missions must be
established; their terms of reference must be specified
and their financing well clarified. In addition, the
suggestion in the report of new mechanisms for the
Security Council's discussion of prevention requires
careful consideration, since these could duplicate the
ongoing activities of the Secretariat.

Though the primary role in maintaining
international peace and security lies with the Security
Council, we believe that the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat, with the flexibility they exercise through
the dispatch of special representatives and envoys as
well as through other measures, have a unique and
important role to play in conflict prevention. We,
therefore, support the ideas contained in the report for
strengthening the Secretary-General's traditional roles
in this area by, for example, increasing the use of
interdisciplinary United Nations fact-finding and
confidence-building missions in volatile areas,
developing regional preventive strategies with relevant
regional organizations and establishing an informal
network of eminent persons for conflict prevention. All
of those efforts, however, must be made in an
appropriate manner and in accordance with the
Secretary-General's mandate as derived from the
relevant provisions of the Charter.

We also share the view that ad hoc groups of
friends of the Secretary-General can be useful in
supplementing the Secretary-General's conflict
prevention activities. It is of course crucial that
relevant countries, including those with the capacity to
contribute to the conflict prevention efforts, be
included in such groups of friends so as to ensure that
they are truly effective in working out measures for
conflict prevention. I would also like to emphasize that
those groups should include representatives of the
Bretton Woods institutions and other development-
oriented organizations, as appropriate, in order to
respond to economic requirements of the conflict-
affected areas.

It is clear that effective conflict prevention will
be an increasingly important area of United Nations
endeavour in the years to come. Effective conflict
prevention will require joint as well as independent
actions, as the situation requires. Japan will continue to
actively participate in conflict prevention efforts, as
well as in efforts to devise an effective conflict
prevention mechanism within the United Nations
system, bearing in mind the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report.

