Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to reply to the comments made moments ago by the
representative of the Republic of the Sudan. As the
Security Council is aware, only rarely do I take the
opportunity to respond to comments made following
my reports on the Darfur situation. I have not done so
for two years. However, today I feel compelled to do so.
I always listen carefully to the statements delivered by
the representative of the Republic of the Sudan. I regret
the hostile and disrespectful language directed at me
personally, as well as my Office and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) at large.

It is perhaps ironic that, owing to the Government
of the Sudan's policy of complete non-cooperation with
my Office, it is here in the seat of the body that referred
the Darfur situation to my Office that I have come
closest to anything resembling a so-called dialogue
with the Government of the Sudan. This is a state of
affairs that I wish to remedy, and I once again repeat
my offer to the Sudan to discuss the real issues at stake
here and engage on the issue of surrendering any or all
of the suspects to my Office. Despite these repeated
demands made and the groundless allegations levelled
against me and the Court, I remind all parties that the
ICC, including my Office, is entirely independent and
regulated by a robust legal and procedural framework
that guarantees fair trial rights and due process to all.
I strongly reject the continued baseless allegations of
conspiracy theorists and improper motives. It is tiring
and demonstrates a lack of respect for not only the
Council and its important work, but also the victims of
atrocity crimes and the cause of international criminal
justice, more broadly.

Let me be clear: I and my Office are interested
only in pursuing accountability for alleged crimes
in connection with the Darfur situation in a fair and
impartial manner in accordance with the Rome Statute.
We hope that our efforts will bring about justice for
the thousands of victims of those alleged crimes, while

respecting all rights of the suspects. That deep need for
justice and accountability is of course why the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to my Office in the first
place. Our investigations have uncovered, and continue
to uncover, evidence that supports the allegations of the
most serious crimes allegedly committed by the suspects
in the Darfur situation, which include representatives of
the Government of the Sudan and its current President.
This is a fact that the Government of the Sudan cannot
simply wish away. Furthermore, to the extent that it
must be said again, I remind all those listening today
that the warrants of arrest were issued only after the
independent judges of the Court were satisfied that
there were reasonable grounds to believe that the
suspects of those warrants committed crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court as alleged by my Office.
As is the case in any national system, which my Office
complements, those allegations should be answered by
the suspects. To date, the Government of the Sudan has
refused to surrender any suspect to the Court so that the
truth can be determined by the chambers of the Court
in full transparency. So to the Government of the Sudan
I say this. Rather than uttering the same tired slurs, it
should transfer the suspects to the Court and let the
facts and the evidence speak the truth.

I now address the victims, who continue to yearn
forjustice. They should take courage in the example set
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Ratko Mladie was indicted in 1995, not arrested until
almost 16 years later, finally convicted last year of
crimes that include genocide, and sentenced to life in
prison. The victims should therefore not be discouraged
by inaccurate statements aimed at shielding those who
bear criminal responsibility. They should not stop their
pursuit ofjustice or their willingness to come forward
with evidence to my Office. In our pursuit ofjustice in
the Darfur situation, I assure them that my Office will
not stop; that I will not stop. We are committed to doing
our job by the Rome Statute, and without fear or favor.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
