Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
today's meeting. We also thank Ambassador Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative
for Darfur and Head of the United Nations-African
Union Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), and Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the
Sudan, for their briefings.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2018/ 154) and the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Sudan established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) (see S/2017/1081).

We believe the relative calm and stability in Darfur
are encouraging. Nonetheless, we remain concerned
about the humanitarian situation, which has led to
more than 2.7 million displaced persons, and about the
human rights situation, which primarily affects women
and children. We welcome Pramila Patten's first visit to
the Sudan as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also
commend the progress made in the implementation of
the action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict, signed in March 2016
by the Government of the Sudan, as well as the visit
by Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Government of the Sudan should continue its efforts
to protect its people from such dreadful crimes, allow
victims access to justice and punish those responsible.

With regard to security, given the relative stability,
we would like to welcome the decrease in the number of
intercommunal clashes and the various reconciliation
initiatives, as well as the establishment of a joint
mechanism to regulate agriculture and prevent the
theft of livestock. We also welcome the signing of the
memorandum of understanding between UNAMID
and the Government of the Sudan for the opening of a
temporary base in G010, the subsequent transfer ofland,
the visit of the Vice-President of the Sudan to Darfur
and his commitment to carrying out development
projects in the area. The Government of the Sudan and
all Member States must collaborate more effectively
with the Sanctions Committee through, among other
things, ensuring adequate border control, preventing
the supply of weapons and the funding of rebel groups,
as well as submitting timely requests for exemptions.

Nonetheless, such measures must be complemented
by other steps to address the root causes of the
conflict if we truly desire lasting peace in Darfur. The
vulnerabilities, weak institutions and poverty in Darfur
must be addressed so as to prevent another outbreak of
conflict. We believe that it is essential to implement the
provisions governing land tenure, ensure food security
and create decent employment opportunities for the
population. We must resume the political process and
encourage more women and young people to participate
in it. It is vital to make headway in implementing the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and broker an
agreement on a permanent ceasefire.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore the
efforts of UNAMID and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel in achieving those goals.

