Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Let me at the outset, Sir, convey to you my most sincere
congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Council this month. The Egyptian delegation is confident
that your wisdom and your well-known qualities of
leadership will lead the Council to concrete results in
addressing the delicate international crises that are now
before it.

Allow me also to convey my thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Wisnumurti, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, for the constant efforts he
exerted in leading the Council's work last month.

The Egyptian delegation will not today address the
details of the human tragedy that is taking place on the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation,
indeed, has already on more than one occasion assessed
the dimensions of that problem and has expressed its
views on several occasions. Likewise, we have stated to

 

the Council that Bosnia is a Member State of the United
Nations and is threatened with gradual disappearance before
the very eyes of the whole world. We have said that the
Council should assume its full responsibilities in that
respect.
This meeting is being held in the wake of the
aggression committed by the Pale Serbs against the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continues
today and prevents the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
from enjoying freedom and democracy. That people has
endured the most odious practices of neo-racism, termed
"ethnic cleansing", which, indeed, is only a form of
genocide. Evidence of this can be found in the events of
Srebrenica and Zepa, two of the safe areas that ultimately
fell under the military domination of Serbian forces. We
hope that the Security Council will remain vigilant and
aware of the fate that may befall Gorazde as well.

Egypt welcomes all the efforts towards peace and the
international peace plans designed to put an end to the
bloody conflict in Bosnia. We wish to affirm the following
principles.

The first is the inadmissibility of the logic of
settlement between the aggressor and the Victim of
aggression on the basis of proposals for regional settlement
and maps showing the division of territory, or the use of
carrot-and-stick techniques. Indeed, the Bosnian
Government has accepted the peace plans that have been
put forward, whereas the Serbian party has wholly rejected
them.

Secondly, the pressure exerted upon the weaker party
to make further territorial compromises in strategic areas or
key zones in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the pretext of
finding a practicable solution is a step backwards and is a
renunciation by the international community of respect for
the territorial integrity of the Member State that suffered
the aggression.

Thirdly, the cession of certain parts of the safe areas
to the Serbian side under the present division means that
the United Nations today is evading the need to protect a
State that it itself created. It is also a violation of the
commitment undertaken by virtue of resolutions of the
Security Council under Chapter VII.

Fourthly, we cannot countenance a re-drawing of the
map of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina in such a
manner as to consolidate the results of the "ethnic
cleansing" practices that have been condemned by the
international community.

Egypt, through its contingents in the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR), including a battalion in
the city of Sarajevo, is contributing to this effort. We
believe that the air strikes undertaken by aircraft of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in
accordance with Security Council resolutions should
continue against Serbian military targets that have
persisted in their flagrant defiance of Security Council
resolutions and in threatening the safety of the
international Forces. These Serbian forces have continued
to attack the exclusion zone declared by the relevant
Security Council resolution. It is enough to say in this
respect that the Serbian side some months ago humiliated
the entire international community. Indeed, that party took
UNPROFOR units as hostages and used them as human
shields. That is a grave precedent that threatens the very
existence of the United Nations, undermines its credibility
and hampers the performance of peace-keeping forces in
general.

We hope that NATO and all States will persevere in
this attitude, which promotes the present negotiating
process, and provide the necessary military deterrent to
oblige the intransigent Serb party to comply with the
requirements of international law and react favourably to
peace proposals.

Egypt has followed the entire process of the
international meetings currently taking place. The United
States has made great efforts, for which we are grateful.
In conclusion, Egypt hopes that these joint meetings will
yield results, both in Geneva and at the forthcoming
summit of Member States. We also hope that the
international meetings will lead to a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina
that will guarantee its Government sovereignty over its
territory in conformity with the conditions accepted by
that Government.

