Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Madam President, I
welcome you to New York - perhaps more correctly, I
welcome you back to New York. It is a pleasure to have
you presiding over the Council. I wish to also thank the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Patriota for their
respective briefings, and Ms. Gbowee for her unique
perspectives. The Council can only be assisted by those

who have actually had to make peace on the ground;
hers was a truly valuable contribution.

New Zealand has long believed that inclusive
development is central to sustainable peace, so we
were pleased to support the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3 today and welcome its
spotlight on measures to address the root causes of
conflict, including through strengthening the rule
of law, transitional justice, promoting sustainable
economic growth and development, good governance,
democracy, gender equality and respect for and
protection of human rights.

New Zealand comes to the Council as a champion
of practical approaches and solutions. An example
of that practical approach is that we believe that
departing United Nations missions should leave
behind a strong workforce that can find long-term
employment following any mission drawdown. Against
that background, let me highlight just three issues on
inclusive development.

First, if sustainable peace is to become a reality
in post-conflict situations, effective work is needed to
address the root causes of conflict, which requires that
the Council, and the United Nations as a whole, adopt a
multidimensional, integrated approach.

Secondly, peace agreements and reconciliation
must embrace all those with a stake in that peace,
particularly the marginalized: women, youths
and former combatants. New Zealand therefore
welcomes the practice of deploying gender advisers in
peacekeeping missions to ensure the inclusion ofwomen
in electoral systems, to support their participation in
peace processes, and to protect women and girls from
sexual violence.

Thirdly, more work is required to understand
the link between transnational organized crime and
terrorism, which, as the statement points out, can
undermine the security and stability of States and
their prospects for development. When accompanied
by efforts to engage local communities and to
develop strategies for countering extremism, such an
understanding helps tackle the enablers of conflict and
terrorism, and reduces the impact when conflict breaks
out.

New Zealand follows closely and supports the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and
in last week's peacebuilding debate (see S/PV.7359)
called for a strengthening of the interaction between
the Council and the PBC, not least in making better
use of the knowledge, experience and analysis of PBC
country-configuration Chairs. I repeat that call here
today. New Zealand's own region has, in recent years,
seen countries emerge from conflict, and that has
provided valuable lessons about conflict drawdown
and highlighted how inclusive approaches are an
essential part of a sustainable peace and development
programme.

Timor-Leste is one such example. In 2006, the
international community gravely underestimated
the importance of sustained international support,
eventually leading to a renewed crisis. Development
partners moved quickly to support the Timor-Leste
Government as it worked to formulate a strategic plan for
development. An early priority, which we very strongly
supported, was the process of dialogue as internally
displaced people were reintegrated into communities.
New Zealand has since worked in partnership with
Timor-Leste to strengthen its security sector, including
by professionalizing the police force. We also worked
with the National Human Rights Institution to ensure
respect for human rights, and helped boost private
sector activity to support livelihoods and employment
options.

Today, Timor-Leste has graduated from being a
beneficiary ofpeacekeeping to itselfbeing a contributor
to United Nations peace operations. Through the Group
of Seven Plus, it is a global leader on helping vulnerable
States to transition from fragility - a fine example
of a beneficiary giving back. Timor-Leste's recent
interventions were instrumental in Guinea-Bissau's
return to democracy, as highlighted by Ambassador
Patriota in his briefing.

Solomon Islands is another example where, after
serious unrest in 2003, New Zealand, Australia and
other Pacific neighbours worked in partnership through
the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands
to help restore long-term stability and security. We
worked, for example, to ensure the peace and security
role of women, which saw the Royal Solomon Islands
Police Force becoming one of the best-performing
Government agencies in terms of female representation.

Small States, particularly small island developing
States (SIDS), are overrepresented among countries
threatened by fragility and instability. They are
also challenged by physical isolation, economies of
scale, limited governance structures, limited natural
resources and uneven infrastructure, and they are
threatened by climate change. To be effective, solutions
and interventions must take account of the unique
circumstances of SIDS - which is one of the many
reasons why, in 2012, New Zealand endorsed the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.

New Zealand is a long-standing supporter of the
concept of inclusive development, and so we welcome
this debate and thank you, Madam, for convening it. We
support the resulting efforts of this Council to deliver
practical, inclusive development initiatives.

