Mr. Steiner: I begin by offering my apologies for
the fact that, due to technology issues, it has not been
possible to establish a video connection. I shall therefore
restrict my statement to a brief overview of the main
points that I wanted to share with the Security Council
and will submit the full statement in due course.

IfI may, I would like to begin by thanking the
Dominican Republic and you, Mr. President, in your
capacity as its Foreign Minister, for calling the Council's
attention once again to the impact of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security in this
debate. I also want to join my colleague Rosemary
DiCarlo and our other briefers in expressing the hope
that what we share with the Council today will not only
demonstrate the linkages that the Council is exploring
but also bring to its attention once again the sense of
urgency with which the world now needs to address
this issue.

Taken alone, climate-related disasters, conflict
and insecurity each threaten human security and
development. Examples will be forthcoming today.
But their convergence can lead to catastrophic impacts
on people and societies. It is telling that this week
the World Economic Forum published its Global
Risks Report 2018, in which it identifies the impact
of extreme weather events and failure to implement
climate-change mitigation and adaptation measures
as the top two global risks that the world now faces,
well ahead of cybersecurity, data theft and other such
phenomenons that pose risks to the global economy and
international security.

As Council members all know, climate change is a
risk multiplier. It aggravates an already fragile situation,
including in countries in conflict, where communities
have limited capacities to cope with additional shocks.
In a recent report, our colleagues in the World Bank
have also pointed to the fact that without urgent climate
action, more than 140 million people in sub-Saharan
Africa, South Asia and Latin America will migrate
within their countries' borders by the year 2050, adding
significantly to the challenges that are already being
faced by vulnerable communities in cities.

In our work on the ground as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), we are witness
to the ways that climate change is driving insecurity
and, increasingly, conflict as well. For instance, in
extreme weather events such as drought, we are already
witnessing a higher number of victims arising from
conflict between pastoralists and sedentary populations
in West Africa than from some of the extreme violence
related to political developments. These are very
troubling developments and point to the fact that we are
not keeping up with the challenge. Let me very briefly
set out three major themes that have emerged.

First, the science that my colleague Rosemary
DiCarlo just referred to is becoming ever more clear,
both in terms of the nature and scale of the impact and
to the linkages between climate change and the effect
that it is having not just in the atmosphere, but actually
in the biosphere. The report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change points to more extreme
weather events, drought, floods, rising sea levels and
so on, and those clearly are a threat to communities
across the globe, in particular and perhaps on the front
line of action to the poorest of the poor and coastal
communities in small island developing States.

But what is also important is the fact that the
empirical evidence of how we can respond to those
threats is becoming ever more clear. The nationally
determined contributions that all countries agreed to
in Paris are not only action plans but also risk maps
of where countries have identified the priorities for
addressing threats to the future of their security,
economic well-being and development. The case of Iraq
is an interesting one. The action plan that Iraq brought
to the Paris agreement focuses on the nexus between
climate and security, which includes mainstreaming
climate risks, ecosystem restoration and solar solutions
for recovery in newly liberated areas.

The second major point I wish to make is that our
capacity to respond to these threats and address their
challenges to human security demands an effective and
integrated agenda on climate disaster-risk reduction,
peacebuilding and many development measures,
including the resetting of our economies and therefore
emissions reduction. Integrating efforts to tackle
climate change and to prepare for and respond to
natural disasters is the right approach. The Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development provide us with an approach that can
actually leverage various measures that can add up to
significant change. Included in that are the optimization
of nature-based solutions to scale. Sustainable land
use and forest management offer powerful and cost-
effective means to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
reduce risks to livelihoods and provide rural economies
in particular with opportunities to manage this.

The third point that I would like to make here is
that while we are addressing the first two issues, it is
critical that we recognize that people are already at risk
today from the impact of climate change. Therefore,
investing in adaptation and resilience is now an urgent
need if we wish to scale up. Even if we curb emissions
for 1.5 degree world, many millions of people are
already exposed to the challenges and risks of climate
change. A strong focus on adaptation and disaster risk
management is therefore essential. I would cite two
or three examples from our work across the world
that demonstrate how we are currently trying to assist
countries in addressing this. I would also mention that
at the UNDP today, we literally have a portfolio of
hundreds of projects in 140 countries, assisting nations
to address these mitigation and adaptation priorities.

In Maldives, rising sea levels threaten freshwater
supplies. The Government of Maldives and UNDP have
piloted an innovative integrated water management
system across three islands. I am pleased report that,
based on the success of the pilot, the United Nations
Green Climate Fund is now providing financing to
scale up such an integrated water management system
across 45 islands, securing a combination of rainwater
and groundwater for a quarter of the population
in Maldives.

My second example is in the Caribbean. For
obvious reasons, in partnership with four of the largest
insurance companies in the region, UNDP has supported
Governments in designing initiatives to facilitate
financial risk transfers from climate-vulnerable
households to the private sector. This initiative will
expand insurance coverage in the Caribbean, building
on the reconstruction work in the region.

As a final example, in the Dominican Republic,
the Government, in partnership with UNDP, has
developed a vulnerability index to climate shock - the
first of its kind worldwide - to measure household
vulnerability to hurricanes, storms and other climate
phenomena. It has been used not only in the context
of social protection policy systems, but also as a tool
for disaster risk planning and disaster response. It is
a very appropriate example at this time, given that
the Dominican Republic, as President of the Security
Council, has brought us together on this critical
question today.

I end this brief presentation by appealing to all
participants to consider how the world now views
climate risk and how the world is assessing the threat
that it poses to the future not only of our economies but
also of our human and national security. Ultimately, it
also becomes a transboundary challenge to the way that
we can look to the future.
I express my thanks for this opportunity to address
the Council by means of this telephone call, and, again,
my apologies for not having been able to participate
in person.

