Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Indonesia's
principled position with regard to the issue before the
Council remains. First, it is imperative to find a
peaceful solution to any question related to nuclear
non-proliferation.

Secondly, any solution must be guided by the
need to protect the integrity of multilateral
2

arrangements, in particular the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which is
fundamentally based upon three main pillars, namely
non-proliferation, the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and nuclear disarmament.

Thirdly, Indonesia has full confidence in the
credibility, independence and efficiency of the
International Atomic Energy Agency as the sole
competent authority for the verification of the
respective safeguard obligations of Member States.

The present draft resolution does not provide for
additional sanctions against Iran. If it did, we would
not have been able to support it. The draft resolution
reaffirms previous statements and resolutions and calls
on Iran to comply fully with its obligations under those
resolutions.

However, it would not have sufficed to stop there.
As a matter of principle, Indonesia attaches the greatest
weight to a negotiated solution of the issue. It is our
firm belief that negotiations and dialogue offer the best
chance for a solution. My delegation therefore
appreciates the incorporation of its amendment
reaffirming the commitment to a negotiated solution of
the issue as part of the dual-track approach. Such a
dual-track approach must have the same common
objectives and must not cancel one another out. An
atmosphere conducive to the negotiations must be
nurtured and promoted.

Indonesia shall work earnestly to ensure that the
Council's resolutions add value and do not lessen it,
and that they provide incentives, and not disincentives,
to negotiations. From our perspective, the draft
resolution before us is, above all, a reaffirmation of the
intrinsic promise of negotiation as a means to find
solutions.

For those considerations and reasons, Indonesia
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us
today.

