The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of Belgium. The uncontrolled circulation of small arms and light weapons (SALWs) clearly poses a serious threat to international peace and security. As we have heard, it is estimated that more than | billion such weapons are in circulation worldwide, 85 per cent of which are in civilian hands. The consequences of that situation are as dramatic as they are predictable. Every year, SALWs kill hundreds of thousands of people. They are responsible for 90 per cent of the victims of armed conflicts, mainly civilians and too often women and children. To avoid such tragedies, we must stop the flow of illicit arms. Arms embargoes are an effective instrument to that end, provided that they are fully implemented. The Libyan case is a dramatic counterexample in that regard. A collective surge of effort on the part of the Council is necessary today in order to reaffirm its authority and the unequivocal nature of the embargoes it imposes. Furthermore, a satisfactory response to the illicit trafficking of SALWs requires us to take into account their entire life cycle, as well as the ammunition they need to function. Belgium has been firmly committed for several years to a more systematic tracing of illicit weapons in conflict and post-conflict zones, which requires sufficient technical and human resources. Indeed, tracing is the cornerstone of aneffective approach that is informed by the reality on the ground. The briefing by Mr. Damien Spleeters clearly demonstrated that. The tracing of SALWs contributes to preventing diversions and improving stockpile security policies. Moreover, it facilitates informed decision-making on export licences, enables the assessment of embargo enforcement and helps to dismantle trafficking networks. The monitoring of SALWs, as well as direct investigations on the ground, enable United Nations peacekeeping operations to more effectively prevent the resurgence of violence. That said, cooperation between peacekeeping operations and groups of experts responsible for monitoring embargoes should be strengthened, which would enhance their ability to trace the origin of illicit SALWs and limit their availability. That is why Belgium calls for the monitoring and tracing of illicit weapons to be included in the mandates of the relevant peacekeeping operations. In addition, the role of regional organizations and their member States in the fight against illicit arms trafficking is fundamental, and several tools are at their disposal. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the African Union's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative and the establishment of action plans for Africa and its subregions. Those decisions demonstrate the importance of better coordination among the various regional and international arms control mechanisms. As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/1011), particular focus on the Sahel region and central Africa is sorely needed. In conclusion, I underscore the technological evolution of small arms and light weapons and the challenges that it poses to existing commitments. Thus, there is an urgent need to supplement the 2005 International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons with an annex that takes into account the increase in the number of polymer and modular weapons. If we want to be effective, we must ensure that our tools remain relevant. I now resume my functions as President of the Security Council. There are no more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The meeting rose at noon.
