Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
welcome you, Sir, and we congratulate Ambassador
Reyes of Colombia, who was able to organize this
meeting with competence and patience.

Canada is pleased with the results of the
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The Conference
concluded with the adoption of a Programme of Action
that showed the international community's
determination to tackle the problem of small arms
trafficking. This success is based on solid foundations,
in particular on the specific, future-oriented action of
the African States, the member States of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the countries of Latin American and the
Caribbean.

(spoke in English)

We now have a consensus document that
acknowledges that the small arms trade as a whole, and
not just the illicit aspects of that trade, poses real and
urgent problems. We have all agreed that Governments
are responsible for acting on such issues as
manufacturing, marking and tracing, record-keeping,
export controls, brokering, stockpile management and
the collection and destruction of small arms.

The Programme of Action that we have agreed to
also recognizes the human dimension of the problems
linked to small arms, including their impacts on women
and children - aspects of the issue in which my
country has invested particular time and effort. Another
positive aspect for Canada is the Programme's attention
to the issues of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, issues that others before me have
highlighted today.

The results of the Conference are thus very
welcome, but they are only a first step. In achieving a
consensus result some important elements had to be
left aside for the moment. The Programme of Action is
a good start, but it is neither perfect nor complete. It
includes no elements, for example, on such key factors
as regulation of civilian possession of arms, or
transfers to non-State actors. Action on these elements,
too, was supported by many delegations, but
unacceptable to only one.

The Programme of Action also includes little in
the way of detail on such key issues as criteria to help
Governments clarify the conditions for export
authorization or standards for determining what
constitutes an excessive and destabilizing accumulation
or surplus. These are important elements for Canada,
but problematic for some other countries. All these
unfulfilled elements are key to any comprehensive
international approach to the small arms issue and must
still be re-addressed. The issues that could not be
agreed on in the Conference can and must be actively
pursued and re-addressed in the biannual meetings and
the review process.

More broadly, the Programme will be stillborn
even in its current form if it is not rigorously and
rapidly implemented. Some of these issues can be
handled through the follow-up procedures of the
Programme itself. The issues on which there was
agreement, both those explicitly mentioned in the
follow-up section of the Programme and those
mentioned elsewhere in the document, should be
pursued vigorously in the meantime, starting now.

For our part, in Canada, we have already begun
planning and consultations with other States on
regional implementation seminars. We will be pushing
for implementation not just at the national level but
also through all pertinent regional and international
organizations of which we are members 4 and that is
most of them. This includes the Security Council,
which can play a key role, for example, by
incorporating appropriate disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration provisions in the mandate of
peacekeeping operations and in securing the necessary
financing for those provisions.

The Conference was undoubtedly a success, but
still only a qualified success. It would be a mistake to
underestimate what we did achieve. Equally, it would
be wrong not to recognize how far we still have to go.
We owe it to the men and women and girls and boys in
places much less comfortable than New York City.
Their well-being and security depends on our
controlling - indeed, on our curtailing - the
appalling trade in small arms. We do not believe there
is any country among us blind or indifferent to the
terrible consequences for these people if we fail. But it
has become apparent in negotiations that there are still
some philosophical differences of approach on the
issue of small arms. In Canada's view, and in the view
of many of the countries most severely affected by the
instability and insecurity these weapons bring, the
access, the management, the sale, the transfer and the
use of these weapons must be closely tracked and
closely controlled, whether they are in the legal or
illegal cycle of transfer. We should know into whose
hands these weapons are being sold or given and by
whose hands they are being used at all times - in
peace, in conflict, but particularly in turbulent times.
No philosophy or ideology gives any of us a
dispensation from seeing the terrible harm that these
weapons do, and no philosophy or ideology gives
anyone an exemption from the responsibility to address
them. Just because the issues of transfer and possession
are not reflected in our document does not mean they
are not reflected in the daily lives of so many people -
lives that are themselves too often curtailed because of
these weapons.

The real assessment of the Conference's success
will be made on the ground, not in New York, in terms
of guns destroyed and lives saved. This in turn will
mean some very hard work, nonetheless, for us here in
New York, in converting the paper promises of the
Programme of Action into reality. It will mean
devoting time, money and political will to this issue,
and it will mean continuing the battle over the coming
years to complete the Programme of Action to make it
more comprehensive in its scope and more ambitious in
its commitments. The Council may rest assured that
Canada will continue with these battles, working
closely with like-minded States from all regions of the
world until this scourge is alleviated. In that regard, we
support the Secretary-General's call for a legally
binding treaty.

