Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to congratulate
France on taking the initiative to organize a briefing on
transnational organized crime as a threat to peace and
security. I would also like to express my gratitude to
the Secretary-General and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for
their helpful briefings.

The international community has intensified its
efforts to combat transnational organized crime, in
particular since the adoption of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
10 years ago. Drug trafficking is closely connected
with transnational organized crime. International
counter-narcotics efforts, also over the past 10 years,
culminated in the adoption by the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs last year of a new Political Declaration
and Plan of Action on International Cooperation
towards an Integrated and Balanced Strategy to
Counter the World Drug Problem.
Despite all of these coordinated international
efforts to combat the serious threat posed by drugs and
crime, one can hardly say that the situation has
improved over the past 10 years. I would like to point
out three factors that make the challenge more
complicated to deal with.

First, advances in transportation, information
technology and financial systems have made it easier
for cross-border human trafficking and smuggling, the
trade in illicit arms and drugs, and the transfer of
proceeds of criminal activity. These advances have
enabled organized crime groups and networks to
become more diversified and connected.

Secondly, there is an increasingly strong linkage
between drug trafficking and other forms of
transnational organized crime, such as trafficking in
arms and persons, money-laundering and corruption.
Such a linkage is most noticeable, as many of my
colleagues have stated previously, in States embroiled
in conflicts or struggling through fragile post-conflict
situations.

With the profit from the illicit trafficking of drugs
and sometimes of minerals, as well as the trade in
small arms, non-State criminal groups are able to
corrupt State institutions and better equip themselves
with powerful operational capacity. They can finance
acts of terrorism while conflicts in fragile situations are
prolonged, which in turn prevents the establishment of
democratic governance and the rule of law and
impedes sustainable development. As a result,
organized crime groups gain control and establish
dependable routes for illicit trade, as governance by
fragile State institutions becomes further weakened.

Thirdly, the activities of organized crime groups
can easily cross borders and have negative impacts on
neighbouring countries first and then throughout entire
regions. It is indispensable to supplement national
efforts with regional and international cooperation.
In the light of all these challenges, I would be
grateful if Mr. Costa could perhaps provide additional
thoughts on two questions. First, with respect to the
role of the Security Council, it is useful to have these
briefings on transnational organized crime to raise
awareness of the causes and consequences of this threat
and to mobilize political will, which is a primary role
of the Security Council, but does Mr. Costa have any
additional suggestion as to how the Security Council
may best reflect his analysis and assessment in its
work?

The second question relates to information- or
intelligence-sharing. We should encourage the creation
of regional networks in problem areas to share
information. But what concrete additional actions
could be taken to promote timely and more effective
information-sharing and joint operations among
diverse players?

I would like to conclude by stressing how
important it is to combat this transnational threat, not
only in order to prevent conflicts and favour
peacebuilding, but also for promoting the human
security of the individual. Japan fully supports the
UNODC's valuable work in mobilizing international
efforts.

