Mr. M'Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his presentation of
the report on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I would like also to
take this opportunity to commend the members of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929
(2010) for the significant work they have accomplished
since the extension of their mandate last June.

Iran's nuclear programme remains a major source
of concern not only for the Council but also for the
entire international community. It is worrisome to note
that relations between the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the organizations that have been established to combat
nuclear non-proliferation can hardly be said to have
improved. The various meetings held have not led to
any tangible progress in that area.

The report of the Director General to the Board
of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) of 30 August 2012 (GOV/2012/37) is
unequivocal. While resolution 1929 (2010) obliges Iran
to implement the measures that were established for
it by the Board of Governors, the report notes certain
obstacles, particularly with respect to the IAEA's
access to the Parchin site. It concludes that, despite the
intensified dialogue between the Iran and IAEA since
January 2012, no concrete results have been obtained
with respect to resolving pending issues.

Once again, Togo, while recalling the inalienable
right of all States to develop research, production and
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, calls upon
the Islamic Republic of Iran not to shirk its obligations
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, as well as under its agreement with the
IAEA, and to continue negotiations with the five plus
one group.

We urge Iran to do more, working with the P5+l and
the Panel of Experts, to find a negotiated and peaceful
solution to this issue.

To conclude, I would stress the importance for
the Panel of Experts, through visits, seminars and
workshops, to heighten all States' awareness of the
need to submit reports to the 1737 Committee on the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.

