Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): First of
all, Djibouti congratulates the delegation of Indonesia,
led by Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari
Marsudi, for convening today's important event on the
theme "Investing in peace: delivering quality training
and capacity-building to improve the safety and security
and performance of United Nations peacekeepers".

Since the beginning of his mandate, Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres has stressed the vital role
of peacekeeping operations in the peace and security
architecture. He has reiterated that it is a necessary
investment, since countless lives have been saved over
the past decade thanks to peacekeeping operations,
while many war-torn families have been able to make
a new start. Entire economies have been restored
and nations rebuilt. While differences and nuances
persist in the approach to strengthening peacekeeping
operations, there is no doubt that we can welcome the
strong consensus for increased investment in training
and capacity-building. Similarly, it goes without saying
that peacekeeping training is a strategic investment that
enables United Nations military, police and civilian
personnel to effectively carry out their increasingly
challenging and, at times, dangerous missions.

(spoke in English)

Last year marked the seventieth anniversary of
peacekeeping. It was a year during which several
key milestones were achieved, such as the reform of
the peace and security architecture, the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which Djibouti signed, and
the implementation of the action plan to improve the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
Obviously, there is a widening gap between United
Nations peacekeeping doctrine and the reality on the
ground. Peacekeeping operations often face a set of
complex challenges. Those challenges are daunting
in high-threat environments, where both the United
Nations and regional peace operations are increasingly
deployed. We therefore need to rededicate our efforts
towards enhancing our policies and procedures to
better adapt to the changing reality.

(spoke in French)

Allow me to underscore Djibouti's commitment to
the issue of peacekeeping operations, with a contribution
of nearly 2,000 men in Somalia, a formed police unit in
Darfur and women and men in other United Nations
peacekeeping areas. Djibouti's presence is a concrete
manifestation of its commitment to promoting peace
and security on the continent. I would like to focus
my remarks to the Council today on the following four
points.

First, the United Nations and the international
community must promote greater cooperation and
strategic coherence in conflict prevention, in particular
in Africa. A process for planning and defining the
joint mandates of African Union peace operations
authorized by the Security Council is essential to
ensure the effectiveness of such operations. A greater
number of real-time consultations with the African
Union and with subregional organizations, including
joint assessments and analyses, are required in order
to recommend coherent options to decision-making
bodies. Such regular interactions must be increasingly
focused on emerging threats and ways to strengthen
partnerships to better address them.

Secondly, high quality training and capacity-
building are today essential for improving the safety,
security and performance of our peacekeepers on
the ground. In that regard, under the auspices of His
Excellency President Ismael Omar Guelleh, Djibouti
has pledged to continue to play an active role in United
Nations and African Union peacekeeping operations
by reaffirming its commitment to providing well-
trained and well-equipped personnel and to support
the development and implementation of peacekeeping
training sessions. We made a commitment at the most
recent United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, held
in New York, to providing a support centre for capacity-
building for troop-contributing countries.

Thirdly, out of a total of 16 United Nations
peacekeeping operations, nine are deployed in Africa.
Those missions account for more than 80 per cent of
uniformed personnel and approved financial resources.
Three ofthose missions are deployed in French-speaking
areas. They account for more than half of current
uniformed police and military service personnel.
However, the contribution of French-speaking countries
remains well below aspirations. It appears that French-
speaking troop-contributing countries need to be better
informed of the various issues related to contributions,
in particular following the new reform. In that regard,
my country intends to organize, together with the
Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Operational Support, in close collaboration with
the Canadian, French and Irish Governments and with
the support of the International Organization of la
Francophonie, a two-day seminar on 24 and 25 June
in Djibouti. This flexible coordination mechanism will
raise the awareness of French-speaking troop- and
police-contributing countries about the various issues
relating to their contribution, including as it pertains
to women, to United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Fourthly, as we approach the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we also
reiterate the important role women can play in
peacekeeping operations. We therefore welcome
ongoing efforts to ensure the integration of a gender
perspective in all peacekeeping operations.

We have sufficiently emphasized the close link
between logistical support and the health and safety
of peacekeeping operations, hence the importance of
adequate preparation of the operational planning for
transport supply logistics, maritime and air services
and medical logistic support. The tools exist, and the
basic regulatory framework is also in place. It is up
to Member States to ensure that units are structured,
professional and truly operational before deploying
them.

