Mr. Mantovani (Italy) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Solana, High
Representative of the European Union, for his biannual
briefing on the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) and the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Chad for being with us this afternoon.

(spoke in English)

Italy welcomes the full deployment of the
European Union operation and the results that have
already been achieved in terms of increased security
and better protection of the local population and the
humanitarian community. Italy is proud to be part of
EUFOR in Chad and the Central African Republic,
with a field hospital located in Abeche, which serves
the whole mission as well as the people of the
neighbouring villages. On the occasion of the Security
Council's visit last June, I personally had the privilege
of visiting the hospital and its technological structures,
which meet the highest standards. I personally

witnessed the presence there of one EUFOR patient
and seven Chadian patients from the surrounding
villages.

Coming back to the main subject: we have noted
that, despite the efforts of the international community,
the security situation remains volatile, and only a
limited number of returns have taken place. I welcome
the establishment by the European Commission of
programmes to encourage the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons.

I also welcome the reported progress in the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
its activities in support of the local gendarmerie. Once
again, I wish to note the very good cooperation that the
United Nations and the European Union have
established, which reflects the strong added value of
the increasing coordination between the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security. We see Chad and the Central African
Republic as an important test case of our collective
ability to maximize the impact of, and ensure
coherence among, various actors and instruments.

We will shortly adopt the draft resolution
prepared by France - which I wish to thank - to
renew the mandate of MINURCAT. We look forward to
an update by the Secretary-General on his planning for
a smooth and timely takeover from EUFOR, including
the size, mandate and structure of the new force.

