Mr. Al-Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of Viet Nam, for his distinguished
efforts during his presidency in the month of July.

I would like to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Alejandro Wolff for the briefing he presented to the
Council on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I) and for the efforts to support security and
stability in Iraq during the previous months. Our thanks
also go to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his statement, and our
appreciation goes to Mr. Staffan de Mistura and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
team in Iraq and New York for their tireless work to
help the Government and the people of Iraq.

My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of UNAMI contained in
document S/2008/495 and would like to present the
following comments. On the political and security
level,the Iraqi Government has succeeded in
preventing a sectarian war in the country and has
proven that it is not a sectarian Government, but that it
is one that represents all Iraqis without discrimination,
except on the basis of their ability to serve Iraq and
defend its national interests.

During the past few months, Iraq has witnessed a
series of military operations, led by the Iraqi army and
carried out with the support of the multinational forces,
in Basrah, Baghdad, Meesan, Mosul and Diyala. The
operations have targeted members of Al-Qaida and
other armed militia groups as well as other outlaws,
and they have led to the success of the law enforcement
plan, the enforcement of Government control and an 80
per cent decrease in the number of terrorist operations
and violent acts.

The Iraqi Government has also succeeded in
building its armed forces on a national, professional
and neutral basis, which has led to their determination
and will to confront Al-Qaida and other militias and to
strike against those groups. It is now clear that the
loyalty of the Iraqi troops is only to Iraq, not to
particular rulers, parties or sects. The Iraqi Government
is keen to stress human rights principles regarding the
conduct of the Iraqi armed forces and to prevent those
forces from having political affiliations.

The number of army, police and other security
forces has increased in all provinces in accordance
with their security needs. The Iraqi Government has
assumed responsibility for security from the
multinational forces in 10 Iraqi provinces - most
recently, al-Diwaniya province, in July 2008. That is
another step towards the assumption of full security
responsibility for the remaining Iraqi provinces from
the multinational forces and towards the achievement
of complete control over security by the end of 2008.

The decline in violence in Iraq has led to a return
to normal life in all parts of the country and has
encouraged a number of internally displaced families
and Iraqi refugees to return to their homes. The Iraqi
Government, along with the Iraqi Council of
Representatives and in cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other international organizations, is conducting a
national strategy to encourage the voluntary return of
those families. The Cabinet has allocated more than
$195 million for the repatriation of internally and
externally displaced persons, and the Government has
allocated $140 million to help Iraqi refugees. That
strategy also includes the evacuation of homes
abandoned by their owners because of violence, the
granting of financial incentives and the immediate and

unconditional return of those who left their jobs. It is to
be noted that 271 Iraqi families returned from Iran and
31 individuals returned from Refha camp, in Saudi
Arabia, in May 2008. In addition, many Iraqi refugees
have returned from Syria and Jordan in coordination
with international organizations. Iraq has also provided
support for countries hosting Iraqis.

The Iraqi Council of Representatives has adopted
a provincial elections law to ensure the holding of free
and fair elections in all Iraqi provinces, counties and
villages. That legislation has been adopted to ensure
the inclusion of all segments of Iraqi society and to
ensure the holding of democratic elections without any
external interference. We have just received
information from Baghdad that a committee
comprising Iraqi parliamentarians has been formed to
discuss proposals regarding the provincial elections in
Kirkuk and to bridge gaps in that regard.

The Iraqi Government is keen to proceed with the
process of national reconciliation to maintain the unity
of the Iraqi people, make progress in the national
dialogue policy and expand participation in the
political process in accordance with the Iraqi
Constitution, in order to build a free, multilateral,
federal and democratic Iraq. Although the political
process faces some challenges, it is witnessing
progress towards a democratic transition, positive
political developments and coexistence among all
segments of society. Within the context of the
continuing national reconciliation efforts, the Iraqi
Government is seeking to convene an expanded
religious conference bringing together religious clerics
from various religions, sects and nationalities, as a step
to build solidarity among all Iraqis and facilitate the
return of displaced persons to their homes. Moreover,
the Iraqi Government is currently implementing a
campaign to renovate houses of worship, including
mosques and churches.

The adoption of a general amnesty law has had a
positive role in enhancing the national reconciliation
efforts. Under that law, the Ministry of Justice has
released 1,648 detainees; the Ministry of Interior has
released 2,560, including 59 Arab nationalists; the
Ministry of Defence has released 545; and the Ministry
of Labour has released 314. These are in addition to the
detainees released by the Multinational Forces.

Political efforts have resulted in the return of the
ministers belonging to the Tawafuq bloc to the

Government of National Unity, and the Council of
Representatives has voted to appoint 10 ministers to
fill ministerial posts vacated when the members of a
number of political blocs withdrew from the
Government in 2007.

At the socio-economic level, the improvement in
the security situation has had positive effects on the
economic situation in Iraq. The reports of the National
Committee on Investment have indicated that the
volume of investment in Iraq has reached $7.4 billion,
which has been distributed among various basic
facilities in the country. This has involved, inter alia,
the building of factories, housing units, hospitals,
pharmaceutical plants and refineries and the
development of airports and ports with the involvement
of Iraqi and foreign investors. Najaf International
Airport was inaugurated on 20 July 2008. A large
number of businessmen, investors and investment
companies have already visited Iraq, and a number of
investment agreements have been signed with many
countries.

The Iraqi Government's top priorities have been
to improve economic conditions and revive trade in
order to move the country away from the brink of
economic and social collapse. The Iraqi Government
was able to reduce the inflation rate from 65 per cent in
2006 to 22 per cent in 2007, and it is expected that the
unemployment rate will have been reduced to 17 per
cent by the end of 2008, as compared with 28 per cent
in 2003.

In April 2008, the Iraqi Council of
Representatives adopted a law on civil servants and
public sector salaries, as well as a university service
law, in a step aimed at supporting higher education and
scientific research institutes. That was part of an effort
to support the public service sector, to prevent a brain
drain and to take measures to encourage the return of
qualified professionals to Iraq.

A social protection network has been established
to provide care for members of certain social segments,
such as orphans, widows and the unemployed, and
$812 million has been allocated for that project. The
share of the State's general budget for the education
sector has been increased, from 3 per cent in 2007 to
5 per cent in 2008, and 700 new schools have been
built, with another 4,000 to be built by the end of this
year.

The process of health sector reform has been
launched in order to provide primary health care and
ensure the equitable provision of health services to all
people. Approximately 300 health centres have been
built, and approximately 37 general hospitals have
been rehabilitated and expanded. In addition, a number
of specialized hospitals and health centres are to be
built in collaboration with a number of international
companies. The Ministry of Health, in cooperation with
UNAMI and the World Health Organization, has made
significant achievements, such as decreases in the
infant, maternal and under-5 mortality rates and
progress in controlling cholera.

The Iraqi Government has launched a strategy to
develop the agricultural sector, to achieve food
security, to increase investment in agriculture and build
capacity in that sector, to improve the quality of
production, to protect the environment, to combat
desertification and to provide modern machinery.

In relation to oil wealth, the Iraqi Government
has made plans to increase production to 3.5 million
barrels per day, with the continuous development of
that sector through the adoption of legislation and an
investment framework and the fair distribution of oil
revenue. The Iraqi Government is keen to utilize its
revenues for the benefit of the Iraqi people in the
budget of 2008 through a financial policy leading to
lowered inflation and the adoption of the largest budget
in Iraq's history. It is worth mentioning that the Iraqi
House of Representatives adopted a law on combating
the smuggling of oil and petroleum products and
considers oil smuggling to be an economic crime that
threatens the security and economy of the country.

Furthermore, the Prime Minister stressed that Iraq
is moving towards the implementation of
reconstruction and investment projects that cannot be
implemented until all forms of corruption are
eliminated. Therefore, the Iraqi Government launched
a national initiative to fight financial and
administrative corruption, which is one of the most
dangerous burdens that Iraq inherited from the former
dictatorial regime.
Following the ratification of the United Nations
Convention Against Corruption, a conference was held
in Baghdad at which the Baghdad declaration on
fighting corruption was adopted. The Iraqi Government
committed itself and has pledged to fight corruption in
all its forms and to promote the principles of
accountability and integrity. The conference also
resulted in the establishment of a national council to
fight corruption.

With regard to women's rights and the
importance of their participation in the political
process, the Iraqi Government has stressed that Iraqi
women shall exercise their rights, contribute to the
political process and effectively participate in the
upcoming provincial council elections, in which the
percentage of women candidates will be 25 per cent,
the same as in the Iraqi Parliament. Moreover, Iraq has
ratified a convention on the establishment of an Arab
women's organization in the context of its aim to
strengthen the role of women in Iraqi society. The
Prime Minister has launched a project to form an
institution to address the issues and problems of
widows, divorcees and elderly women. The
Government has allocated $200 million to that project.

The Iraqi Government has been keen to entrench
the culture of human rights and has achieved progress
in that area by establishing a national system to control
and monitor violations of human rights. Monitoring
teams were formed in the Ministry of Human Rights to
cooperate with human rights departments in all other
ministries. The Iraqi Government, in cooperation with
UNAMI, drafted a law pertaining to the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Iraq.

On the regional and international levels, the past
few months have witnessed a regional and international
openness towards Iraq since Prime Minister Nuri
al-Maliki travelled to Jordan and the United Arab
Emirates and made a European visit to Italy and
Germany. Iraq has also been visited by a number of
high-level delegations from the Gulf States, as well as
by the Turkish Prime Minister and the head of the
al-Mustaqbal bloc in the Lebanese Parliament,
Mr. Saad al-Hariri. Some Arab countries have sent
messages expressing their desire to develop political
and diplomatic relations with Iraq. Those visits have
resulted in a positive change in attitude towards Iraq.
The Governments of Bahrain, Kuwait, the United Arab
Emirates and Jordan have announced the nomination of
their ambassadors to Baghdad.

Furthermore, the visits of senior officials have
resulted in the conclusion of several economic,
security, trade and investment agreements with Iraq.
We would like to mention here with appreciation the
initiative of the Government of the United Arab
Emirates to forgive Iraq's debts of $7 billion.

The meeting of the International Compact with
Iraq held in Stockholm, Sweden, in late May 2008
achieved many positive results. The meeting welcomed
the proposal to form a new partnership for
development that includes the co-financing of new
programmes with the international partners and has
certain arrangements with the Paris Club with regard to
Iraqi debt settlement. In that regard, my delegation
would like to call on all brotherly Arab countries to
promote their historical role with respect to their
brothers in Iraq by forgiving Iraq's debts and to
reconsider the percentage of the compensation
payments imposed on Iraq because of the invasion of
Kuwait in 1990, a crime committed by the former
dictatorial regime.

I would like to highlight the important role
played by UNAMI in Iraq in providing support and
advice to the Iraqi Government on the political,
humanitarian, human rights, national reconciliation and
constitutional processes, as stipulated in resolution
1770 (2007).

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my
Government's request that the mandate of UNAMI be
extended for another year, in recognition of its
important role in implementing its mandate in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

In demonstration of my Government's keenness
to facilitate UNAMI's execution of its mandate, the
Iraqi Government has decided to allocate a
40,000-square metre parcel of land in the international
zone for its new integrated headquarters for 25 years.
We hope that UNAMI will provide support and
assistance in accordance with certain mechanisms and
with the prior approval of the Iraqi Government. We
also look forward to UNAMI having a more effective
and influential role through the return of the United
Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes to
work inside Iraq and to contribute to Iraq's
reconstruction.
