Mr. Castaneda Magafia (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): First, I would like to thank the Government
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela for having
convened today's open debate. It reflects responsible
and wise leadership on the part of that Government
in carrying out the work of the Security Council. We
take this opportunity to renew the bonds of friendship
between our two Governments and to convey special
greetings from President Salvador Senchez Ceren to

President Nicolas Maduro Moros and demonstrate our
confidence in his country's presidency of the Security
Council. We also welcome this opportunity to address
the issue of the maintenance of international peace and
security and respect for the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations as a key element in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
My country, as a founding member and supporter
of the Charter of the United Nations, firmly believes
that comprehensive peace can be achieved only through
dialogue, harmony and full respect for international
law and human rights. We have made the promotion
and strengthening of security at the national and
international levels one of our priorities, with respect
for human rights as a vital component of our policy.
The key tool that the United Nations possesses to
uphold its responsibility in that area is represented by
its peacekeeping operations. That work has expanded
and the mandates have diversified. In addition, the tasks
carried out by peacekeeping operations are performed
in harsh environments in a constant state of flux. That
is why, in order for them to be successful, they require
the full support of the international community.

As a country that benefited from that type of
operations in the 1990s, we are deeply committed to
returning the invaluable support given to us by the
international community, and in particular the United
Nations, through the United Nations Mission in El
Salvador during the peace process in our country. We
therefore reiterate our full willingness to continue to
actively participate in current and future missions.
While we acknowledge that such operations face
complex challenges and difficult conditions, we are
concerned about ongoing attacks against troops and
personnel. We also realize that some field missions
do not have adequate security for troops or enough
personnel to carry out their work, which decreases their
level of security.

El Salvador welcomes the establishment of the
new security-risks policy and the steps that have been
taken, but we are concerned that it has been developed
without any consultation and that its dissemination
does not provide a clear strategy for Member States. In
that regard, we stress the need for transparent, active,
open and regular dialogue among the countries that
contribute personnel to peacekeeping operations, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, especially with
regard to the serious incidents that have occurred
recently relating to the safety ofpeacekeeping personnel
and to human rights violations against civilians.

We reiterate the need to provide comprehensive
training prior to the deployment of troops and during
operations, including appropriate equipment to fulfil
the assigned mandates and to maintain dialogue
between the Secretariat and potential contributors,
so as to develop viable and effective alternatives so
that the international community can face such crises
in a timely manner. In that regard, our Government
supports the initiative of establishing rapid deployment
units that would be available to the Security Council.

In conclusion, we would like to make the following
points.

First, we believe that it is very important to
develop more realistic political strategies that are
contextualized and coordinated through valid and
effective consultations among the Security Council,
the Secretariat, host countries, regional actors and
troop-contributing countries, thereby creating an
institutional framework within which to reconsider the
establishment of and the mandates for such operations
and achieve the diligence, clarity and precision needed
to ensure the efficacy of peacekeeping operations and
the establishment of exit strategies.

Secondly, we believe that the use of modern
technologies could help improve the safety and security
of personnel and the assets of the United Nations. We
reiterate the need for the use of such technologies to be
guided by the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially the principle of respect for the
consent of host States, thereby ensuring respect for the
sovereignty of host States.

Thirdly, El Salvador welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to establish an independent panel to
review allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by
international forces in the Central African Republic.
We welcome the report to be presented by the panel
and look forward to a prompt and specific answer from
the Secretary-General to the recommendations made
and to the discussion on the subject, in which we will
actively take part.

Fourthly, El Salvador supports all initiatives
that ensure the participation of women in the various
contingents, in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000).
We hope that that policy will be clearly reflected in
the composition of staff, at all levels, under the special
mission policy recently approved by the Council with
regard to the peace process in Colombia.

Fifthly, El Salvador appreciates the importance
of maintaining a balance in the allocation of funds
between the maintenance of international peace and
security and the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). We believe that ensuring the financing of the
Agenda's Goals will help us to prevent future conflicts.
As a country, we will continue inter-agency efforts to
train our police and military personnel. We emphasize
that the support that we have been able to provide to
peacekeeping operations would not have been possible
without the invaluable assistance of friendly countries
whose technical cooperation was vital. We hope that we
will continue to receive such support.

Finally, we call for working together to strengthen
transparency and efficiency in the management of
peacekeeping operations.

