Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
extending the gratitude of my delegation to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2007/ 126). We are
also very grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. Ashraf Qazi, for his
tireless efforts in ensuring the effective contribution of
the United Nations to peace and reconstruction in Iraq.

My delegation would also like to welcome His

Excellency Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi, Vice-President of
Iraq, to this meeting.

My delegation is very concerned about the
continuing violence, which results in human casualties
on an almost daily basis and is overshadowing political
and reconstruction efforts in Iraq. The deteriorating
situation caused by that violence has affected, in a
harmful way, the ability of many Iraqis to enjoy their
basic rights. In this regard, we welcome Prime Minister
Al-Maliki's new plan to deal with all armed groups,
regardless of religious or political affiliations,
combined with border reconciliation and economic
measures. Despite many challenges to the
implementation of the new plan, my delegation is
hopeful that it will bring tangible results, not only in
Baghdad, but also in the rest of Iraq.

Iraq is part of the family of nations. Thus, the
international community simply cannot stand idly by.
We must do our utmost to help to alleviate the
suffering of the Iraqis and to restore Iraq's sovereignty,
peace and stability.

Last year, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono
put forward a proposal to promote the early resolution
of conflict in Iraq, which consists of three elements:
first, all-inclusive reconciliation among Iraqis,
involving the current Government; secondly, the
participation of the international community in
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts in the country;
and, thirdly, the deployment of United Nations-
mandated peacekeeping forces in Iraq after the
withdrawal of foreign troops.

As regards reconciliation among Iraqis, my
delegation believes that settling differences among all
parties in the country is a matter of urgency. The key to
such reconciliation is genuine dialogue across and
among ethnic and religious groups. Dialogue will be
robust when moderates are empowered and have more
room and a greater capacity to set the agenda of Iraqi
politics and to have a tangible impact on the process.
Thus, we commend Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani's
fatwa calling for unity and coexistence based on
mutual respect, as well as the formation of joint Sunni
and Shiite committees in mixed neighbourhoods in the
country. We are hopeful that more initiatives of that
kind will proliferate, given their significance for the
enhancement of confidence-building efforts.

For our part, my delegation is pleased to inform
the Council that, in cooperation with the two largest
Muslim organizations in Indonesia, namely, Nahdhatul
Ulama and Muhammadiyah, an international
conference among Islamic religious leaders for
reconciliation in Iraq is to be convened in Indonesia
from 2 to 3 April 2007. The conference is expected to
agree on concrete actions that will strengthen the
reconciliation process in Iraq.

With regard to reconstruction and rehabilitation,
my delegation attaches great importance to the
completion of those activities so that the Iraqi people
can enjoy their social and economic rights to the
fullest. Thus, we commend the hard work of the Iraqi
Government to ensure the realization of those rights.

Given current conditions, however, Iraq cannot
do it alone. Support from the international community
remains instrumental for building the capacity of the
Iraqi Government to meet various socio-economic
challenges. My delegation welcomed the launch of the
International Compact for Iraq. We fully support the
partnership between the Government with Iraq and the
United Nations in the preparations for and the
management of the Compact.

We are greatly concerned about the continuing
violence and attacks aimed at destabilizing Iraq. There
must be reasons for the continuation of such heinous
actions, and we cannot ignore the possibility that
hostile forces in Iraq have emerged as a direct result of
the prolonged presence of foreign forces in that
country.

My delegation has always believed that a clear
timetable for the withdrawal of foreign forces must be
urgently sought, based upon a sovereign decision by
Iraq, without creating a vacuum which could put Iraq
in a more difficult situation. Such a time-bound exit
strategy should, indeed, consider the requirements of
sufficient capacity on the part of the Iraqis, so that they
can be self-reliant in terms of security and economic
development, and the existence of national unity based
on genuine political dialogue and all-inclusive national
reconciliation.
In the meantime, considering the cross-border
characteristics of the Iraqi conflict, my delegation
believes that countries in the region can play an
important role in contributing to the promotion of
peace and stability in Iraq and in preventing regional
ramifications.

In that regard, we welcome the recent conference

in Baghdad, which involved representatives from key

countries in the region. The conference was an

opportunity for diverse perspectives to constructively

converge in support of the people and the Government

of Iraq in their exertions to achieve economic progress,

as well as durable peace and stability through national
reconciliation.

As regards the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), my delegation wishes to reaffirm its
support for the Mission. We fully support the
development of UNAMI's operational capacity with a
view to its becoming a self-reliant Mission. We also
attach great significance to the continuation of a trust
fund to support the operation of an entity that provides
security for the United Nations presence in Iraq.

As a final point, my delegation emphasizes the
importance of collaboration among UNAMI, agencies
and refugee-hosting countries in addressing the Iraqi
humanitarian issue. With 2 million Iraqi refugees in
neighbouring countries and 1.9 million displaced inside
Iraq, UNAMI absolutely cannot address this issue
alone. Partnership is indispensable in that regard.

