Mr. Christodoulides (Cyprus): At the outset, Iwish
to congratulate France for its initiative in organizing
this timely open debate, focusing on the open wound of
attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious grounds in the
Middle East.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement just
delivered on behalf of the European Union and would
like to add comments from its national standpoint.

Around a century ago, the poet Constantine Cavafy,
who lived in Alexandria, Egypt, in his poem Going
Back Home from Greece, wrote about "our seas,/ the
waters of Cyprus, Syria and Egypt,/ the beloved waters
of our home countries", and went on to say, "We must
not be ashamed of the Syrian and Egyptian blood in our
veins;/ we should really honour it, take pride in it". I
have cited this poem, as just one of the many examples
of the cultural richness of the Middle East, a birthplace
of great civilizations and religions and an area of
spiritual fermentation and fertilization. This cultural
mosaic has been the product of thousands of years of
coexistence, even in times of conflict, in an area that
had always been the bone of contention between and
regional and international powers.

Today, we are yet again experiencing tremendous
turmoil in the Middle East. This debate is an opportunity
to reflect upon the root causes of the unrest. In order to
do so, we must avoid the trap of confining ourselves
to the developments in a specific region. Ethnic and
religious clashes are nowadays a source or a pretext
for nearly every conflict around the world. It is also
being invoked as the ideological basis of terrorism,
intolerance, discrimination, racism and all forms of
hatred. If this scourge is not tackled decisively, if it
remains unaddressed, it will soon have such spillover
effects that will render the whole situation as entirely
out of control.

The times demand courageous measures by all
States individually as well as by the international
community collectively. All that we are witnessing
in the wider region of the Middle East, particularly
following the emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS), or Daesh, and the perpetration of
its untold atrocities should not leave us indifferent or
passive.

As the Syrian conflict enters its fifth year, it is
evident that long-term oppression, intolerance and
lack of inclusiveness have cultivated the ground for
the flourishing of terrorism. The incomprehensible
Violence caused by ISIL/Daesh, and other terrorist
groups, as well as the different militias, has created
a huge humanitarian crisis. It is vital that the
international community sends a clear and strong
messages condemning terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including the organizers, financiers
and sponsors of acts of terrorism.

In Iraq, although the situation seems to be getting
under control, there a lot remainsto be done. ISIL/
Daesh can be defeated only if there is political unity
and a common fight against terrorism. Cyprus believes
that addressing the security and political crisis in
the country is key not only to its stability but also
to regional safety and security. The recent horrific
and brutal acts of terrorism in Libya have showcased
once again that terrorism knows no borders. We have
witnessed how destructive ISIL has been in Iraq and
Syria, and unfortunately, it has found fertile ground
in the growing post-revolution political instability
in Libya. The gravity of the situation in Libya must
prompt action in support of the political process in that
country. To restore stability, a political solution to the
Libyan crisis is a sine qua non.

The problem of religious persecution is most
pronounced in parts of the Middle East in the current
turbulent times, especially in places where conflict
is raging and extremist terrorist groups are active. A
resolute stance for the principle of religious freedom
everywhere is extremely important. Religious belief
is fundamental to many human identities. Freedom
of faith must be defended, irrespective of whether
the attacks come from totalitarian atheist regimes or
theocracies. For the faithful, what they believe about
God is inseparable from what they understand about
human beings. But God's rights must never be allowed
to trample on human rights.

We have aligned ourselves with the international
coalition against terrorism, and we have been active
in promoting actions aimed at protecting the ancient
communities and the religious and ethnic minorities of
the Middle East. Our long tradition as a constructive
and stabilizing factor in the region is acknowledged by
all.

It is our duty towards humanity and our shared
values to steadfastly adopt a more proactive political
involvement, so as to save future generations from the
plague of blind hatred. For us, it is also a historical
responsibility to our ancestors and the beloved waters
of our homelands.

