Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
wish warmly to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting, and we should like also to thank
the Secretary-General for the comments he made this
morning. We endorse the statements made on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The various challenges facing the world require
that the parties to conflict respect international law
and international humanitarian law and work to ease
tensions, which have had disastrous consequences
for international peace and security. The aim of the
Security Council is a comprehensive and just peace
throughout the world, including the Middle East. To
that end, we must halt Israel's violations and illegal
practices by putting an end to the occupation and the
settlement policy as well as to the crimes perpetrated
by Israeli settlers, bringing the perpetrators to justice.
All illegal actions must stop, including those targeting
holy sites, the killing of and detention of Palestinians,
the confiscation of their land and the destruction of
their homes.

Resolving the Palestinian question can come about
only on the basis of internationally accepted norms,
namely, the two-State solution and the creation of an
independent and viable Palestinian State on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side in peace and security with an Israeli State,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the Arab Peace Initiative, the return ofrefugees,
respect for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and the end of the Israeli occupation of all
occupied Palestinian lands.

Any attempt to impose a policy of fait accompli on
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights represents not only
a breach of international law and resolution 497 (1981)
and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, but is
also null and void, can have no legal consequence and
undermines efforts to bring about peace in the Middle
East.

Everyone recognizes the fact that peace can be
achieved only if the Palestinians regain their inalienable
rights to life, safety, self-determination and dignified
living conditions in their own independent State. It is up
to the Council to take the steps necessary to implement
those resolutions and bring about peace by taking all
measures necessary to provide international protection
to the Palestinian people and to launch credible
negotiations on all aspects of a final solution, in order
to bring to an end the Israeli occupation of all occupied
Arab territories, put a total and immediate stop to all
settlement activity, lift the Gaza blockade, and rebuild
all that was destroyed by the Israeli war machine.

Qatar is fully convinced of the importance of the
reconstruction of the Gaza Strip and of the positive
impact thereof. We have therefore promised to provide
$1 billion in aid towards the reconstruction of Gaza. In
fulfilment of that promise, we have already built 1,060
housing units in Sheikh Hamid bin Khalifa Al-Thani
city, in Gaza, and work on 1,200 other units is under
way. We have also built a hospital and carried out 45
domestic road projects.

Regarding Syria, despite the efforts deployed
by the international community, represented by the
International Syria Support Group, and Council
resolution 2268 (2016), the Syrian regime continues to
carry out violations and attacks against civilians and
civilian targets. It continues to carry out massacres,
including that of Deir al-Asafir, in which dozens
of people were killed, including children. Civilian
facilities were clearly targeted there. It also continues
to hamper humanitarian convoys and to block access to
the various areas under its control, which causes great
difficulties for United Nations personnel.

The only way to put a lasting end to the violence
is through the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015), which reaffirms that the only lasting solution
to this crisis will come through an inclusive, Syrian-
led political process, so as to achieve the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people fully to implement
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
enable the creation of a transitional entity, the freeing
of prisoners, the lifting of the blockade and access for
humanitarian convoys.

