Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank the delegation of Italy for organizing
today's meeting in an open format, which allows us to
bring the position of Russia on the issue before us home
to all Member States.

We are grateful to Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Mulet
for their briefings.

Russia strongly condemns the use of chemical
weapons, wherever it is done and by whomever. In order
to maintain the international non-proliferation regime,
we deem it essential to identify the perpetrators and
bring them to justice. However, systemic deficiencies
have been found in the work of the existing international
entities in the context of the Syrian chemical dossier.
The results of their investigative activity on the use
of toxic substances are deeply disappointing. Their
mandates have been implemented selectively, without
the use of the whole range of methods and means
based on the high standards of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, which requires first and foremost the
collection of samples, interviewing witnesses and the
gathering of evidence directly at the site of the incident.

The specialists from the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) fact-
finding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic did their
work remotely. Their report (see S/20l7/567) was
very mediocre, full of omissions, inconsistencies and
contradictions. They did not comply with the basic
principle of ensuring the secure preservation of physical
evidence. Samples were received on the territory of a
third country, with no certainty as to whether they were
taken in Khan Shaykhun, some other place in Syria
or even outside its borders. The key question about
how the sarin was used and delivered to the site of the
incident has not been clarified.

We were assured that a visit to Khan Shaykhun
would be unsafe, although foreign experts from
various States had allegedly been there the day after
the chemical attack. No problems were encountered
even with the Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorists. By the way,
we asked our Western colleagues to share the details of
their investigations so that our specialists could have a
substantive discussion, but we were stonewalled. When
we invited representatives of the Department of Safety
and Security of the Secretariat to Security Council
consultations on 4 October, it suddenly turned out that
they had already managed to reach an agreement with
the groups controlling the Khan Shaykhun district on
the experts' visit. We should remember, in that regard,
that Riad Hijab, the Syrian opposition's General
Coordinator of the High Negotiations Committee, had
given security assurances in a letter that our British
colleagues circulated to the Security Council. And
yet for unknown reasons, the OPCW experts did not
manage to visit the site of the incident.

Now began the unconvincing references to
the power of science, thanks to which, apparently,
everything could be ascertained without moving a step.
Just imagine a situation where a case is being considered
in court and it suddenly turns out that the investigators
did not visit the scene of the crime. In judicial practice,
this would be completely absurd. We were then told that
the Syrian side had presented the results of its national
investigation, confirming the use of sarin. Every line
of the investigation apparently converged on the same
conclusion and so the Director-General of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat decided not to deploy a mission
to Khan Shaykhun. Our Western colleagues, for the
first time that we can remember, all began to make
references to the Syrian investigation.

But I should like to point out that the Fact-finding
Mission's job is not solely to determine the fact that
toxic substances have been used. It is also supposed to
study all the available information on the possible use
of chemical weapons in Syria, as is written down in
black and white in resolution 2209 (2015). The result
has been that the OPCW mission failed to obtain
key material evidence. All of its conclusions were
based on circumstantial evidence, the overwhelming
majority of which was provided by the opposition
and non-governmental organizations that have been
entirely compromised, such as the White Helmets, who
are closely linked to the terrorists of Jabhat al-Nusra.
Taking information from them at face value sets a bad
tone, to say the least.

Security conditions cannot be used as an excuse
to justify the fact-finding mission's refusal to visit the
Shayrat airbase. The Syrian authorities were quick to
guarantee secure access to the facility and asked that
the visit be organized as soon as possible. Under its
mandate, the OPCW mission has the right to access
any areas that could be affected by the alleged use of
chemical weapons. Nevertheless, its leadership did not
consider it necessary to check the version of the story
according to which the sarin munitions were delivered
by Syrian planes from the Shayrat airbase. And yet it
was on that shaky basis that an act of armed aggression
was conducted against sovereign Syria on 7 April.

We have repeatedly said that the OPCW's
investigation could have been much more objective if
the fact-finding mission's team had been put together
on a Wide geographical basis in order to fulfil its
mission. Meanwhile, it is a fact that its key positions
were held by representatives of countries involved
in the Syrian conflict and hostile to Damascus. In
that regard, it was impossible to ignore the fact that,
right before today's Council meeting, the fact-finding
mission issued a report on the alleged chemical incident
in Al-Ltamenah on 30 March, based, incidentally, on its
by now familiar remote procedures. That is a striking
coincidence, especially considering that almost nothing
has been heard about the incident for the past six
months. That immediately gives rise to a number of
legitimate questions as to who provided the samples
and when; where and by whom they were taken; how
their preservation was assured during this entire time;
whether the authorities in Damascus were asked for
information; and so on. In the circumstances, one can
only think that the story was intentionally timed to
coincide with today's meeting.

The specialists of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) for investigating the
use of chemical weapons in Syria did not visit Khan
Shaykhun either. The decision was taken by the
Mechanism's Leadership Panel, which considered it
unnecessary. However, the request to the Department of
Safety and Security was still submitted, just in case - in
October, six months after the incident occurred. After
much consideration, the JIM's visit to Al-Shayrat air
base did eventually take place. But it is not clear that
this added any value, since the team of experts had
not been asked to sample for sarin traces. They were
prepared to do it and had the necessary technical and
human resources, but did not because they had not been
given the go-ahead by the leadership. And yet finding
out if sarin had been stored at the airbase was crucial
to establishing who was to blame and was therefore the
direct responsibility of the JIM.

The result of this series of gross errors by the
investigative mechanisms is that the JIM's report
of 26 October and its conclusions (see S/2017/904, annex) cannot stand up to any serious criticism. It is no
accident that the text, including the section analysing
what happened in Khan Shaykun, is full of locutions
such as "possibly", "probably", "suggests" and "most
likely". I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if he really thinks
such terminology is acceptable in a report on such a
serious matter. Would it not have been better to inform
the Council honestly that the JIM. was not in a position
to conduct a fully fledged investigation? The relevant
Russian entities did a thorough scientific and technical
analysis of the report and held an open briefing on
2 November to discuss the results. We urge everyone
to familiarize themselves with the briefing. Its main
findings are as follows.

The evidence for blaming the Syrian Arab Republic
is based on a version that states that an aerial bomb
containing sarin was dropped from a military aircraft
flying near Khan Shaykhun, on an analysis ofthe crater
created by the bomb's explosion and on a determination
of the presence of sarin's chemical composition at
the scene. However, the Mechanism's conclusions are
untenable, since the report fails to provide convincing
evidence of the means of delivery, the type of munitions
used and the method of sarin dispersal.

Turning to the results ofthe technical analysis based
on our thorough examination, we find that according to
the JIM's tracking - provided by the United States-led
coalition - of the Syrian Air Force Su-22, the route
was in fact to the side of and parallel to Khan Shaykhun.
No manoeuvres by the plane were observed. In those
circumstances, based on the JIM. version of events, the
dropping of the bomb could not have occurred along
the aircraft's flight path - since non-guided munitions
can be aimed only when the aircraft is precisely on
course for its target - but sideways on, at almost a
90-degree angle.

I would like to ask Mr. Mulet why the Mechanism
concluded that this was technically possible. If it was
in fact carried out - although nothing was observed
on the radar - then, going on the radius of the turn
and the approach to the target, the Su-22 would have
inevitably had to fly over the residential area, with an
increased thrust and significant noise. But according to
the JIM. report, not one of the witnesses saw a military
aircraft directly over the town. Our Russian experts
have shown, using calculations and graphs, that an air
strike on Khan Shaykhun was not technically possible.
Why did the JIM. not consult Russia, given that the
aircraft is manufactured in our country? Then all these
fantasies about the Su-22's flight path would have
vanished on their own.

The problem is that from the very beginning, the
JIM. leadership has looked at the aerial bomb version of
the Khan Shaykhun events as the basic account, if not
the only one. Anything that did not fit into it has been
discarded, and the Mechanism has ignored the version
about how the incident might have been staged, saying
that nobody saw anyone preparing a ground-level
detonation of munitions. How can one take that kind
of reasoning seriously within the framework of such a
serious investigative process? Who on earth would put
together such a thing in front of anyone?

Based on information from social networks, the
fact-finding mission received munition fragments
supposedly found in the crater. I would like to ask
Mr. Mulet if the JIM. has analysed the metal fragments
to determine the type of steel and whether it could be
used to manufacture warheads. It is well known that
carbon steel is used everywhere to make these kinds
of munitions. If that was the case, why is the data not
in the report? And if not, how can it be unequivocally
concluded that there was a chemical bomb? There is
a crumpled piece of pipe in the crater visible in the
photographs. What, in the JIM's opinion, is it made of
and what does it have to do with an aerial bomb?

Let us consider the crater. If a chemical bomb
with binary sarin had been dropped, there would
unquestionably have to have been found, in or near it, the
mixer that synthesizes the two components that produce
sarin, as well as pieces ofthe tail unit. Nothing like that
was found. I would like to ask Mr. Mulet why the crater
has no signs of the entry channel that the impact of an
aerial bomb always produces. How can one conclude

that there was an aerial bomb when the crater's shape
is rectangular rather than elliptical? Every textbook on
explosions says that a crater like that is characteristic of
an explosion from a horizontal, ground-based position.
That also corresponds to the distribution of the burn
marks on the surface of the asphalt. The edges of the
crater were not turned outwards and there were no
traces of displaced soil, which shows that the munition
was sitting on the asphalt at the moment it exploded.
Incidentally, the crater was paved over soon after the
incident, which looks very like destruction of evidence.

As part ofits work, the JIM. commissioned a special
laboratory analysis, which detected an impurity that is
left behind after the formation of Syrian binary sarin
from the precursor methylphosphonyl difluoride (DF).
We would like to ask Mr. Mulet what this component's
concentration was and at what stages, and whether
there was any verification of the likelihood of this
micro-impurity's being present in DF in any other
processes where DF is used as a basic component for
producing sarin. We believe that the impurities found
in the samples should not be considered as unique
markers solely for Syrian binary technology for
producing sarin. It is also possible that the DF and sarin
were deliberately synthesized following the known
Syrian recipe. The chemicals could have been produced
anywhere in order to deliberately compromise the
Syrian authorities, and as far as we know that version
of events was never considered. Nor has the possibility
that homemade sarin was used in Khan Shaykhun been
explored, although there could be evidence of that in
substance samples. Does Mr. Mulet really believe that
no one besides the Syrians is capable ofproducing sarin
based on a specific known formula established through
analysis? And if he does, why?

I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if the JIM. conducted
a chemical analysis of the samples taken from the crater
with a View to detecting and identifying traces of the
explosive that released the sarin. If not, why? After all,
that would be the most logical way to determine the
type of munitions and explosion and the method used
to disperse the sarin.

What has been noticeable is the visual materials
produced immediately after the chemical incident, in
which people are seen milling around the crater without
special protective equipment. There are representatives
of the White Helmets using respirators and cotton
gloves, which provide no protection from the effects of
sarin, and they seem to be feeling fine. That is proof
that there was no sarin in the crater, since if a chemical
bomb had gone off it would have produced a lethal
concentration of the poison around the crater. There is
reason to believe that there was a munitions explosion
on the ground, after which the White Helmets shot the
well-known video and only after that was the sarin
released into the crater. And yet the White Helmets
announced the possible use of chemical weapons even
before the Syrian planes took off from Shayrat airbase.

I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if the JIM. verified
the information that the White Helmets had. Why
was almost no attention paid to that fact during the
preparation of the Mechanism's report? The report also
passes over one very important circumstance. In April,
in the Security Council, the United States Permanent
Representative showed photographs of Syrian children
who had supposedly died from sarin poisoning. The
pupils of the children in the pictures are significantly
dilated, whereas if they had been suffering from the
effects of sarin, their pupils would have shrunk to the
size ofa pinhead. We asked the fact-finding mission and
the JIM. to explain that inconsistency, but they avoided
the issue. The report also notes that in 57 of 247 cases,
the victims had arrived at hospitals before the incident
actually occurred. That is one in four of the supposed
patients, which excludes the possibility of carelessness
in filling out the documents in the ensuing commotion.
The Mechanism, however, decided to ignore that glaring
discrepancy, forcing the available evidence into the
Procrustean bed of the single, untenable aerial-bomb
version. I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if 57 people is
not rather too many to write off as poor record-keeping.

We are not undermining the authority of the JIM,
simply proceeding according to facts and logic based
on our thorough scientific and technical analysis of the
report. We firmly believe that the Mechanism, vested
with such a major responsibility, cannot continue to
work in this way. If comprehensive changes are not
made, it will remain a tool used solely to settle accounts
with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic.
That is the impression that is being given, and that is
unacceptable. In extending the mandate of the JIM,
we want to enhance its effectiveness and bring it in
line with the high standards of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. That is what our draft resolution aims to
do, and we hope that our colleagues in the Security
Council will approach that draft from a constructive,
non-politicized perspective.

Even as some continue to try to find these imaginary
chemical weapons in Damascus, the region is seeing an
increasing threat of chemical terrorism. Owing to the
not very constructive position taken certain countries,
it has been difficult to develop an appropriate response,
despite the draft resolution that we put forward, together
with China. The JIM. has not done anything about this,
even though anti-terrorist efforts are one of its main
tasks under the mandate given it by the Security Council
last year. The issue of chemicals continues to be used
to increase tensions around Syria; ultimately, chemical
terrorism could lead to a real conflagration that would
have repercussions even beyond the Middle East.

In conclusion, I want to say that when, together
with our American colleagues, we created the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, we had in mind the goal of
closing a large gap in international tools used to address
such issues as investigating cases of chemical terrorism,
and we considered the Mechanism as a preventive
mechanism aimed at deterrence. Unfortunately, we
have not been able to achieve that. I think that what
Mr. Mulet said today would strike even people with the
wildest imaginations:

(spoke in English)

"With respect to the responsibility of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Mechanism did not
identify specific actors within the Government
and institutions of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
nature and logistics of the operation would involve
a range of actors from different areas".

(spoke in Russian)

In other words, it stated in its report that the
responsibility of the Syrian Arab Republic had not
been determined, within either the Government or its
various institutionss, and that the character and the
logistics of the operation might have involved a whole
range of players from various areas. What kind of
evidence is this? And then it wrote that the Syrian Arab
Republic - the entire State - was responsible.

We need to draw lessons from history. In its
current form, the Mechanism represents a serious step
backward, even compared to the efforts of the United
Nations Special Commission on Iraq, because in that
case Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei clearly based their
work on verifiable facts. They would not have dared
to base it on assumptions such as those that I have just
quoted from Mr. Mulet's own statement.

Once again, I want to say that the Russian draft
resolution is aimed at correcting these errors and
systemic problems.

