Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): First of all, it my
pleasure to congratulate you, Mr. President, and
Russia on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of June. Let me assure you
of Rwanda's full cooperation and active participation
during your presidency.

I thank Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their reports (see S/2018/347 and S/2018/471) and
briefings. I also take this opportunity to particularly
thank the Office of the Prosecutor, and Prosecutor
Brammertz himself, for the favourable cooperation
between his Office and the Prosecutor and judicial
authorities in Rwanda, including cooperation on the
apprehension of the remaining fugitives who are still
at large.

This is a fitting occasion to assess the results
and effectiveness of an important institution for
international justice. In the light of the magnitude of
the challenges to justice in the post-genocide era in
Rwanda, my Government accords particular importance
to an international mechanism that is functional and
can reinforce our own efforts in ensuring justice after
the atrocious crimes of the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) was a pioneer in establishing a credible
international criminal justice system. Some of its
achievements, especially the verdicts it delivered in
relation to rape and media as weapons of perpetrating
genocide, remain significant milestones for
jurisprudence on genocide.

With those positive achievements in mind, it should
be a matter of concern to all of us that the legacy of the
ICTR and the credibility of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals are seriously at
stake. Since the Mechanism was established, in 2012,
it has released, before the end of their sentences,
more than 10 masterminds of the genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda. Those early releases were granted in
non-transparent circumstances and using inconsistent
procedures. It is worth noting that the Mechanism was
not able to apprehend or prosecute a single genocide
fugitive during the same period due to the lack of
cooperation by Member States.

A few weeks ago, my Government was very
surprised to receive, for the first time, a request from
the President of the Mechanism for an opinion on three
additional applications for early releases of genocide
convicts. We were surprised because the Government
had never received such a request in the six years of the
existence of the Mechanism. While we appreciate the
opportunity to provide our opinion, which we did, that
unique request from the Mechanism underlines the lack
of transparency and the inconsistency we have been
denouncing for a long time. It also demonstrated that
the decision not to seek the opinion of the Government
of Rwanda before or not to consult the associations
of victims and survivors before was at the personal
discretion of the President of the Mechanism and was
never a matter of his role. One may ask what allowed
the Mechanism to seek our opinion this time even as
the rules have remained unchanged. I would like to
elaborate a bit on a point made earlier regarding the
failing credibility of the Mechanism due the lack of
transparency on the issue of early releases.

In Rwanda we believe that the purpose of
incarceration is to rehabilitate individuals. Therefore,
what we are opposed to is not the principle of early
release in itself. Let me remind the Council that there
is no country on Earth, no jurisdiction, that has to
date commuted the sentences of or released early more
convicts of genocide than Rwanda has. The problem
lies in the lack of transparency and accountability in
the process used by the Mechanism to effect those early
releases. The problem lies in the criteria that are being
used. The problem lies in the lack of consideration
of the gravity of the crimes committed. The problem
lies in the lack of consideration of the total absence of
remorse expressed by those who are benefitting from
those early releases. The decisions have been made
solely by the Mechanism's President. The Government
of Rwanda and the associations of victims and survivors
have learned about those decisions in the media.
We continue to wonder what weight was given to
the gravity of the crimes committed by those convicts.
We continue to wonder what weight was given to their
lack of remorse. We continue to wonder what the
Mechanism, and particularly those who have made
those decisions, think when they themselves hear those
released denying their crimes and the genocide against
the Tutsi. A number of those who have benefitted from
early release have since regrouped and formed an
association denying the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
and repropagating the genocide ideology. They are
free to undertake such criminal activities without fear
of consequences because they were released without
conditions. That will remain a part of the Mechanism's
legacy. The Mechanism and its current President will
not be able to escape that legacy.

I would like to point to some of the best practices
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. I will spare the
time of the Council and reference its Practice Direction
on the Conditional Early Release of Persons Convicted
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone, issued on
1 October 2013. Those best practices provide a robust
set of accountability mechanisms that the Residual
Mechanism could itself use. We expect and we hope
that the Council will be able to advise the Mechanism
to consider those best practices.

The first practice is under the eligibility criteria
for consideration for conditional early release. The
Special Court requires that to be eligible for early
release a convict has to prove a "positive contribution
to peace and reconciliation in Sierra Leone", such as
"public acknowledgement of guilt, public support for
peace projects, public apology to victims, or victim
restitution". The individuals being released by the
Mechanism are well known to deny the historical facts
for which they were convicted.

The second practice of the Sierra Leone Court is
stringent requirements for supervision, restitution to
victims, renunciation of ideologies contrary to peace
and reconciliation, and proposed areas of resettlement.
We believe that such elements are lacking in the
Mechanism's process of determining eligibility for
early release. Yet they are reasonable accountability
mechanisms. There is absolutely nothing extraordinary
about requesting accountability, and it is a mechanism
that needs to be put in place to ensure that released
convicts do not re-engage in criminal activities.

Thirdly, the Special Court requires that witnesses,
victims, the Government of the home State and
representatives of requested areas of release are all
informed and engaged regarding early releases. In
particular, they should have an opportunity to provide
their opinion on requests for early releases prior to
the Court's decision. As I mentioned earlier, we are
happy that for the first time in the six years of the
Mechanism we received a request a few weeks ago for
the Government's opinion.

Rwanda has shared its concerns in various
interactions with the Mechanism, with both the
President and the Prosecutor. No change has been made
to date to the rules of procedure for early release. We
are aware, however, of the constructive attempts by
a number of judges and the Prosecutor to amend the
current rules with stronger provisions for accountability
and obligations of transparency. However, we regret the
current paralysis on the matter, as there has yet to be
any change.

In conclusion, allow me to submit two very modest
suggestions to the Council.

First, the Mechanism should be urged to put in
place clear rules of procedure for early releases and
to apply them transparently instead of leaving such a
grave decision of early release to personal discretion
rather than rules. The credibility of the Mechanism and
its legacy and contribution to the fight against impunity
are at stake.

Secondly, rules of procedures to be put in place
should include conditions to prevent genocide convicts
benefiting from early releases from engaging in future
activities promoting genocide ideology and denial.
Again, the rules of procedure of the Special Court
of Sierra Leone can serve as best practices. We are
not asking for anything to be reinvented. Rather, we
are offering those best practices for consideration
and implementation.

Let me end my remarks by thanking the President
and the Council once again for this opportunity to
explain our concerns.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.
