Mr. Steiner: I shall try to go through all the
many questions as quickly as possible.

The first point is the matter of return. I think we
should not lose sight of the fundamentals. 1999 is only
three years past.

You might remember that the reason the
international community intervened, first as a military
presence and then as a civilian presence, was that most
of the people in Kosovo were driven out. You have to
understand that a certain length of time is needed
before return really becomes possible. There were
displaced persons not only among the minorities but
also among the majority. A certain length of time is
required. We have the encouraging example of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. When we first started the return
efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I thought that it
would be impossible for a sizeable number to return to
Bosnia. Now, seven years later, we have seen returns to
the most difficult cities. We have returns to Prijedor,
Stolac and, this year, thousands of families returning to
Srebrenica. That shows that it works, that with the right
approach it is possible to have minority returns. Ours is
a bottom-up approach, because you need to prepare
return projects from the ground up, from the grassroots,
and then present them to the donor community.

That brings me to my main point in this context.
The international community and the Security Council
have asked us to make minority returns possible. We
have reported to the Council that we have the necessary
parameters to make return really possible on the
ground. Return is possible and has started this year,
this summer. But it will cost money. Later on, here in
New York, we will also inform the donor community of
what is possible. Specifically, we will present 30
projects for a quite sizeable number of returns, which
can start immediately. If the Council asks me to make
return possible and we prepare it, then I will have to
ask the Council to help us financially. Otherwise, it
cannot work. Return cannot work if those concrete
projects are not supported.

The issue of missing persons was mentioned
several times by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the European Union. I think it is an
absolutely crucial element psychologically. That is why
we have completely re-organized our efforts in this
area. We have a new office of missing persons under
the leadership of someone who comes from the Hague
and who has considerable experience. Mr. Pablo
Baraybar leads that office and has already shown
significant results. I have invited the families and the
representatives of the families of the missing from
Belgrade and from Serbia, as well as those from
Kosovo, to meet with me because this is an issue that
we need to address together. They came to Pristina, and
we had a meeting in my office. I think it was quite a
successful meeting. To be concrete, let me tell you that
the Office of Missing Persons announced publicly in
Pristina today that we will now issue medical death
certificates. That is very important because those
families want legally valid information regarding the
fate of their loved ones. We are starting this process to
give people legal surety. I think that it is difficult and
cannot be worked out overnight, but the record here is
quite impressive.

With respect to benchmarks, let me go beyond the
details. It is a living document. I am also ready to adopt
it in the light of further progress. But what are the
benchmarks in reality? They are for the Kosovars.
Those who have thought about it understand that.
Benchmarks are the way to Europe. If you fulfil the
benchmarks, you also fulfil the essential preconditions
for moving in that direction 7 and everyone wants to go
in that direction. At the same time, the benchmarks are
not a formal prerequisite. They are an aim and goal in
themselves, and they are what people want. They are
the precondition that we can address. It is the question
of unemployment, which is such a heavy burden on
Kosovo. It is the precondition that people can go to the
institutions and to the courts and have their rights or
freely use the streets in security. The benchmarks are in
essence also what the people want. This is essentially
why they are supported.

A final point: I think it just makes good sense to
say that before you can address the question of status,
the substantial autonomy - whatever form it may
take- as prescribed in resolution 1244 (1999), you
need something that can carry that autonomy. If you do
not have functioning institutions, then it remains on
paper. You first have to create a functioning,
respectable society and functioning institutions. Then it
makes sense to talk about the status. I think that people
have understood that. Not everyone, but those who are
really working in the interest of Kosovo.

Let me also say a word on Mitrovica, which was
mentioned several times. We are pursuing a strategy
together with the commander of KFOR, General
Marcel Valentin, and our cooperation in that regard is
excellent. Our strategy addresses several decisive
elements, because you cannot solve Mitrovica by
addressing just one element. I am grateful that Council
members have stressed the point that parallel structures
have to go. They are in contradiction with resolution
1244 (1999) and are exactly the opposite of what we
want to achieve.

The second point is that policing is key. You need
to have a police force that works in the interest of the
people, including that of the people in northern
Mitrovica. Since the last time I reported to the Council,
I have massively increased the presence of the police.
The police are working and doing normal police work
in Mitrovica, which changes the picture on the ground.

Also with respect to Mitrovica, we will, of
course, apply there the policy of zero tolerance for
crime and corruption. If need be and if we have proof,
we will also arrest people there, not only in the rest of
Kosovo. That is what the population there expects. The
population is sick and tired of this grey zone in which
criminals can visibly go about their business. Equally
important is to find ways to allow political
participation on the municipal level as well. We have
developed a model of how this can happen. But the
precondition is that there exists a readiness to take part
in the political structures, which must be part of the
overall system based on resolution 1244 (1999).

Another element is economics. The economic
situation in northern Mitrovica is miserable, and it
needs to be changed. People want it to be changed
because people there do not want to be without
economic prospects. It can be done. We have
developed quite a comprehensive programme for an
economic perspective in the north of Mitrovica, but
there is a simple economic fact. You will not get
business or investment when the legal framework is not
clear but is still a grey area; when one does not know
what law is to be applied; when there are not yet
reliable institutions; and when illegal institutions
govern the situation. The precondition for helping the
economy in the north is the removal of the parallel
structures there.

Let me mention one point that has been raised
several times and which I think is a legitimate concern
of the Serbs living in northern Mitrovica. Of course,
there is fear. I have said publicly e and I also speak on
behalf of the KFOR commander - that I will
personally guarantee that there will be no incursion
from the south over the Ibar river to the north. I can say
that on the basis of fact; those are not just words. We
can guarantee that no Serb in the north has to fear any
incursion from the south if he accepts the common
institutions that should govern in the whole of Kosovo.
We give this guarantee, and I can say here that we can
hinder any incursions so that no one will have fear.
Each person has only to expect advantages in joining
the legitimate structures.

There was a visit to Mitrovica - and northern
Mitrovica - by Admiral Johnston, who is
CINCSOUTH and came from Italy. He said publicly -
in fact, he could even tell the Council - that he did not
recognize northern Mitrovica; it had changed because
of the increased presence of the police, of our
administration, of UNMIK. He said that he could see it,
he could smell it. Precisely what the people in the north
want is to become part of the legitimate structure.

The representative of Mexico asked about the
possibility of microcredits. I think this is an absolutely
crucial element. We have seen an enormous success
story in an institution coming from Bangladesh, the
Gramin Fund, which is handing out very small
microcredits to people in rural areas. It functions in an
incredibly impressive way. It shows how people can
start businesses with small amounts and then produce
their own way of life.

In this context, let me also say that the
representative of Mexico is the only one who has
mentioned something very important to us, and this
again relates to money: it is the funding for our budget.
Indeed, it is true that the reductions we had to face -
and we will have to face in the future - bring us to the
limit of our capabilities and will force us, if it
continues, to cut down on our efforts to fight crime. I
think it is the wrong moment to do this, when we are
just beginning to see the first fruits of the new structure
that we have set up in the framework of justice and the
police.

Let me answer two points that were mentioned by
the representative of China. First of all, as regards the
treatment of the name question in parliament -
Kosovo, or Kosovo Metohija - I think this is very
simple and have made it clear in Kosovo. The official
name of Kosovo is Kosovo. Members of the Council
can read this in resolution 1244 (1999). This is the
name. We apply it in the Constitutional Framework. We
also use it in official documents, because it is the name
used in resolution 1244 (1999). At the same time, if
someone uses another name orally in parliament or in
writing, I think it is very clear that this will not have
any consequences. I also made this fact clear to the
parliament, where a member of that body can use the
word Kosovo Metohija, as it is traditional, but in
official documents we follow the guidelines we got
from resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework.

On crime, the issue of smuggling was mentioned.
Indeed, this is one of our big challenges. I think we are
beginning to make some progress here when we think
about the millions and millions of cigarettes and other
smuggled goods that we have confiscated. By the way,
one essential element is gasoline, which has a much
greater potential; its volume is much bigger than
cigarettes.

Let me mention a practical example. Last week I
was at the boundary line between Kosovo and
Montenegro, where we have two checkpoints. One is
on the Kosovo side, and the other is on the Montenegro
side. But between the two checkpoints there are seven
kilometres of road going over the mountains. When
travelling there, as I did last week, one can see a
gasoline station every 300 metres. If one looks at the
price of the gasoline, as I did, it can be seen that the
cost is 50 euro cents per litre. But in Kosovo or
Montenegro it costs 86 cents. One can see from this
difference that, if many cars pass by, this is quite a lot
of money, amounting to millions.

These are issues that we need to address and to
overcome, to the benefit of the budget of Montenegro,
as well as that of Kosovo. The solution for something
like this is, of course, co-location. This means that the
two checkpoints, instead of being apart, should be put
together so that there is no longer a "no man's land".
These are the practical measures that we need to
address. Indeed, this is a big problem, and a lot of
money is evading our budgets and getting lost.

The representatives of Mauritius, the Syrian Arab
Republic and others mentioned participation in the
forthcoming municipal elections. I think this is a very
essential point, because, since politics are local, power,
to a certain extent, is also local. What we have so far
are 73 political units applying for certification for the
municipal elections. Out of these more or less 73
parties, 34 are Serb. This is very encouraging within
the context of multi-ethnicity. And it is right, because it
has been the Serb parties who have rightly insisted on
the municipal elections, because they are in their
interest. In communities where they form a sizeable
part of the population, it would mean that they have
either the majority or a sizeable part in the municipal
assembly. Therefore, it is in their interest to take part in
the municipal elections, and they should not listen to
those who tell them something else.

The representatives of Cameroon and of the
Russian Federation mentioned the question of the
rights of minorities in the Kosovo Assembly. There
was a reference to procedures that we established under
the Constitutional Framework. I think that we should
see that the Constitutional Framework foresees
exceptionally powerful minority protection
mechanisms. I am very happy that the Serb
representatives have, in the case of the recent law on
higher education, used this mechanism, which protects
them. It is a mechanism which allows anyone who feels
that a minority right has been violated to challenge the
law - just adopted by a majority in the parliament -
and go to the presidency of the parliament, which has
to find or propose a solution by consensus. If there is
no consensus, then a panel will be formed with the
claimant - the one who pretends that a right has been
violated - with the other side, and with a third person
whom I will nominate. The panel will decide by
majority vote. If the Assembly then adopts the law,
fine. If not, the whole law comes to me for
promulgation. And of course I will take due account of
the panel's recommendation.

What I am saying is that, if we have cases where
someone feels that minority rights have been violated,
as in the case of higher education, we do have
mechanisms, and it is very important that the
mechanisms foreseen by the provisional constitution
are applied in such cases. I am very happy that this is
exactly what is happening in the case the
representatives have mentioned.

Let me say a word on decentralization. There will
be no horizontal solutions to this question. We will not
have new municipal boundaries. This will not help us,
as we will have no cantonization.

Our approach is a vertical approach, which, by
the way, does not apply only in some of the communal
areas. It should apply throughout Kosovo, because it
follows the modern European trend of the devolution of
power from the central level to the local level.

We therefore have a model which will also allow
minorities, even if they do not form a majority in a
certain municipality, to be more involved in their day-
to-day life, and that is exactly what they want. But
there is a price for that. That price is that, just as we are
asking the majority people - the Kosovo Albanians f
to accept that Kosovo is not an Albanian society but a
multi-ethnic society, and that it must become one, we
also must request of the minorities that they be ready to
integrate into this society.

That means that in the context of decentralization,
we need proof that there is a readiness to participate in
political life at the municipal level. That means also
that the minorities must take part in the municipal
elections, because one cannot on the one hand ask for
more rights, albeit for good reason, and then not take
part in the elections.

That is what I wished to say in response to the
comments made and questions raised by Council
members. Let me just say that I am very grateful for
the enormous support expressed around this table for
what we are doing. We are trying to do our job, and
what we need in order to be successful is, of course,
the Council's continued readiness to assist us.

Finally, allow me to make a proposal. We have
told the Council time and again what progress has been
made and what the difficulties are. Perhaps the Council
should come when we have the municipal elections, on
26 October, to look at the situation and to find out for
itself out where progress is being made and where we
still have work to do. I think that if the Council could
do this in the context of the municipal elections i if
its schedule permits - it would be very helpful and an
expression of the continued support of the international
community for what we are doing there on the ground,
and it would also give the Council an objective picture
of where we are.
