Ms. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing today.

We commend the Office of the Prosecutor of the
ICC for its continuing efforts to fulfil the mandate to
investigate the crimes under the Rome Statute committed
in Darfur. We have often reiterated our concern about
the situation in Darfur and Council referrals to the
Court. However, the ongoing security and humanitarian
crisis in Darfur continues to be marked by widespread
violence, impunity and displacement.

As highlighted in the report of the Prosecutor,
despite a decrease in the number of incidents, the
situation in Darfur is not improving. Restrictions of
movement impact humanitarian assistance. Civilians
continue to be the primary victims of indiscriminate
aerial bombardments. An intensification of alleged
inter-tribal fighting causes an immense loss of life.
Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers are
subject to constant attacks. Widespread sexual and
gender-based violence remains a horrible feature of
this conflict. All those violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law
continue with absolute impunity. As the Prosecutor
states in her report, there are numerous allegations of
ongoing crimes that may fall under the jurisdiction of
the Court. We urge the Prosecutor's Office to continue
to closely monitor various crimes allegedly committed
in Darfur.

The semi-annual briefings by the Prosecutor have
provided a consistent message. The ICC cannot fulfil
its mandate unless the Darfur suspects are arrested and
transferred to The Hague. Five individuals accused
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
continue to evade the Court's jurisdiction. Most of
them even occupy the highest posts in the Government
of the Sudan. We are deeply concerned that the Sudan
has still not taken any meaningful steps to apprehend
those five individuals and that other States in a position
to do so have not acted either.

Just last week, the Security Council received from
the Court another formal finding of non-cooperation
against the Sudan. The latest decision of the Court on
non-compliance against the Republic of the Sudan is
a serious reminder that the Security Council needs to
follow-up on its referrals. However, despite the efforts
by many members of the Council to date, it has not
been possible to reach an agreement on any follow-up
mechanism.

The report of the Prosecutor also reminds us that
a lack of cooperation persists not only from the side
of the Government of the Sudan, but also from other
States. Regular travel by the indictee against whom
the arrest warrant is in force once again shows that
all States, not just parties to the Rome Statute, should
cooperate fully with the Court in order to strengthen
international efforts to fight impunity.

The lack of cooperation has also led to unfortunate
recent development in the Al-Bashir case, when eight
victims with participatory rights withdrew from the
case and from the Darfur situation generally, due to
perceived lack of progress. This situation proves that
victims cannot wait for justice forever. Despite our
concern about this development, we call on the Office
of the Prosecutor to continue its support for the victims
of the most serious crimes in Darfur.

Justice and accountability are integral parts of
peace and reconciliation efforts. If left unaddressed, a
lack of accountability encourages further and renewed
human rights violations and abuses. The Security
Council repeatedly calls on the Government of the
Sudan to ensure accountability and bring perpetrators
to justice. The Government of the Sudan should do more
to end attacks against civilians, ensure accountability
and guarantee justice for the victims.

In conclusion, as this is the last time that Lithuania
will have an opportunity to address the matter as
a member of the Council, I would like to reiterate
Lithuania's full support to, and cooperation with, the
Court. I also wish to underscore that the International
Criminal Court is an institution born from a shared
understanding that injustice will be brought to light and
that serious crimes must not go unpunished.

