Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Inzko, for his briefing.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. It is in the interests of the international
community in general, and of regional States in
particular, that it maintain peace and stability, advance
coordinated socioeconomic development and achieve
harmonious coexistence among all ethnic groups.
The international community should take a balanced
and prudent approach on the question of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and pay attention to and heed the views
and concerns of all parties concerned.

China welcomes the achievement by Bosnia and
Herzegovina in advancing national reconciliation,
promoting economic development and strengthening
the rule of law. We have noted that the country is
still faced by difficulties and challenges in its pursuit
of national stability and development. We hope that
Bosnian people of all ethnicities will work actively to
consolidate the results of the political process, engage
in dialogue to settle their differences, comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and continue
to strive for greater progress in all areas so that Bosnian
people of all ethnicities can share in the peace dividend.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We respect the choice made by the Bosnian
people with regard to the future of their country, and
we support Bosnian people of all ethnicities in living
harmoniously and seeking development together.
We welcome the efforts by High Representative
Inzko to promote the political process of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that, according to his mandate,
he will continue to play a positive role in promoting the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

China welcomes the adoption of resolution
2315 (2016), which extends the mandate of EUFOR
ALTHEA, the EU-led peacekeeping force. We hope
that EUFOR ALTHEA will continue to maintain
close cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
play a constructive role in maintaining the peace and
stability of the country. China is willing to work with
the international community and continue to contribute
to the realization of the lasting peace, stability and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

