Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Miranda, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Angola, to the Security Council.

The Tunisian delegation welcomes the holding of
this meeting, which attests to the Council's sustained
interest in the question of Angola and to its
commitment to settling an armed conflict that, as has
been noted, has gone on for more than a quarter of a
century, inflicted terrible suffering and loss on the
Angolan people and delayed the country's development
process.

In spite of some improvements, the economic,
social and humanitarian situation continues to bear the
direct brunt of the conflict. We would refer in
particular to the large number of internally displaced
persons, especially women and children. We call on
humanitarian agencies, in close cooperation with the
Angolan authorities, to pursue their efforts to relieve
the suffering of the internally displaced persons.

Mr. Jonas Savimbi's UNITA, which refuses to
honour its commitments under the Lusaka Protocol and
continues to defy the international community and the
resolutions of the Security Council, bears full
responsibility for the situation. Despite the weakening
and shrinking of its military capacities, UNITA is
pursuing its guerrilla activities by targeting civilians.
This situation is of great concern to my delegation. We
strongly condemn such action, which is all the more
unacceptable in that Mr. Savimbi's main reason for
perpetuating the conflict has nothing to do with serving
the cause of peace or the well-being of the Angolan
people.

We welcome the oft-reiterated commitment of the
Angolan Government to the Lusaka Protocol and its
initiatives to promote the peace process and to stabilize
the situation in the country. We also welcome its
intention to organize democratic elections. We invite
the international community, the United Nations in
particular, to assist in the organization of such elections
and to ensure that they take place in the best possible
conditions and with the participation of all the
grassroots forces of the countries.

It is obvious that the Angolan Government has
fulfilled its share of responsibility. It is now up to
UNITA to respond positively to the outstretched hand
of the Angolan Government, to renounce the military
option and to cease holding hostage the future of the
entire country. Moreover, we believe that the ongoing
conflict in Angola threatens security and stability in
southern Africa.

Tunisia shares the conviction that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. We therefore call once
again for the strict and rigorous application of
sanctions imposed on UNITA, which we believe to
constitute the only means of cutting UNITA's supply
lines for arms and other war materiel. Sanctions should
be maintained until the peace process becomes
irreversible.

We emphasize in this context the importance of
the investigation work done by the Monitoring
Mechanism on Sanctions against UNITA. In this
regard, we attach great importance to the Mechanism's
investigations, especially those related to the
smuggling of diamonds, which are the crux of the war
in Angola and among the major sources of income for
rebel movements in Africa in general and in Angola,
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in particular. We express the hope that all
interested parties will cooperate with the Monitoring
Mechanism so as to shed full light on violations of
diamonds sanctions.

In conclusion, we support the forthcoming visit of
Ambassador Gambari to Angola and encourage him to
pursue his efforts to help the Angolans regain the path
to peace, stability and reconciliation.

