Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank you and your team, Madam President,
for your leadership and hard work during this month's
presidency. I could wax lyrical about that, like my
Korean colleague, but that would not be very British.
I would also like to thank you for convening today's
wrap-up session. It is once again commendable that
the meeting is being held in public, and I hope that
subsequent presidencies will repeat the open and
transparent format.

The Council covered an extraordinarily wide
range of issues in October. They included a number
of continuing conflicts in Africa - Mali, Somalia,
South Sudan, Abyei and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Council also spent time on a number
of issues in the Middle East, including Yemen, Syria
and yesterday's emergency meeting in response to the
escalating tensions and risks surrounding the situation
in Jerusalem. We discussed the Ebola crisis, which is
now recognized to be a threat to international peace and
security. We discussed Ukraine, where the separatists
planned to hold so-called local elections this weekend,
in clear violation of the Ukrainian Constitution and
the Minsk agreements. All Member States should vow
not to recognize them. And we had meetings with the
President of the International Court of Justice and
peacekeeping Force Commanders.

Throughout the month, Madam President, you have
stuck to the principle of openness and transparency,
supporting the move of the Cote d'Ivoire sanctions
briefing into the Chamber, and even allowing Malian
television to broadcast live the statement of its Minister
for Foreign Affairs to the Council at the beginning of
the month (see S/PV.7274). You have also convened
three very different open debates that have given a
representative flavour of the nature and breadth of
the issues before the Council. The open debate on
the Middle East (S/PV.7281) represented the more
traditional, geographically defined prism through
which the Council engages on the maintenance of
international peace and security. The open debate on
women and peace and security (S/PV.7289) reflected
how the Council has embedded a cross-cutting thematic
approach in its work. The agenda on women and peace
and security is now an integral part of the Council's
work and of its understanding of the nature of conflict
today and how to resolve it. The open debate on working
methods (S/PV.7285), the fifth consecutive debate on
the topic, showed how the Council has been prepared
more recently to open up its self-reflection to the wider
membership. That trajectory of openness, transparency
and reflection should be welcomed. It demonstrates a
willingness in the Council to adapt the ways in which
it considers matters of international peace and security
and to remain open to hearing from a wider range of
actors on all aspects of its work.

While we can see that trajectory in the way the
Council has dealt with the issues before it in October,
we can also see areas where it has been unable to make
progress. The Council has discussed the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo innumerable
times since 1960, when the first United Nations
mission, the United Nations Operation in the Congo,
was established. We have been considering questions
about Israel and Palestine since the 19505. Even the
relatively recent issue of Western Sahara has been on
the Council's agenda for nearly 25 years.

But ifwe fail to resolve those old issues, we will not
have the time to deal with the new crises and challenges
that the world faces. That is why a renewed focus on
conflict prevention must remain a central part of the
Council's efforts to maintain international peace and
security. If we can take early action to prevent situations
deteriorating, we may be able to avoid their becoming
entrenched fixtures on the Council's programme of
work. But in order to create the space and time needed
to take a genuinely preventive approach, we must
find ways to avoid having repetitive discussions of
entrenched issues. We must move some items off the
Council's agenda faster than new items are coming onto
it. Some items on the Council's formal agenda have
not been discussed for 60 years, and we should stop
pretending that we are trying to resolve them.

That is connected directly to our methods of work.
We require timely briefings from early-warning actors
across the United Nations. We should develop more
interactivity in informal consultations. And despite
recent efforts, including yours, Madam President,
in the month of October, those too often resemble a
formulaic exchange of positions. We should also ensure
that we are as efficient as possible in the conduct of our
business. Unless we can improve those basic aspects
of our working methods, an enlarged Security Council
will simply not be able to function.

Lastly, although it may be too soon to congratulate
Ambassador Quinlan on Australia's assumption of
the presidency, I can offer the United Kingdom's full
support to Australia in its presidency next month.

