Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for his briefing this morning. I would
first like to acknowledge and very much welcome the
appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new Special
Representative. Of course, we acknowledge and greatly
appreciate the services of Mr. Maman Sidikou.

Since our previous meeting (see S/PV.8067), the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has clearly continued to evolve - the establishment
of an electoral calendar, the election date set for
23 December, peaceful protests on New Year's Eve,
met with repression and deadly violence, and the
deadly attack of 7 December on the base in Semuliki,
North Kivu, against the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).

With the worsening overall security situation
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular in the east, surging humanitarian needs and
a political fragility, the key to changing that trajectory
is a democratic transition of power and the creation of
tolerant political space, based on the holding of credible,
transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections in the
spirit of the agreement of 31 December 2017. Important
building blocks for the elections - the calendar and
the electoral law, as well as a budget - are now in
place. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the opposition and other key stakeholders
now need to contribute constructively to make sure that
the elections are held on 23 December of this year. The
international community has a role to play in supporting
those efforts. Dialogue and coordination with the region
will remain key, and we strongly support an active role
of the guarantors.

The Security Council should also continue to
follow the situation. For the elections to be credible, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
urgently needs to implement the confidence-building
measures agreed upon in the 31 December agreement.
In that regard, we remain deeply concerned about the
continued and recent reports of violations of human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including those of
assembly, speech and peaceful protest. The violent
response to the events of New Year's Eve represents an
unacceptable example of the lack of respect for human
rights regarding which there can be no impunity for
those responsible.

Ensuring women's full and equal participation
in elections is also essential for a credible electoral
process, including their safe access to polling stations.
We appreciate efforts to increase women's voter
registration in the Kasai region. MONUSCO will
continue to play a vital role in supporting the electoral
process and in contributing to the protection of
civilians. I take this opportunity to express our deepest
condolences, of course, to Tanzania and MONUSCO
for the losses resulting from the horrendous attack on
7 December.

Lastly, with regard to the continuing deteriorating
humanitarian situation that others have also raised,
the lack of resilience among the Congolese population
makes it extremely vulnerable to conflict. In 2017,
more people were forced to flee their homes in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo than in any other
country in the world. We, Sweden, are proud to be
the third largest bilateral humanitarian donor, but we
are deeply concerned about the record-low levels of
funding to the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
humanitarian appeal. I would therefore like to take
this opportunity to encourage all countries to consider
additional funding to that appeal.

