Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I should like first
of all to thank the High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his comprehensive briefing.

The achievements of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
established in December 1950, are unequalled. It is,
without doubt, the biggest and most effective
humanitarian agency in the world. Working with
countless agencies and non-governmental
organizations, it has given hope to millions of
vulnerable people displaced by war, famine and natural
disasters. Today, 19.2 million people receive assistance
from that Office. The number of vulnerable people in
need of assistance, and the list of areas needing
humanitarian relief, are almost endless. These include
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti, Kosovo and Afghanistan, to
mention only a few.

The question now is how well placed UNHCR is
to handle these new challenges. UNHCR's core
mandate is to lead and coordinate action, to protect
refugees and to resolve refugee problems worldwide.
Two main objectives can be distilled from this core
mandate: to safeguard the rights and well-being of
refugees and to ensure that everyone has the right to
seek asylum and find safe haven in another State.
At the heart of this mandate is the following
issue: Who is a refugee? The 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol define a
refugee as a person who is outside the country of his or
her nationality and is unable or unwilling to return to
it, owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for
reason of race, religion, nationality, membership of a
particular group or political opinion. That definition is
the basis of international refugee law.

In this era, one in which conflicts can cause
massive refugee flows that overwhelm the facilities of
host countries, the tolerance level is very low. Illegal
migration is another complicating factor. There is,
therefore, a tendency on the part of some Governments
overburdened with the reality of illegal migration to
consider refugee issues in the same light. The
challenge for UNHCR is to seek the cooperation of
Member countries in ensuring recognition of the fact
that the problem of refugees is a distinct human rights
issue, and not one of migration.

The abuse of refugee status by some illegal aliens
does more than just raise the question of the denial of
this most basic right - recognized under international
humanitarian law and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights - to vulnerable groups. UNHCR has to
work with States to combat the gradual erosion of
refugee rights under the guise of law enforcement and
anti-illegal-immigration measures. It is also important
that Member States live up to their obligations and
commitments under the 1951 Convention on Refugees.

