Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I should like to thank
Mr. Bildt for his briefing and for his thoughtful analysis
of the problems of the Balkans. One of the conclusions to
be drawn from his analysis is that the international
community cannot hope to achieve its goal of self-
sustaining stability for the Balkans while the Milosevic
regime remains in power in Belgrade, not just because
Mr. Milosevic and his clique are under indictment from
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, but at least as much because they continue to
be the principal representatives of the tendency towards
violent disintegration to which Mr. Bildt referred.

They have been the main protagonists of that
tendency towards violent disintegration ever since 25 June
1991, and they remain so to this day in Kosovo and in
Montenegro. The only way out of this conundrum is for
the people of Serbia to put a stop to Mr. Milosevic and
his fellow disintegrationists, to follow the example of the

 

other republics of the former Yugoslavia in electing a
democratic government, and to cast their lot with the other
peoples of the Balkans in a new vision of regional
cooperation and integration.

The Stability Pact provides the most viable framework
for a comprehensive approach to restructuring the region.
An issue requiring priority attention of the parties to the
Pact continues to be that of the voluntary return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. Cooperation on the
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons is as essential to self-sustaining stability as the big
infrastructural projects currently under discussion. We hope
that this issue will be included in the quick-start package to
be discussed at the regional funding conference next month.

Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America) It is a
great honour to be here again, and I apologize for having
missed so much of today's meeting, but like you, Mr.
President, I was equally preoccupied today with our
concurrent meeting in the Economic and Social Council
with Dr. Piot and the discussion on AIDS and Africa,
which I think was a very important step forward in the
close cooperation of all of us in dealing with the AIDS in
Africa problem. I am particularly sorry I missed the
comments of my good friend the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, but since I spent a good deal of time
with him this morning, I have a very good idea of his
position, as well as through the report I got from my
colleagues.

My main purpose in joining the Council today is to
speak personally about Carl Bildt for a moment, because
according to his own book, I was the reason he ended up
where he is today, by offering him the job to begin with, in
a secret interview in Washington, which at the time he did
not realize was a job interview. So I have come here today
both to apologize to him and to praise him. We have been
friends and very close colleagues since 1994, since that first
meeting that he has described rather amusingly in his own
memoirs, and as a co-Chairman of the Dayton peace
conference, he was my closest colleague at moments of
very high drama. I am delighted that the Secretary-General
has given him this important assignment, and I want to
state publicly that our Government listens to everything
Carl Bildt says with the greatest attention, not simply
because he represents the Secretary-General, but because of
his extensive experience and authority in regard to these
issues.

I think that Carl Bildt's report to us today should
encourage us somewhat in regard to Bosnia and focus us on
where we need to go to move forward. It is, in my view,
a simple question of two things: leadership by the
international community - and in Bosnia and Kosovo
this is slightly different structurally, but the same nations
are involved in both, although under different structures;
and secondly, the underlying problem that plagues all of
the Balkans to this day, and has since 1991, and that is
the goals and designs of the leadership in Belgrade.

In regard to the first, it is a question of resources,
leadership and will, and all too often we have institutional
rivalries and public criticism between the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and the United Nations, or between
the United States and the European Union, or between
individuals, when the fact is that we all have the same
objective and we are all pulling for the same goal. Some
of this criticism is not surprising, and it does not trouble
me very much, but I do think we have to remember that
we are all on the same team, trying for the same
objective, which in Bosnia is to make the Dayton Peace
Agreement work.

In regard to Bosnia, I am encouraged by some of
what Carl Bildt has reported, and I think we should take
very carefully his comments on refugee returns to
minority areas and strengthening the joint institutions. The
High Representative's office in Bosnia is critical to
success. It has been filled now by three outstanding
representatives of the European Union, Carl Bildt himself,
Carlos Westendorp, and now Wolfgang Petritsch. We
must support them.

In regard to the region, I share entirely Carl Bildt's
view that the newly elected Government of President
Mesic' and Prime Minister Racan is a major step forward,
and I believe that the number-one test of that Government
in regard to the region will come in Mostar. I believe that
what happens in Mostar will be determining for the future
of Bosnia. It is the most broken city in Europe at this
moment - Mitrovica is the most dangerous, Mostar is
the most broken. In Mostar, I think Zagreb holds the key,
and I call on our friends from Croatia to help fix the
broken city of Mostar.

As Carl has so accurately noted, we remain
handicapped by the actions of the regime in Belgrade, and
we also remain handicapped by the fact that a number of
indicted war criminals are still at large. I believe that the
war crimes tribunal and others should reinvigorate their
efforts to bring indicted war criminals to justice. I am not
going to talk at length about Kosovo today, because I
know that we have a very important meeting scheduled

 

for that subject next week, when General Reinhardt and Mr.
Kouchner will address us, but I do want to welcome very
strongly the announcement of the United Kingdom over the
weekend that it will double its contribution to the civil
police in Kosovo. This is an extremely important action and
one that I think will help the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo force
achieve their goals. So while reserving further comments on
Kosovo for next week's important meeting, I want to
commend you, Mr. President, for holding this meeting
today, and commend Carl Bildt for his report. I encourage
him to continue to be the eyes and ears of the Secretary-
General and to keep us in the Security Council, and through
us the international community, apprised of his views of
what we can do in order to achieve our goal in Bosnia,
which is to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement; and in
Kosovo, where our goal is more elusive and more difficult
to reach, but with his help and assistance I am confident we
will be able to move in that direction.

