Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me at the outset, Sir,
perform the pleasant duty of welcoming you back to
New York and to the Security Council. We are
honoured to participate in this meeting under your
presidency.

This is an important meeting on an important
topic which your country has chosen for our
discussion. I welcome the thoughtful remarks that have
been made by the Secretary-General, and I welcome
his presence and participation. We wish also to thank
the Secretaries General of the various regional
organizations for their presence here.

I would like, through you, Mr. President, to
welcome my dear friend, Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary
General of the Arab League. We listened to his
statement very attentively.
The Security Council, under the Charter, is
supposed to provide for a system of collective security.
This system is designed to protect the weak from the
strong. It is incumbent on us, despite the imperfections
of the Security Council and of the Charter, that we who
need the Security Council and the United Nations more
than the stronger States not do anything to erode its
authority or question its viability, even in these
difficult times.

It is our conviction that it is not the Security
Council which has failed in the current crisis. The
failure, if there is one, is a failure on the part of the
member States of the Council to agree, and in
particular a failure on the part of the permanent
members of the Council, who hold the power of veto,
to agree among themselves.

In fact, if anything, what has been established is
that the Security Council has set very high benchmarks
for the enforcement action envisaged in Article 42 of
the Charter. I think that this is a positive aspect if one
looks ahead to other possible crises.

I would like to quote from an article which
appeared in the International Herald Tribune
yesterday. It was the obituary of a United Nations civil
servant who died of a disease in Viet Nam. The article
said in part that: "The United Nations is not a bully, not
a know-it-all, not a superior force, and it is not
irrelevant."

Even if we believe that the rule of law has been
violated, it is incumbent on us to work towards the
restoration of that rule of law in international relations.
We cannot do so by questioning the viability and
effectiveness of the Security Council. We must work to
restore whatever flaws and failures we see in the
operation of the Security Council.

My delegation continues to believe that the
Security Council will remain central to the future of
peace and stability not only in Iraq but also in the
Middle East and in other areas such as South Asia, on
which Security Council resolutions have been adopted,
establishing the framework of legality for the conduct
of relations in that context. That is our conviction. We
believe that regional organizations can be helpful and
viable only so long as they act on the basis of the
principles of the United Nations Charter and in
response to the legality established by the resolutions
of the Security Council. That must remain the driving
force for regional organizations.

Finally, we believe that in the future, what we
shall need to develop to address conflicts and disputes
in various parts of the world are hybrid formats that
include regional countries directly involved in disputes
but also major Powers and perhaps the Security
Council itself as an intermediary that can provide the
framework, the legality and the power for the solution
of regional conflicts and disputes.

