Mr. Dejammet (interpretation from French): The
French delegation has studied carefully the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Liberia. The recent
events in that country are a source of continuing concern
for the French Government. The descent into chaos of
Liberia, which seemed to be in the process of concluding
the peace process decided upon in Abuja, was deeply
disappointing.

We believe that the factions bear full responsibility
for what has taken place. The Secretary-General indicates
in his report that

"the faction leaders have clearly demonstrated their
disregard for the aspirations of the Liberian people
for peace." (S/1996/362, para. 43)

We share that assessment.

 

The French delegation regrets in particular that the
resumption of fighting in Monrovia and in the rest of the
country has nullified the efforts made in the humanitarian
sphere. The fighting has caused half the population of the
capital to flee and has dashed the hopes of 750,000
refugees for a rapid return home.

The Foreign Ministers of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), meeting in Accra on
7 May, reaffirmed that the Abuja Agreement was the only
basis on which to restore peace in Liberia. On that premise,
they determined a number of measures that the factions
must implement by the beginning of August, when the
ECOWAS Summit is to be held. The Foreign Ministers
stated that the African force's continued presence in Liberia
will depend on progress made by the factions to put the
peace process back on track. For his part, the Secretary-
General indicates in his report that UNOMIL will remain in
Liberia only if ECOMOG is still there.

The French delegation hopes that the factions will
heed this appeal. The international community's total
withdrawal from Liberia would allow a resumption of
fighting throughout the country, with no prospect of a
short-term settlement. This would be extremely dangerous
for the stability of the subregion, which is why we do not
wish to abandon the Liberians to themselves.

France has lent its constant support to the peace
process in Liberia. It will continue to do so by agreeing, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, to extend the
mandate of UNOMIL for three months. As it has
committed itself to do, France will also provide assistance
to the peace process in the form of F 15 million, of which
F3.5 million will be allocated to the special United Nations
Trust Fund for the implementation of the peace agreements
in Liberia. This should allow, as urged by the Secretary-
General, for the equipment of a battalion of the African
force. We hope that this assistance will contribute to
strengthening ECOMOG in the field and thus better
guarantee security in the capital and throughout the country
when the ECOWAS soldiers are able to redeploy there.
This said, the extension of UNOMIL's mandate should
give the Council the opportunity to consider whether the
warlords truly intend to re-establish peace in Liberia. If
they do not, we shall have, as the Secretary-General
suggests, to reconsider the role of the Observer Mission.
We sincerely hope that we will not be obliged to vote for
its withdrawal.

We know that the warlords in Liberia still believe that
a military solution is possible in a conflict that has bloodied
the country for nearly seven years. The warlords are
mistaken. The Secretary-General writes in his report that

 

the faction leaders should carefully ponder the lessons of
Somalia. We strongly urge them to follow the Secretary-
General's advice to draw the appropriate conclusions in
order to allow all Liberians to return to the path of
democracy and progress.

