Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to congratulate the Netherlands and your team,
Mr. President, on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also want to thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and for all
of his efforts on behalf ofpeace in Syria

Sixteen days ago, we sat around the negotiating
table with our Security Council colleagues and agreed
to a 30-day ceasefire in the brutal bombardment
of civilians in Syria. The negotiations were long
and difficult. Every minute we delayed meant more
innocent people were killed. But the Russian delegation
stalled and drew out the talks. They had conditions
they insisted on before they would allow the killing to
stop. The United States was reluctant to accept those
conditions. But, in order to stop the killing in Syria, we
accepted them. We attempted to work with Russia in
good faith to end the violence in Syria.

As a result, 16 days ago we came to an agreement.
Russia cast its vote in favour of the agreement (see S/PV.8188). With that vote Russia promised its support
for a 30-day cease-fire, as did the rest of the members
of the security Council. With that vote Russia said
that it too wanted to create the conditions for food
and medicine to reach starving Syrian families. With
that vote Russia told us it would use its influence with
the Syrian regime to silence the guns in Syria. It told
us that the Russians would themselves honour the
ceasefire they voted to demand. With that vote Russia
made a commitment to us, to the Syrian people and to
the world - a commitment to stop the killing in Syria.

Today we know that the Russians did not keep their
commitment. Today we see their actions do not match
those commitments, as bombs continue dropping on the
children of eastern Ghouta. Today we must ask whether
Russia can no longer influence the Al-Assad regime
to stop the horrific destruction of hospitals, medical
clinics and ambulances and to stop dropping chemical
weapons on villages. Has the situation in Syria
reversed, and Russia is now the tool of Al-Assad - or
worse, Iran?

We must ask those questions because we know
the Russians themselves have continued their own
bombing. In the first four days following the ceasefire,
Russian military aircraft conducted at least 20 daily
bombing missions in Damascus and eastern Ghouta.
The Russians negotiated the wording of the ceasefire
down to the commas and the periods. They voted for the
ceasefire. And they immediately disregarded it. In the
past 16 days, over 500 civilians have died. Some reports
put the death toll even higher. That is unacceptable.

Thousands of Syrians are in desperate need of
medical care. But none of the United Nations list has
been evacuated. We have heard the conversations are
ongoing with the regime to medically evacuate 25
people in the coming weeks. While those civilians
should be rushed to medical care, we ask why it took
so long. When will the more than 1,000 identified
medical cases be evacuated? There have been almost no
deliveries of medicine or surgical equipment, because
the Al-Assad regime remove them from the United
Nations humanitarian convoys.

The convoy that made it to eastern Ghouta on
5 March had to navigate around constant regime
airstrikes. The bombing was so severe that the United
Nations could barely unload the food the trucks were
carrying. And in the past 16 days, there have been three
separate allegations of chlorine-gas attacks. This is no
ceasefire. This is the Al-Assad regime, Iran and Russia
continuing to wage war against their political opponents.

And there is another reason we know the Syrians
and Russians never intended to implement the ceasefire:
they planned for it. Over the past two weeks, the
Russian and Syrian regimes have been busy labelling
every opposition group in eastern Ghouta a "terrorist
group". Why? So they can exploit a provision in the
ceasefire resolution (resolution 2401 (2018)) that allows
for military operations against the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria and Al-Qaida. There are terrorists in Syria,
but the Russian and Syrian regimes label anyone as
terrorists who resist their absolute control.

In the eyes of Russia, Iran and Al-Assad, the
neighbourhoods of eastern Ghouta are full of terrorists.
The hospitals are full of terrorists. The schools are full
of terrorists. The Syrian and Russian regimes insist
that they are targeting terrorists, but their bombs and
artillery continue to fall on hospitals and schools and
on innocent civilians. They have deliberately and with
premeditation exploited a loophole they negotiated
in the ceasefire to continue starving and pummelling
hundreds of thousands of innocent Syrian civilians.
They have made a mockery of this process and this
institution. For the sake of the Syrian people and
the integrity of the Council, we must respond and
take action.

During the negotiations, the United States put all
parties on notice that we needed to act if the ceasefire
was not honoured. Members of the Security Council
agreed. Now that day has come. The ceasefire has
failed. The situation of the civilians in eastern Ghouta
is dire. The United States is acting. We have drafted a
new ceasefire draft resolution that provides no room
for evasion. It is simple, straightforward and binding.
It will take effect immediately upon adoption by the
Council. It contains no counter-terrorism loopholes for
Al-Assad, Iran and the Russians to hide behind. And it
focuses on the area the Secretary-General has identified
and that the world can see holds the greatest urgency for
the lives of innocent civilians, that is, Damascus city
and eastern Ghouta.

If Russia, Iran and Al-Assad cannot agree to stop
the bombing in that limited part of Syria for that limited
amount of time, they will not agree to anything that is
worthwhile. If they will not keep their word once they
have agreed to a ceasefire, then how can we trust them?
In the end, that is what makes the work of the Council
possible: trust. If we cannot count on the members of
the Council to honour their agreements, we cannot
accomplish anything. If we cannot act when children
are dying, we have no business being here. If we cannot
save families that have not seen the sun for weeks
because they have been hiding underground to escape
barrel bombs, then the Security Council is as impotent
as its worst critics say it is.

Almost a year ago in the aftermath of the Syrian
regime sarin gas attack on Khan Shaykhoun, the United
States offered a warning to the Council. We said that
when the international community consistently fails
to act, there are times when States are compelled to
take their own action. The Security Council failed to
act, and the United States successfully struck the air
base from which Al-Assad had launched his chemical
attack. We repeat that warning today.

We welcome all nations that will work together
to finally provide relief for the Syrian people, and we
support the United Nations political process that seeks
to end the war in Syria. However, we also warn that
any nation that is determined to impose its will through
chemical attacks and inflicting human suffering, most
especially the outlaw Syrian regime, the United States
remains prepared to act if we must. It is not the path we
prefer, but it is a path we have demonstrated we will
take. We are prepared to take it again.

