I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive periodic report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/555). The report once again clearly registers the fact that illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories constitute a flagrant violation under international law and one of the biggest obstacles to the achievement of the two-State solution as well as of a just and comprehensive peace. We appreciate in particular the report's emphasis on the continued use of unlawful force by the Israeli security forces against Palestinians as well as demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned structures and on the increasingly frequent incidents of settler violence against Palestinian civilians. Its findings and recommendations deserve thorough consideration by Member States. The use of excessive and disproportionate force against civilians, arbitrary arrests, attempts to erode the status of Jerusalem, the inhumane blockade in Gaza and the illegal settlements have all been parts of a recurring pattern that severely curtails the fundamental rights and freedoms of Palestinians. During the past few years, Israel has intensified its expansion of illegal settlements throughout the occupied Palestinian territories. The settlements undermine the perspective of a two-State solution and lay the foundation for the annexation of those areas. Therefore, it is imperative for the international community to exert the utmost efforts to stop Israel from further expanding those illegal settlements. We also agree with the Secretary-General's pertinent observation that the Palestinians now also face serious socioeconomic impacts as a result of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We believe that the international community should increase its assistance to the State of Palestine. With that understanding, Turkey has provided 15 tons of medical supplies to the State of Palestine and plans an additional $5 million of direct budget assistance. The situation in Gaza remains particularly fragile. As an emergency measure, the Turkish-Palestinian Friendship Hospital in Gaza has been transferred to the Islamic University of Gaza to be used as a quarantine centre. However, the population of Gaza is still subject to an inhumane blockade by Israel. The humanitarian conditions in the region are unsustainable, unacceptable and not in the interest of any of those concerned. The need to address the reconstruction and rehabilitation requirements of the Gaza Strip is ever-growing. This cannot be effectively done while the current blockade remains in force. This policy of collective punishment needs to end. Peace and prosperity in the Middle East can be achieved only through the two-State solution, which will pave the way for a just, comprehensive and lasting resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In this regard, the most immediate and pressing challenge is the Israeli Government's illegal plans for the annexation of the West Bank. The annexation would be a grave violation of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. It would mean the end of the two-State solution once and for all. It would increase grievances and the suffering of Palestinians at the hands of the occupying Power. Palestinian land and the people of Palestine do not deserve to be sacrificed for the sake of Israel's brazen policies of violence and occupation. In fact, an overwhelming majority of the international community objected to Israel's plans. Most recently, the meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation Executive Committee held on 10 June delivered a strong message against Israel's initiatives for annexation and provided its full support to the Palestinian people in their quest for justice. This message should be supported by all the members of the international community to prevent Israel from taking this dangerous step. We take this opportunity to once again urge the Israeli Government to immediately cease its illegal settlement activities and not to proceed with its illegal annexation plans. The international community has to maintain its support for the two-State solution, leading to the establishment of an independent, sovereign and contiguous State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Turkey is ready to contribute to all international efforts towards that end. It is high time that the international community uphold the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, ensuring that they live in a free Palestine in peace and dignity. As ever, Turkey is firmly committed to standing with the Palestinian people with all its might.
