Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Brazil reiterates its long-
standing support for the implementation of the two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized and
mutually agreed borders based on the 1967 lines, in
accordance with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations, the relevant United Nations resolutions
and the established guidelines of the peace process. At
the heart of that formula is the need to work towards
the end of the occupation and the establishment of a
Palestinian State that is fully sovereign, economically
viable and territorially contiguous, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

In that regard, the expansion of Israeli settlements
in Palestine, which are illegal under international law,
as well as the incitement and inflammatory rhetoric on
both sides, continues to hinder the achievement of a
lasting peace in the region. The Brazilian Government
maintains its understanding that the final status of the
city of Jerusalem should be defined in negotiations
between Israel and Palestine on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, especially resolutions 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016).

Brazil remains deeply concerned with the dire
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The escalation
of violence over the past few months underscores the
urgent need for a political solution to the conflict,
which includes inter-Palestinian reconciliation.

The critical financial situation of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the effect
that the recurrent underfunding of the Agency has on
its ability to address the needs of Palestinian refugees
is yet another worrying development in the region. As
a member of the Advisory Commission of UNRWA, we
underline the vital role the Agency plays in ensuring
health, education and other basic services for almost
5.3 million refugees. We call on all parties to abstain
from any actions that may jeopardize UNRWA's
capacity to fulfil its purpose.

Brazil remains deeply worried about the situation
in Syria and welcomes the agreement reached to
create a demilitarized zone between opposition and
Government forces in the Idlib governorate. We urge all
relevant parties to fully comply with this agreement. We
also wish to reiterate our full support for the efforts of
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the intra-Syrian
political negotiations in Geneva. We look forward to
the establishment of a constitutional committee in line
with the agreements reached in Sochi and reaffirm our
support for an inclusive political solution to the Syrian
crisis based on the parameters set forth in the relevant
Security Council resolutions, namely, resolution 2254
(2015), and taking full advantage of the conditions
created by the Astana process. We renew our hope that
a political process, mediated by the United Nations and
led by the Syrian people, will bring about the end of the
war and a peaceful solution to the conflict.

With regard to Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura's
decision to step down at the end of November, Brazil
wishes to thank him for his tireless efforts aimed at
promoting conditions for an inclusive and credible
political solution to this long-lasting conflict.

The civil war in Yemen, which has entered its
fourth year, is currently the largest humanitarian crisis
in the world. The Brazilian Government is alarmed
by repeated allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law in Yemen. Brazil remains gravely
concerned about the situation in the port city of
Hodeidah and calls on all parties to ensure that the
port remains fully operational in order to avoid further
humanitarian consequences for the people of Yemen.
The only viable path for the future of the country is
through a negotiated settlement. Brazil expresses its
full support for the plan put forward by Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths to relaunch political negotiations and
implement confidence-building measures. We urge all
parties to fully engage in efforts towards a negotiated
solution for the conflict.

