President Park Geun-Hye: We are here today
to tap into our collective wisdom as we take on an
emerging challenge to peace and security in our world.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
terrorist fighters from around the globe are endangering
Iraq. That is not simply a threat to one country or one
region. It affects us all. Today's meeting, coming as it
does soon after President Obama's ISIL strategy and
the most recent action, could not have come at a better
time. The events of 9/11 brought the fight against
terrorism to the top of the global agenda - a cause that
the Council has been key to advancing.

For Koreans, ISIL's brutal slaughter of innocent
people is an appalling reminder of a similar fate that
befell one of our own citizens 10 years ago. There
can never be any excuse for trampling the norms of
humanity and for the random killing of women and
children. They go against what Islam stands for, what
civilization stands for, and what humanity stands for.
Foreign terrorist fighters serve as their minions. They
slip across borders to spread terror. They are a scourge
to humankind.

Today's milestone resolution 2178 (2014) highlights
the need for greater cooperation to better roll back
the threat. That includes information-sharing,
border control, tackling violent extremism and law
enforcement. Korea will thoroughly implement such
measures. Those involved will be brought sternly to
justice and their funding blocked.

Nor can we neglect the more fundamental approach
of dealing with conditions that are conducive to
terrorism. Eliminating poverty and ensuring sustainable
development are essential if we are to address the root
causes ofterrorism. Korea is a partner in this campaign.
We are increasing our official development assistance
to the least developed countries and are providing
humanitarian aid to countries threatened by ISIL and
foreign fighters.

We must go further. We must remain ever vigilant
against cyberterrorism and nuclear terrorism and the
utter chaos and destruction that they could unleash. All
too often cyberspace is used to finance, recruit for and
incite radical violence. We must prevent cyberspace
from becoming not only the target of terror but also a
tool of terror.

Nuclear terrorism, however unthinkable, is also
a possibility. The post-9/ll world has already seen
terrorist groups seeking nuclear materials. That is why
international efforts to prevent nuclear terrorism must
be stepped up. In that regard, I wish to acknowledge
President Obama's leadership in proposing a summit on
nuclear security five years ago in this very Chamber
(see S/PV.6l9l). Today, the global regime for nuclear
security is becoming stronger, thanks to summit
meetings in Washington, Seoul and The Hague.

In the same vein, may this meeting today help
to rally our collective resolve, and may it kick-start
concrete international actions against the new scourge
of foreign fighters. The fight against faceless and
nameless terrorists without borders will not be easy.
But we also know that terrorizing human dignity
and humankind is a strategy that is doomed to fail.
Seven decades ago, the founders of the United Nations
defeated the totalitarian threat and envisioned a world
of peace that puts humanity first.

The Council is a guardian of our rights and dignity
as humans. It must meet head on the challenge ofviolent
extremism and the foreign fighters who spread it. In the
effort to stem the threat, it will always find in Korea a
committed partner.

