Mr. Bildt: I think the main conclusion to be
drawn after all these hours is that your initiative to
organize this debate, Mr. President, has been not only
highly valuable but also highly valued by all who have
taken part and by all of us who have been able to
benefit from listening to the different interventions that
have highlighted both the problems that are there and
the possibilities for moving forward that I think we see.

On a somewhat more personal note, let me start
by expressing my appreciation for the intervention of
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, because
I know both Muhamed Sacirbey and Milos Prica as old
friends of mine, but certainly not friends of each other.
They were truly enemies on two sides of what was the
bitterest war in Europe during the second part of the
last century. The fact not only that they can sit together,
but that they can also speak together in front of the
United Nations Security Council~ certainly not
pretending that everything is over, or that there are not
any problems - I think that, more than anything else,
demonstrates, in spite of all the difficulties in the
region, that there is a way forward - not an easy one,
not a fast one, but there is a way forward. I also
express my personal thanks for their respective
contributions.

I think we have also been able to listen to
constructive and forward-looking interventions by the
representatives of Slovenia, Croatia, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania and
Bulgaria in which they have all, from their respective
points of view, highlighted both their respective
problems in their respective parts of the region and the
need for that regional approach, that search for a more
comprehensive political solution within the framework
of Europe. This was, indeed, the centrepiece of my
intervention; and, ifI may say so, it was indeed that of
the intervention of Mr. Javier Solana on behalf of the
European Union.

I have noted with satisfaction the strong support
that has been expressed for the efforts and the approach
of the United Nations, from Ambassador Holbrooke of
the United States and from Ukraine, just to take two
examples of nations that, on some of the other issues
that have under discussion today, have taken somewhat
divergent approaches. But the support both of them
have expressed, as well as others, is, of course,
something that we will carry forward in our work.

At this late hour I will not take up all of the
different issues. A lot of them will be addressed in the
course of the regular briefings that are given by the
Secretariat to the Council on the different peacekeeping
missions in the area. Let me just, in terms of Kosovo,
stress one note regarding the concern that has been
expressed by several members of the Council about the
need to find out the fate of persons who are missing as
a result of that conflict. A lot of them- most of
them - are of Albanian origin, and there are also those
of other origins - Serb or others. We must press
forward to find out as much as we can about their fate.

But let me also take this occasion to recall that
there are still thousands of people missing as a result of
the conflicts in Bosnia and Croatia. We must not cease
international efforts to find out as much as we can
about the fate of those missing. That is important, not
only for the families of those concerned, but also for
the long-term efforts at reconciliation.

I also note the concerns that have been expressed
about the human rights situation in Kosovo. I think all
present are aware, and it has been expressed by most of
the speakers, that both the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and the
international security presence in terms of the Kosovo
Force are doing their utmost to safeguard the human
rights of each and every person. The fact that they do
not always succeed is not due to their not trying, and I
think it is important to recognize this. This is
continuing, and it is disturbing. I just read a report that
came in a couple of hours ago about what happened
very early yesterday morning when six mortar grenades
landed within the premises of the very old Orthodox
monastery of Decani in southern Kosovo. That
monastery, where the mortars are coming down close to
the church and close to the monks, is a treasure of
Orthodox culture in Europe. Of course, we must do
everything we can to counter that sort of violence.

I have been asked by several speakers to
comment further about the situation in and around and
concerning Montenegro. Let me just repeat what I said
in late February and again today: the federal authorities
in Belgrade that have, in my opinion - and I think that
is very clear - been abusing their power and the
elected representatives of the Republic of Montenegro
are on a slow but steady collision course. Unless we or
they or changes can alter these trends, that collision
will occur, with negative consequences.

What we can do, of course, is to highlight the
problems that are there from the side of the United
Nations. I can only continue to urge that political,
economic and other support be given to the elected
representatives of Montenegro. That is important in
order to increase the possibilities for them to pursue the
not entirely easy balancing of different interests, which
they have so far done successfully and which has made
a contribution to stability and democracy that has been
highly appreciated by the international community.

Finally, let me underline what I think is the
absolutely crucial importance of a continued dialogue
on these issues within the Council. The experience of
the last 10 years is that if the international
community- and the Council is the ultimate
expression of the international community- is not
united in some sort of way behind the consensus of
what we area trying to achieve in the region in terms of
stability and peace, then we are not likely to succeed.
So the dialogue with and within the Council is
absolutely essential as we prepare ourselves for that
day when the conditions are there for the
comprehensive regional settlement of the political
issues, which will also pave the way for a resolution of
all of the "minor" issues that we have been addressing
today.

In that spirit, and as an old friend as well, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for this initiative and for this
debate. I can assure you that I will do our utmost to
live up to the expectations expressed today.

