Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Indonesian delegation
has followed with events in Haiti with interest, and in this
regard we are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report, which has indeed been invaluable to
the Council's deliberations on the future of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH).

UNMIH has proved to be another United Nations
success story. Resolution 940 (1994) clearly spells out its
mandate: to assist the Haitian Government in maintaining
a secure and stable environment, to protect the Government
of Haiti and key installations, to assist in the holding of
elections and to professionalize the security forces. These
aims have been largely achieved. In less than one year after
UNMIH took over from the multinational force, it has
achieved some truly impressive goals. Moreover, due to the
assistance provided by UNMIH and the international
community, Haiti has had free legislative, local and
presidential elections.

On 7 February 1996, Haiti achieved an important
milestone in experiencing its first peaceful transfer of
power from one democratically elected President to another
since independence in 1804. My delegation believes that
these elections have been a positive development in the
consolidation of Haiti's democracy. In this regard, we
give special thanks to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for his
leadership, which helped to ensure the success of
UNMIH. We would also like to pay tribute to the men
and women of UNMIH for their brave and dedicated
work in securing peace and stability in Haiti under
difficult circumstances.

The Indonesian delegation believes that much of the
success in Haiti can be attributed to a unique combination
of peace-keeping and post-conflict peace-building efforts.
In this connection, my delegation stresses the importance
of sustained humanitarian and technical assistance, along
with financial commitments on behalf of the international
community. It is also in this context that we applaud the
efforts undertaken by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the World Bank, along with eight United
Nations agencies, for their valuable contributions to the
implementation of the emergency economic recovery
programme, while paying particular attention to the
developmental aspects of their activities.

It is also my delegation's view that internal security
and economic development in Haiti will remain elusive
without a strong system of justice. In this regard, we are
pleased that major advances are being made in the
creation of a professional Haitian National Police Force,
in its prison system and in judicial infrastructure.

Despite the considerable progress that has been
achieved towards national reconciliation, democratic rule
and reconstruction in Haiti, my delegation cautions
against unbridled optimism. The simple fact remains that
much still needs to be accomplished before sufficient
momentum in the development of Haiti's institutions is
established. The fragile nature of stability is made evident
by the recent reports of looting, arson and common crime
that have occurred in various parts of Haiti. My
delegation is also concerned with reports of deteriorating
economic conditions, including a depreciating currency,
higher unemployment and underemployment, rising
inflation, a decline in private investment and revived
instances of capital flight.

Haiti stands at a crossroads. While significant
progress has been made since its return to a constitutional
Government, challenges persist. The first obstacle that
must be surmounted is the smooth transition of power,
which we deem to be a prerequisite for sustaining both
internal and international confidence. Additionally, we
note that at this time the National Police Force is not
adequately trained or fully operational, which is a vital

 

aspect for moving Haiti away from its turbulent past and
pointing it in the direction of political stability, lasting
democracy, constitutional order, economic prosperity and
national reconciliation. In both these instances the presence
of UNMIH has had a qualitative impact.

After careful consideration, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council, which
calls for the final extension of the UNMIH mandate. We
feel that the new Government of Haiti and its people will
significantly benefit from the additional assistance provided
for in this draft resolution. Above all, we cannot fail to note
the request made by the President of Haiti to the Secretary-
General for the continued presence of UNMIH for some
months. However, given the tremendous financial burdens
placed on the United Nations, we support the idea that
interested countries should make every effort to provide
voluntary contributions in order to assist the United Nations
in financing UNMIH.

Furthermore, in consideration of recent developments
in Haiti, we believe that the emphasis of UNMIH personnel
should be directed towards bolstering the Civilian Police
Force to reflect more accurately and compensate for the
changing nature of Haiti's security needs and present
condition.

In this context, therefore, my delegation underscores
the importance of transferring tasks from UNMIH to the
Government of Haiti so that they will be adequately
prepared fully to assume responsibility for their security
and stability at the conclusion of this mandate. We stress,
however, that while UNMIH, with the generous support of
the international community, has made a profound
contribution to easing the harsh humanitarian conditions in
Haiti and assisting in building its institutions, the ultimate
responsibility for achieving lasting national reconciliation
and reconstruction resides with the people of Haiti.

