Mr. Omaar (Somalia): First of all, I thank you,
Sir, for this opportunity to participate in and contribute
to the consideration of the way forward for
peacemaking and peacebuilding. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/304) reflects both our
experience and our needs. We welcome and support its
proposals and recommendations.

Somalia and South Asia are proof that we have no
choice but to make peace and to build on it. To take but
one example, piracy off the waters of Somalia, based
on the absence of a national capacity to enforce the
rule of law for 18 years, has impacted and affected the
lives of almost every region of the world. Therefore, I
believe that disengagement from peacemaking and
peacebuilding is not an option at all.

As has been said, peacemaking needs vision and
a common strategy. From our perspective and due to
our history, the peace that we seek is subregional. For
50 years, the Horn of Africa has been at war in one
form or another, and we believe that the wider
peacemaking and peacebuilding effort in the Horn of
Africa is the only guarantee for the peace that we are
working towards in Somalia.

Secondly, our experience shows that
peacemaking and peacebuilding are not only parallel
and simultaneous, but also incremental. In Somalia,
despite the problems, two thirds of the country are
peaceful and in the peacebuilding phase. The North and
the North-East provide examples of locally grounded
initiatives that have developed and grown to that stage.

We are now fully and frankly engaged in the
completion of the Djibouti peace process in the
remaining third - the southern part - of the country.
That can be achieved only by reinforcing both the
ongoing political peacemaking process and the security
stabilization programme.

Somalis have shown national ownership in the
stable parts the North and the North-East and in the
Djibouti peace process. We have a three-pronged base
for national ownership: the North, the North-East and
now the Djibouti peace in the South. That has been
achieved at a high cost in human life.

We now believe that the proposals and
recommendations of the Secretary-General first, for
one, a coordinated and timely response by the United
Nations agencies and the international community and,

secondly, for the capacity-building of the institutions of
the State on the ground are the two most critical factors
that need to put in place. In terms of Somalia, those are
the two priority areas where we need the international
community to complete the cycle and the circle of
peacemaking and peacebuilding. That is necessary both
for the peacebuilding in the North and the North-East
and for the peacemaking in the South, where we are
engaged.

On behalf of Somalia and its people, we are ready
and we confirm our readiness to work with the
Secretary-General, the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the World Bank and all United Nations
agencies to carry through those two elements -
capacity-building, on the one hand, and the coordinated
and timely response led by the United Nations
agencies, on the other.

The indication and example of the international
community's involvement in Somalia, alongside our
own peacebuilding and peacemaking efforts, are
represented by the initiatives of the Security Council,
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
the African Union Mission in Somalia, and the forces
of Uganda and Burundi. Both Burundi and Uganda
have gone through the same experiences as us, and I
believe that they are the proof that the consistency of
the international community can help people on the
ground deliver the peacemaking and the peacebuilding
that we are discussing here today.

Despite the fact that 18 years have passed in
Somalia, the achievements in the North and the North-
East speak for themselves and for Somalia. The process
is now under way in the southern part of the country,
and we believe that we can complete that process and
close the current chapter of the history of Somalia.

