The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Cote d'Ivoire.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), for her presence and the quality
of her briefing. Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about
developments in Haiti. Indeed, the violent social
demonstrations of recent months, which have resulted
in the loss of human lives and significant material
damage, clearly show that this precarious situation
requires continued joint national and international
efforts for lasting stability in Haiti. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire welcomes MINUJUSTH's commitment
to working with the Haitian authorities to carry out
the activities related to its mandate, as outlined in the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2018/1059).

The Secretary-General's report calls for our
comments on the following points: the sociopolitical
and economic situation, the security situation, and the
implementation of the MINUJUSTH withdrawal and
the transition strategy.

On the sociopolitical and economic level, the
persistent crises in Haiti often reflect the socioeconomic
difficulties and political tensions that characterize the
country. Unfortunately, they jeopardize the ongoing
reconstruction efforts. In response to that worrying
situation, my delegation reiterates the need to address
the root causes of the crisis. It therefore recommends
that concrete measures be considered to alleviate the
daily difficulties of the people, combat corruption
and shed light on allegations of mismanagement of
PetroCaribe funds.

My delegation also welcomes the appointment
of a Minister-delegate for Human Rights and
the Fight against Extreme Poverty and urges
the Haitian authorities to pursue their relentless
efforts to restore stability in their country.
We also call for the promotion of an inclusive
national dialogue that would contribute
significantly to easing the political climate and to
implementing the principle of accountability, and
a guarantee of the independence of judges who
must conduct the necessary judicial proceedings.
It is therefore imperative that the international
community continue to support the Haitian authorities
in order to help them establish conditions conducive to
political stability and the holding of peaceful, credible
and transparent elections in October 2019.

With regard to the security situation, my delegation
welcomes the joint initiatives undertaken by the Haitian
authorities, in liaison with MINUJUSTH, to reduce the
level of violence and significantly strengthen security.
In that regard, we welcome the implementation of the
community violence reduction programme in hot-
spot areas.

My delegation encourages the continuation
of these beneficial initiatives, which contribute to
strengthening stability and security efforts by
raising public awareness of security and rule of law
issues and improving people's confidence in the
Haitian National Police and rule of law institutions.
However, Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned
about the persistent violence carried out by
criminal gangs, recurring violent protests
and the conditions in Haitian prisons.
In view of this situation, my delegation urges the
various parties, in particular the Haitian authorities, to
redouble their efforts to maintain a stable environment
and to accelerate the necessary legislative reforms in
order to ensure the strengthening of the rule of law.

With regard to the MINUJUSTH exit and transition
strategy, my delegation welcomes the Mission's support
for Haitian Government institutions in the areas of
justice, human rights and security. It also welcomes the
outstanding work done by MINUJUSTH in combating
violence and sexual exploitation. We are particularly
pleased by the progress made in the implementation
of the Mission's mandate, in line with the previously
defined objectives.

However, we remain concerned about the report's
conclusions with regard to the difficulties encountered
in improving the benchmarks. To that end, my delegation
urges the Government of Haiti to fully cooperate with
the United Nations for the success of the priority tasks
identified in advance in order to create the conditions
for a successful, smooth and effective transition without
a United Nations peacekeeping presence. It calls on
the international community to support the Haitian
Government in achieving the objectives of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and to support
it in the implementation of the 2018 humanitarian
response plan.

I congratulate all United Nations staff who are
working tirelessly and sometimes in difficult conditions
to build peace and development in Haiti. I also express
my country's solidarity with the Haitian people and
Government in their quest for stability, peace and
development.

In conclusion, I urge all parties to work towards
the success of the goals that have been set for the exit
strategy of MINUJUSTH in 2019.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

