Mr. Mekdad (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I believe
that the Council and the speakers who have spoken
during the past two days - and, if I am right, more
than 90 per cent of them - have spoken very clearly.
This Council should not in any way deal in double
standards.

Everyone who spoke at this meeting referred in
one way or another to Israel. Israel has not only spoiled
the situation in the Middle East, but has also
undermined the legal framework of collective
endeavours on the international scene. I believe that the
logic used by the representative of Israel condemns
him first and foremost. Occupation is rejected under
any pretext. It is a shame that someone comes to this
Council to defend occupation.

I can hardly believe that I am at the Security
Council in the midst of international legitimacy, the
edifice of international legitimacy. When I listen to
such false claims, lies, misrepresentations and
ridiculous statements, I remember how the world has
judged Israel as an aggressor, an occupier of other
peoples territories and as an outlaw, an international
outlaw.

When we speak of democracy, and we spoke a
while ago about the real Israeli democracy, which is a
democracy of killing, occupation, destruction, and the
oppression of all the States of the region with weapons
of mass destruction that everyone has said should be
destroyed as well.

The other issue that I would like to mention is
that the Israeli regime is a blood-thirsty regime by any
standard. It exercises State terrorism. Today, it directed
its tanks to bombard Rafah and killed 8 Palestinians.
Last week, they bombed Gaza and killed almost 18
innocent civilians, including many innocent children.
After all that, the representative of Israel dares to speak
of democracy. What kind of democracy is that? The
statement by the representative of Israel is a danger to
democracy and an affront to Israel. Democracy for
some and not everyone has been condemned by the
entire world.

The racist regime in South Africa pretended that
it was a democratic regime. It held elections. But this
Council attacked the racist regime in South Africa for
many years until it was eliminated. Incidentally, one of
the very few countries in the world that cooperated
with the racist regime in South Africa, as well as those
in Namibia and Zimbabwe, was Israel, whose
representative speaks about democracy. Israel ceased
cooperation with the racist regime in South Africa only
after that regime was totally eliminated. This is a fact
that everyone knows. And I do not need to recall it here
now. This is Israeli democracy.

What exactly are we talking about in this
Council? When we say that we want peace, we are
faced with tanks and jet fighters and artillery fire that
kill our people. When we ask for a comprehensive and
just peace, we are told that it will not be achieved
unless Israel annexes all the occupied Arab territories.

Democracy should come from within. It should
be the main feature of relations among nations and at
the international level as well. The State farthest from
democracy is Israel.

My country has its own democracy. We have
elections at all levels. During the next few days we will
witness the holding of elections of the Syrian
Parliament, free and democratic elections, such as
those held in any country in the world. But the biggest

lie that was uttered by the representative of Israel is the
one regarding Lebanon.
There is no other country in the world that speaks
more about Lebanese-Syrian ties than Israel. This
Council is the world. Is there a single representative in
this Council or outside that speaks more about
Lebanon-Syria than the Israeli representative? The
country that is most concerned about the unity,
integrity and independence of Lebanon and the
liberation of its territory that is still under occupation is
Syria. The country that is most concerned with the best
Lebanese Government that controls the situation in its
own country is Syria. But the reason why the Syrian
forces went into Lebanon is another issue. Lebanon
went through an extremely destructive civil war, such
as the wars that took place in the Balkans and in many
African countries. The international community
deployed tremendous efforts before Syria got involved
in Lebanon in order to solve the situation, but those
efforts were all futile.

One million Lebanese were forced to go to Syria
during the escalation of the Lebanese civil war. When
all the Lebanese forces and all the political parties in
Lebanon appealed to Syria to intervene, when Syria
received a formal request from the Lebanese
Government, to save the people and Government of
Lebanon, Syria intervened. There are agreements
between Syria and Lebanon on this Syrian military
presence in Lebanon that protects national
reconciliation and preserves the unity and integrity of
Lebanon at the request of the legitimate Lebanese
Government. Syria is prepared, as agreed with the
Lebanese Government, to consider its presence in
Lebanon in accordance with the wishes of the
legitimate Government in Lebanon. And it is a
legitimate Government, as we know. Israel has not
recognized that Government, but that is Israel's
problem.

I would also like to ask, is there a single
Government in the entire world that does not recognize
the present Lebanese Government? It seems that this is
only an Israeli problem. It shows the dissatisfaction of
Israel with what has been accomplished through
cooperation between brothers in Syria and Lebanon.
The Syrian youth who died in Lebanon number in the
thousands and all the Lebanese in all strata of Lebanese
society are grateful to Syria for the role it has played.
As Ijust stated, the Syrian presence in Lebanon is
governed by agreements between the two
Governments, and Syria is prepared to fulfil all
requests made by the Lebanese Government, but it is
clear that Israel is not pleased when there are such
brotherly ties between two Arab countries. That is a
problem for Israel. The ties between Lebanon and Syria
are those of brotherhood and cooperation and are based
on equality and friendly relations among nations. They
are based on the wishes of all the different sectors of
the Lebanese people.

Israel also has no right to interfere in Lebanese
affairs, or to claim to be concerned about Lebanon,
because it has killed thousands, I don't want to
exaggerate, but Israel has killed at least thousands, if
not tens of thousands of Lebanese citizens in the course
of three or four invasions of Lebanon that sometimes
reached the capital, Beirut. Israel destroyed everything
on the ground. This fact is well known to everyone.

I realize that everyone knows the facts, but I only
want to make it absolutely clear that the representative
of Israel cannot get away with false claims and lies
such as these. My colleagues tell me I have spoken at
length. I believe that is so and I will stop here.

