Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the
initiative of holding this timely debate on the report of
the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste
(S/2007/7ll).

We wish to commend the Security Council
delegation, under the leadership of Ambassador
Dumisani Kumalo of South Africa, for having
successfully discharged its mandate in accordance with
its terms of reference. We are pleased, in particular,
that the visit to the country was overwhelmingly
perceived as reaffirmation of the continued support for
and assistance to Timor-Leste by the United Nations
and the international community.

We highly value the timing of the visit of the
Security Council mission to the country. As rightly
stated in the report, the mission took place as the
country was confronting enormous challenges in trying
to recover from the crisis of 2006 and following the
first presidential and parliamentary elections, held in
April, May and June 2007. The mission also took place
well ahead of the Council's discussion on the renewal

of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), which will expire
on 26 February 2008.

The elections were clearly a step forward for
Timor-Leste in the consolidation of democracy, for
which the people and the leaders of Timor-Leste
deserve our deep appreciation. We share the mission's
observation that while progress has been made in
democratization, the root causes of last year's crisis
and its consequences are yet to be fully addressed.

A number of underlying political tensions from
the time of the crisis and the recent elections remain in
many sections of society. Central to the crisis were
issues of divisions in the leadership, weak institutions,
especially the security forces, and lack of solid
structures of Government. The problems stemming
from the crisis, such as the case of fugitive Major
Reinado, the petitioners and internally displaced
persons (IDPs), continue to pose serious challenges to
the peace and stability of the country.

On another note, we share the mission's
observation that poverty continues to be a major cause
of instability in Timor-Leste, where about 40 per cent
of the population still lives under the national poverty
line. We note with interest that youth employment has
been identified as a priority area by the Government in
the international compact for Timor-Leste. It is our
belief that there is a compelling need to integrate
development-related aspects with responses to the
security situation.

We have taken note that the Security Council
delegation held productive discussions and exchanges
of view with various interlocutors of Timor-Leste. The
delegation made effective use of these meetings to
explore ways and means to assist the country in
developing its capacities, in particular in the fields of
democratic governance and security, built on the gains
achieved thus far.

In this regard, we commend the determination of
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste, under
the leadership of President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmao, to restore stability and normalcy in
the country, while reaffirming their commitment to
democracy.
In the light of the enormous challenges faced by
the country, there is no doubt that continued support
and assistance from the international community to this
young country is needed. Strengthening State
institutions, security sector reform and economic
development should remain at the core of the
assistance.

It is our View that UNMIT should continue to
exercise its good offices role to contribute in resolving
the divergences among the political leadership which
continue to exist. This role is especially pertinent at a
time when national consensus is required to address the
serious challenges confronting the country, such as the
urgent need for national reconciliation, security sector
reform, restoring stability, addressing IDP issues,
strengthening democratic institutions and improving
governance.

It is also our view that UNMIT should encourage
the Government and the people of Timor-Leste to take
ownership and leadership of the country's
development, including in the implementation of
assistance programmes provided by the United Nations
and other partners.

Finally, it is important for the Council to reaffirm
its commitment to Timor-Leste in the promotion of
long-term stability in the country and in the attainment
of self-reliance.

The report of the Security Council mission to the
country and the report of the Secretary-General on the
progress made in the implementation of UNMIT's
mandate will allow the Council to assess the extent of
the United Nations support needed for Timor-Leste in
the future.

Indonesia, on its part, remains committed to
supporting Timor-Leste, in particular on a bilateral
basis, so that the country can achieve sustainable peace
and prosperity. Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to
enjoy excellent relations on the basis of forward-
looking and reconciliatory principles as we continue to
deepen and expand bilateral cooperation in various
fields.

