Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Sir, for holding today's debate and ensuring that this
Chamber hears the voices from civil society and your
own statement. It is quite rare to get a round of applause
from this audience. I also thank the Secretary-General
and to the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Human Rights Watch for their excellent contributions. I
pay tribute to them and their teams' work.

The United Nations Charter is clear. Protecting
civilians is supposed to be at the heart of what we do.
When Governments fail to protect, people look to the
Security Council for safety from the scourge of war.
But for civilians in Syria, South Sudan and so many
other places, this is not about words in the Charter or a
debate held once a year; it is a horrific daily reality. The
sheer scale of the need is unprecedented. The year 2016
saw record numbers of people needing assistance and
protection, so many of them victims of conflict and of
the flagrant violation of international humanitarian law,
so many of them becoming victims of sexual violence,
trafficking or other forms of slavery.

As our briefers make clear, that suffering has been

made worse through cruel, unconscionable attacks on

medical facilities. Look at the fall of Aleppo last year:

time and again the regime and its backers bombed that
city until all the hospitals were out of action, so that the
city could not even care for its injured. Sadly, the trend
is spreading. As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
urbanization of conflict in Aleppo, Mosul and Juba has
increased the risk of destruction of hospitals, schools,
water systems and power supplies. This cannot become
the new reality of warfare.

Fifteen years on from the Council's first formal
commitment to protecting civilians in armed conflict,
it is clear that we need a new approach. I therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's call to reinvigorate
a global campaign, which should take practical steps
to minimize civilian harm, protect those that are
displaced, ensure peacekeepers perform their best and
deliver accountability for those who flout compliance
with international law. In support, we should all do
four things.

First, we need to take practical steps to mitigate
impacts on the ground. For instance, work is ongoing
to fortify health-care facilities in Syria and to provide
access to mobile clinics in Yemen. In South Sudan,
United Kingdom peacekeepers are helping strengthen
the security and accessibility of United Nations
protection-of-civilians sites.

Secondly, we should share best practices. That
means the full participation of women in efforts to
protect civilians. It also means full compliance with
international humanitarian law by all. In the United
Kingdom, we train our military on international
humanitarian law throughout their careers, including
with country-specific courses before they deploy. We
are sharing our expertise to help other Governments
and their armed forces comply with international
humanitarian law and we are helping them to make
their military-justice systems more effective.

Thirdly, we need to collect better and more
systematic data on attacks on medical facilities
and personnel. We support the Secretary-General's
commitment to do this within the United Nations
system, but it is not enough to collect data; we need
to use it. We therefore call for more Council briefings
from the whole United Nations family, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Special Representative
for Children in Armed Conflict whenever attacks on
medical facilities and personnel occur.

Finally, the Council needs to take action when
violations occur. When States fail to act, it is our
responsibility to decide that these abuses will not
be tolerated, that we will hold those responsible
accountable. In this Chamber, we have a duty to shine
a light on those who fail to comply with international
law. We have a duty to collect the evidence that is so
essential for timely legal action against those who
attack medical personnel and facilities in violation of
international humanitarian law.

But we are not fulfilling that duty, not yet. So, today,
let us all recommit to using the Council's authority,
shouldering our responsibility to prevent conflict,
to protect civilians and to hold to account those who
violate international humanitarian law and those who
violate and abuse human rights. The United Kingdom
will continue to show leadership, including as part of
the Secretary-General's global campaign.

