Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, allow
me to start with the good news: I wish you a very
happy national day today. Also, let me congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
month of June. I also wish to express my thanks to the
delegation of Pakistan for having guided the Council so
well last month. So much for the good news.

A year ago, we met in this Chamber to debate the
issue that finally led to the adoption of resolution 1422
(2002). At the time, many delegations, including my
own, spoke out against the draft resolution, which
sought to grant immunity from the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to personnel from
States not party to the ICC Statute that are involved in
United Nations-established or -authorized missions.

Many delegations expressed the view that it was
an inappropriate action on the part of the Security
Council to use its authority under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter to call into question the
authority of the International Criminal Court conferred
upon it by an international treaty. The Council decided,
nonetheless, to adopt the resolution. That action cast a
shadow on the integrity of the ICC Statute, the
Criminal Court itself and the application of
international law.

One year later, the Council is called upon to agree
to a renewal of the resolution for a further 12 months,
an action that would allow this situation to continue
and that might eventually lead to the resolution being
extended indefinitely. That, in the view of my
delegation, would be unacceptable, and we call on
members of the Security Council to refrain from
allowing this situation to continue.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Court is undoubtedly one of the major achievements of
the international community in its campaign against
impunity in its promotion of international criminal
justice. All Member States participated in the process
that led to the adoption of the Rome Statute, and in the
work of the Preparatory Commission that resulted in
the Court becoming a reality. The fact that there are
currently 90 States parties attests to the widespread
support the Court enjoys, and the number of pending
ratifications clearly indicates the Court's universal
acceptance. It is also encouraging that the Court is now
fully operational and will soon be in a position to take
on cases.

The creation of the International Criminal Court
is evidence of an emerging norm in international law
that would ensure that those accused of the most
serious crimes, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, are either prosecuted by
competent national authorities or handed over for
prosecution by a duly instituted international court. We
would hope that the Security Council would actively
promote this emerging norm in international law.

We once again urge the Security Council - the
same Council that is entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security - to use its authority
wisely and in the interest of humankind as a whole, and
not to allow itself to jeopardize the ICC or to frustrate
the ends of international criminal justice.

