Mr. Toro Jimenez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Government and the people of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, we would like to reiterate our heartfelt
and categorical repudiation of the terrorist acts recently
committed against the British people.

Deliberating and taking decisions on courses of
action in areas such as terrorism, which is a crucial
item on the agenda of the Organization and of the
Council, is fraught with danger and the risk of
distortion, unless the guiding principle used to shed
light on the truth and reach conclusions is one that
provides a historical and holistic perspective. The
principle to which I am referring is no other than the
historical reconstruction of the process of the
emergence of terrorism at the international level and
the various stages and manifestations of that
phenomenon. By revisiting the past in an examination
of history we can assess the period between the last
two violent confrontations of the twentieth century -
the so-called world wars - in order to identify the
emergence of capitalistic, despotic, racist, bellicose,
totalitarian, imperialistic and, to varying degrees,
genocidal States that were led by demented ideologies
in an attempt to not only further subjugate their own
peoples but also those on the world's periphery who
had been subsumed in the colonial backwardness of
ignorance, political and social exclusion and poverty
and who were deprived of the most basic human rights.
I am referring to the tragic European and Asian
misadventures in National Socialism, fascism and
falangism, as well as the Japanese militarism
hearkening back to theocracy.

At that stage of the imperialist phase of
international monopolistic capitalism, and faced with
the uncontainable surge of peoples supported by the
actions of the first socialist State, which emerged in
1917, some capitalist States reacted by employing the
systematic political use of extreme terror in order to
ensure collective obedience through intimidation and
threats to life and liberty, thereby suppressing all
dissent against their genocidal plans and actions.
Nevertheless, at the time of the Second World War, the
democratic traditions and movements that had emerged
in Europe, the North American continent and other
places led to a marshalling of forces that was able to
thwart that criminal and suicidal movement against the
Western world driven by extremist political agents of
monopolistic capitalism.

In the post-war period, from 1945 until the end of
the twentieth century, in the context of the historic
conflict between capitalism and the principal socialist
States and of the bipolar confrontation within the so-
called Western world, peoples continued to advance in
their key role of breaking the chains of oppression in
the process of decolonization. In order to stop the
popular advance, the international capitalistic
monopoly needed additional financing. To that end, it
pursued its exploitation and pillaging of the peoples
and resources of marginalized countries in order to test
and develop new conventional and unconventional
weapons of mass destruction, strengthening its
capacities especially in the area of nuclear, chemical
and bacteriological weapons targeting the socialist
States in particular - its most Visible adversaries - as
a means of dissuasion, and using dependent countries
as the testing grounds of its new weapons of
extermination.

The collapse of the Soviet Union and the world
socialist system opened a brief period of uncertainty in
the military and economic policies of the West. The
expansion was brought to a temporary halt by the
unexpected downfall of the champions of popular rule,
in line with the prediction of history's coming to an
end made by Francis Fukuyama, who foresaw that the
expansionists would soon identify as new ideological
enemies those countries with the most important fossil
fuel resources. This was followed by wars against
Afghanistan, Iraq and the fragile Palestinian State that
was just emerging, as well as the supposed threat posed
by Iran, all covered under the so-called clash of
civilizations proclaimed by Professor Samuel
Huntington. That scenario also explains the attempted
coups against the democratic revolutionary
Government of our President Hugo Chavez Frias in
April and December 2002.

Given the profound and deepening gulf between
the States of the G7 - and later, the G8 - and the
sufferings of the majority of the peoples of the South,
the victims have declared themselves in overt rebellion
against and defiance of the lead role of the
transnational capitalist monopoly. In the 60 years since
the defeat of European Nazism, the Government of the
United States and its imperialist allies have assumed
the military, political ideological role once played by
that movement in the destruction of the marginalized
world and are now threatening the very foundations of
the biosphere with annihilation. That contemporary
manifestation of repression is State terrorism. It has a
long history of malfeasance throughout the planet to
which the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America
can bear witness. The firm resolve of peoples to stand
up to the latest version of State terrorism practised by
the United States and its allies is evident in the
decision to use apocalyptic weaponry against the
courageous resistance of peoples who have bravely
sacrificed many lives in repelling the invaders and their
abuses.

The United States Senate recently authorized the
renewed production of miniature or tactical nuclear
weapons, which are said to be more efficiently deadly
than the genocidal experiments in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, at a time when popular revolt seems not only
to be irreversible, but also to be threatening the two-
pronged power of the almighty Pentagon to wage war
on two fronts simultaneously. That decision of the
United States Senate runs counter to the commitments
undertaken by the United States in article VI of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
to the very spirit and meaning of that convention, and,
obviously, to the United Nations Charter.

As a nation and a people, Venezuelans jointly
condemn and repudiate terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations as a lethal political instrument for the
extermination and intimidation of innocent peoples
throughout the world, including by those who justify
their actions as collateral effects of foreign invasion.
At the same time, we recognize the activities of those
who fight foreign invasion and lay down their lives for
freedom, self-determination, sovereignty and respect
for human rights. In such cases, it is necessary to
distinguish clearly between terrorist acts and the
legitimate defence of fundamental freedoms under
threat.

My delegation also believes that another powerful
and effective aspect of terrorism is clearly the ongoing
system of lies and manipulation on the part of the
national and international media at the service of
imperialism, seeking to conceal the truth from peoples
who are fighting for self-determination and to forge
their destiny in a new world.

We ourselves have suffered from terrorism, such
as the criminal assassination by car-bomb of Danilo
Anderson, a high-ranking civil servant in the
Venezuelan Justice Department, on 18 November 2004.
The perpetrators of that crime are being dealt with by
the judicial authorities. My delegation also recalls the
case, already brought to the attention of this Council,
of the action taken by my Government with respect to
Luis Posada Carriles, a Venezuelan terrorist who has
sought asylum in the United States. That co-author of
the bombing of a Cuban aircraft in 1976, in which
innocent youth were killed, is a criminal notorious
throughout the world and a fugitive from Venezuelan
justice. We expect a speedy, positive response from the
United States authorities to our request so that justice
can be done. In any case, the safe haven being given to
the fugitive is in clear violation of paragraph 2 of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
scrupulously fulfilled Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). In that
regard, we have also submitted the relevant mandatory
reports in a timely fashion.

Finally, we reiterate what we have said before
other United Nations bodies: The solution to terrorism
is not more terrorism - in other words, war. We need
to dismantle that perverse and criminal mechanism
through the constructive, peaceful and just deployment
of political means focused on the self-determination of
peoples.

