Mr. Carr (Australia): I am pleased that my first
address to the Security Council is about the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I acknowledge the Russian presidency for the month
of March. I acknowledge, as well, the presence of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Afghanistan's
Permanent Representative, Zahir Tanin. I also recognize
Special Representative Jan Kubis for his leadership of
the United Nations Mission in Kabul.

This year's UNAMA mandate will cover a crucial
period for Afghanistan. The Government will work to
address the economic and fiscal impact of transition,
intensify its preparations for the presidential election
in 2014, lead progress in the reconciliation process and
take lead responsibility for security.

As the transition moves forward, UNAMA's
support to Afghanistan will become more, not less,
important. As Afghanistan moves through transition
to its transformation decade, it is important to
note the progress that has been made over the past
10 years. Through the leadership of its Government,
the determination of its fine people and the support of
the international community, Afghanistan has come
a long way. Large parts of the country have been
made significantly safer. Afghan people now live
much longer. Nearly 8 million people are enrolled in
schools today, including more than 2.7 million girls.
Approximately 85 per cent of the population have
access to health care. The Afghan economy is growing
at 8 per cent per annum. Security gains have ensured
that Afghanistan will never again be a safe haven for
international terrorism. Development and governance
gains have helped to ensure that the international
community will have a stable partner. I am confident
that the years ahead will see the Afghan Government
protect those gains.

But to achieve that, the international community
must remain in Afghanistan. We must send a clear
message that Afghanistan will not stand alone.
International support has been instrumental to
Afghanistan's progress. At the Chicago Summit and the
Tokyo Conference last year, we committed to standing
with Afghanistan well beyond transition.

The Council's mandate for UNAMA will provide
the Mission with the certainty and capacity it needs to
support Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General noted
in his report (S/2013/l33), it is essential that UNAMA
be resourced to fulfil its mandate, this year and beyond,
and to maintain a meaningful presence in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan will face some significant challenges.
The next 12 months will set the stage for the completion
of Afghanistan's political and security transitions in
2014. By the end of 2013, Afghanistan will have lead
responsibility for security across the country - a major
milestone. The Afghan National Security Forces have
proved capable as transition has progressed. Australia
is confident that, with consistent international support,
their capacities will continue to improve, as will their
ability to provide security for Afghanistan.

The Afghan Government must also implement
economic and governance reforms to promote growth
and fiscal responsibility. With international support,
that Afghan-led reform process is under way.

UNAMA works with the Afghan Government
and international partners to implement the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework, under which
the international community recognizes and meets
Afghanistan's legitimate needs for assistance and
Afghanistan remains committed to strengthening
governance and promoting respect for human rights
and the rule of law.

Advancing the opportunities for women and
girls in Afghanistan will remain a major priority for
Australia. We very much welcome the references in
resolution 2096 (2013), on UNAMA, to the need for
measurable objectives to secure the rights of women
and girls, as well as the need to counter discrimination.
We condemn absolutely all forms of violence against
women and girls.

Afghanistan must also continue its progress in
fighting corruption and bank fraud, strengthening
human rights and building the capacity of State
institutions. Support for UNAMA is an important
element in those endeavours, and UNAMA's role in
coordinating and delivering international assistance
remains essential well beyond 2014.

In order to entrench good governance and
conditions for growth, it is essential that Afghan society
be underpinned by solid political foundations. The 2014
elections are fundamental. We encourage the Afghan
Government to drive preparations for the presidential
election.

As those elections near, it is critical that the Afghan
Government set up an appropriate electoral framework.
The Government must lead the way to inclusive
elections which are accepted by the Afghan people. We
encourage them to utilize international assistance and
work with UNAMA to strengthen the integrity of the
election process, consistent with the Mission's mandate.

A political settlement will be necessary in order
to achieve a secure Afghanistan. Military force alone
will not bring stability. Recent momentum in the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process
is heartening. Our expectations must remain realistic.
We support the High Peace Council's efforts to build
the conditions for reconciliation, including by ensuring
that the Security Council's Taliban sanctions regime is
flexible enough to support an Afghan-led process.

As the Secretary-General notes, UNAMA's unique
comparative advantage is its broad presence and
political outreach. Adequate resources and an effective
mandate will allow UNAMA to support Afghanistan
through transition and beyond. UNAMA will therefore
be able to meet its long-term commitment to the
Government and the people of Afghanistan.

That mandate provides a sound basis for UNAMA
to continue to support Afghanistan on behalf of the
United Nations and the international community.
Council members, and the wider UN membership, have
a stake in Afghanistan's future security and stability.
The adoption of resolution 2096 (2013) renewing
UNAMA's mandate highlights the unity of purpose
between the international community and the Afghan
Government in promoting Afghanistan's future security
and stability.

Australia has welcomed the responsibility
of coordinating Security Council discussions on
Afghanistan during our Council term. In that role,
we will continue to work with Afghanistan and
international partners to support the country through
transition and beyond.

