Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I would also like
to welcome Prime Minister Ivica Dacie and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaci at this Council meeting. Today
I wish to make three points on the situation in Kosovo.
First, the Republic of Korea welcomes the
substantial progress achieved in the implementation of
the historic 19 April agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina. Thanks to the excellent political leadership
of Prime Minister Dacie and Prime Minister Thaci,
numerous challenges have been overcome and progress
has been sustained in many important areas, including
law enforcement, telecommunication and energy. The
active engagement of the European Union, in particular,
of High Representative Catherine Ashton, was also
instrumental in to those achievements. In that light, we
call on Belgrade and Pristina to continue building on
those hard-earned achievements and to scale up ongoing
efforts towards the normalization of their relations.

Secondly, we are pleasedto note that the 3 November
municipal elections in Kosovo and the rerun election in
northern Kosovo were carried out in a largely successful
manner. Both Belgrade and Pristina, with the support
of the international community, particularly of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
devoted every effort to ensuring the success of the
elections. We believe the latest elections demonstrate
positive prospects for the future consolidation of peace
and stability in Kosovo as well as the region. Against
that backdrop, however, the need to rerun the elections
in northern Kosovo highlights the difficult challenges
facing both Belgrade and Pristina. That reminds us that
the grievances and concerns of the Serb minority in
northern Kosovo remain an impediment to achieving
durable peace and genuine reconciliation. Moving
forward, it will be vital for Kosovo and Belgrade to
engage in post-election efforts to win the hearts and
minds of ethnic Serbs. As such, we call on both sides to
work closely together to find practical ways to address
both their economic and political concerns and to
enhance their integration into Kosovo society.

Finally, we are concerned about incidents of
violence such as that which caused the tragic death of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
customs officer, as well as about the violence that affected
the elections in northern Kosovo on 3 November. Such
violence, which served no one's interest, only damaged
the fledgling peace and security on the ground. We
urge all the parties concerned to work closely together
to hold the perpetrators accountable and to prevent any
reccurance of violence. Once again, we commend all
the staff of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, EULEX and other international
partners for their tireless efforts and sacrifices towards
the continued peace and stability of Kosovo.

