Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the valuable briefing delivered by the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda.

Peru deplores the continuing armed conflict in
Libya, including the indiscriminate and deliberate
attacks on the people and on civilian infrastructure,
which have resulted in numerous civilian casualties
and the displacement of thousands. We reiterate
our strong condemnation of the many signs of the
commission of atrocity crimes and the grave situation
caused by Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

Almost nine years ago, as part of its concrete
efforts to tackle impunity, the Council expressed its
confidence in the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court by referring the situation in Libya to
it (see S/PV.6491). In that connection, we reaffirm
the validity of the values of the Rome Statute and the
importance of ensuring that States cooperate with the
Court. In particular, we call on the Libyan authorities,
as well as those of any other States concerned, to
execute the arrest warrants ordered by the Court,
especially those against Mahmoud Al-Werfalli and
in the other cases mentioned by the Prosecutor,
whose multiple and despicable crimes continue to go
unpunished and undermine the confidence that judicial
institutions need if they are to be an effective deterrent.
The Council must consider measures to tackle these
situations, as the representative of Belgium mentioned.
In that context, we reiterate our firm support for the
mandate of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. All cooperation with her work, particularly by
States parties, must be understood as an opportunity to
strengthen justice and the rule of law in the domestic
and international arenas.

The armed conflict in Libya has also increased the
space available to terrorist organizations such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its affiliates,
as well as Boko Haram, which is taking advantage
of the power vacuum to control territory, carry out
heinous attacks and associate with organized crime. We
welcome the fact that in accordance with the principle
of complementarity, the Office of the Prosecutor is also
considering such situations, as well as others that we
have mentioned, as atrocity crimes, including their
possible link to ongoing investigations.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that confidence
in justice, the rule of law and the institutions responsible
for guaranteeing it is key to resolving and preventing the
conflicts affecting a growing number of countries. The
International Criminal Court must therefore continue
to play the vital role for which it was created, that is,
fulfilling its responsibility to protect populations and
ensure accountability for atrocity crimes, as a central

element of the international rules-based order that we
all defend.

