Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): This afternoon's debate on the situation in
South Sudan is most timely, especially after the recent
developments that have taken place in the political
context of this brother country. I therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for including this issue on the agenda for
this meeting.

As usual, the report (S/2018/831) presented by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix - whom we sincerely
thank - has been most comprehensive and illustrative
regarding the current situation on the ground.

We thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative for South Sudan and Mr. Ismail Wais,
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for South Sudan, as well as
Ms. Grace John, Governance and Peace Manager
for Community Empowerment, for their very
informative briefings.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea would like
once again to pay tribute to the hard work and efforts of
IGAD, the African Union, the United Nations and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
bring the parties to the conflict closer to implementing
the signed Agreement in the quest for peace and
stability in South Sudan.

When it comes to this conflict, my country has
always advocated that the parties must respect the
ceasefire and return to the negotiating table. Today
we can say, with a high degree of optimism and some
satisfaction, that that objective has been met. All
delegations present should congratulate themselves as,
in part, this ceasefire is due to the attention given and
the pressure exerted by the Security Council.

Equatorial Guinea has closely followed the high-
level diplomacy that has, in recent months, facilitated
the evolution of the peace process that began with the
signing of an important declaration of a joint agreement.
That established a permanent ceasefire and introduced
commitments in some of the areas of greatest tension.
We cannot help but applaud those steps, which
tunequivocally constitute a step in the right direction.

However, we are concerned about the latest attacks
mentioned in the report presented today, which we note
were caused by famine and a lack of employment and
schooling. We appeal to the sense ofresponsibility of all
parties to the conflict; we remind them of the historic
moment for which they are responsible before people
and the international community and we strongly
condemn the attacks.

We want to remind all parties involved that, in
addition to seeking peace, they have an obligation to
meet the humanitarian needs of the population, which
is dealing with poverty, food insecurity and a shortage
of basic services. The fulfilment of that obligation
will be successful only when humanitarian operations
are able to take place and when threats and risks to
humanitarian organizations and their courageous
personnel are eliminated.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its great satisfaction at the signing of the final Peace
Agreement last week in Addis Ababa by the parties
involved in the South Sudan conflict, under the
auspices of IGAD, the African Union and countries of
the region. We offer our warmest congratulations to
all, but especially to the Government of South Sudan,
for this definitive Peace Agreement that broadens out
a new horizon of hope for the country and its people.
We may finally see lasting peace established, which
should bring with it the dividends of development in
all aspects.

However, that new horizon will become a reality
only ifall ofthe parties to the recently signed Agreement
comply with and respect all its clauses. The commitment
of the parties to the agreement is key, as is the support
and due attention of the international community
when it comes to the effective materialization of this
significant agreement. Through it, it will be possible
to effectively achieve the peace so yearned for by the
people of South Sudan.

However, we would like to point out that the
signing of the Agreement does not complete the work
of the United Nations, or that of the regional actors,
including IGAD, the African Union and neighbouring
countries. The post-conflict period, which is extremely
complex and requires special attention, must now be
effectively managed. On the basis of what happens on
the ground, UNMISS must adjust its activities, focus on
direct support for the effective implementation of the
Agreement and ensure a sense of calm in the country.

We hope that, with the signing of the revitalized
Agreement, a new phase will also give way to create
more opportunities to provide assistance to the local
population - from food assistance to the repatriation
of displaced persons to their homes of origin. As
the reports presented to us have pointed out, the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan continues to be
of great concern. The problem of famine and the issue
of human rights must be addressed urgently so that they
receive the priority attention they deserve.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea urges the Government of South Sudan to
continue with its consistent cooperation with UNMISS,
IGAD and the African Union so that together they can
achieve their sole objective to achieve the peace and
stability that the people of South Sudan deserve. For
Equatorial Guinea, the reports on the humanitarian
situation and human rights are a matter of concern. We
hope that there will be improvement in that regard.

In conclusion, our Government commends the
recent news of moving displaced persons from the
United Nations protection sites to new locations
within the community, as well as the conviction by a
South Sudanese military court of 10 soldiers to serve
life sentences for the commission of various atrocity
crimes. We hope that the Government of South Sudan
will continue to demand accountability for all those
guilty of heinous crimes, not just against humanitarian
personnel but also against the people of South Sudan,
who so fervently hope for peace and tranquillity.

I would like to end by paying well-deserved tribute
to Mr. Haysom for the successful and noble work he
carried out in South Sudan, where he leaves with his
head held high and duties fulfilled upon the signing of
the Peace Agreement. We wish him the same success in
Somalia and hope that he can contribute to the return
of peace and stability in that sister nation in the Horn
of Africa.

