Mr. Yang Jiechi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me first congratulate France on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for September. I am
delighted to see President Sarkozy personally preside
over today's meeting.

A harmonious world of enduring peace and
common prosperity would be beyond our reach without
stability and development in Africa. The African
people seek a stable and developing Africa, that serves
the common interests of all countries. The United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, is duty-
bound to help Africa maintain and build peace and
embark on the road toward durable prosperity and
stability.

Peace in Africa faces both opportunities and
challenges. It is necessary to make comprehensive
efforts at the national, regional and global levels to
achieve peace. Reconciliation, development and
cooperation should be the three major pillars
underpinning peace in Africa.

Reconciliation is the key to peace in Africa. All
of the ethnic groups and factions in countries
concerned should put the national interest above
everything else and endeavour to advance an inclusive
political process, protect human rights, restore the rule
of law, work together to promote national development
and enable all people to benefit from peace dividends.
Disputes between States should be resolved through
dialogue and consultation. That is the right way to
address them. One cannot choose one's neighbour, but
can certainly learn to live with one's neighbour.
Differences are inevitable, but ways can always be
found to iron them out.

Development is the basis for peace in Africa.
Conflicts are invariably accompanied by poverty,
forming a vicious cycle. In the last analysis, peace in
Africa hinges on whether there is faster economic and
social progress, whether the Millennium Development
Goals can be met as scheduled and whether the benefit
of development can reach all. The rich natural
resources in Africa should be a source of peace, not
war. Conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding should all aim to promote development.
We support the international community's efforts to
help Africa in terms of capital, technology and
governance. But there should be respect for African
countries' national conditions and development
models, and one should not impose one's own way on
them.

Cooperation is the means to achieve peace in
Africa. Only unity among African countries can lead to
a bright future for the continent. The African Union
has, since its founding, played an effective role in
resolving the Darfur issue and the Somalia issue. This
fully shows that the African people are capable of
resolving their problems in their own way. The
international community, for its part, has a pressing
need and, more importantly, the moral obligation to
help Africa. We support the United Nations and the
Security Council in providing more assistance to
regional organizations in institution-building,
information sharing, personnel training and
peacekeeping operations. When the Security Council
decides to take mandatory measures, it should pay
particular attention to the views of African countries.

The Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation was successfully held last
November, during which it was decided to establish
and develop a new type of China-Africa strategic
partnership. A symbol of further growth of traditional
China-Africa friendship, this partnership will boost
China-Africa cooperation and contribute to world
peace and development. China will, acting on the
principles of equality and mutual trust, mutual respect,
mutual benefit and common development, continue to
strengthen its cooperation with Africa and work
together with the international community to promote
peace and development in Africa.

