Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): The
ongoing and concrete commitment of your country,
Madame President, to peacebuilding and development
underlies the wise choice by your presidency of the
topic of today's debate. It is a welcome coincidence
that this debate complements that convened by the
presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina last month,
which we welcome. It allows us to undertake in-depth
consideration and to act together to develop a truly
integrated approach of the Security Council in
addressing conflicts.

The persistence of conflicts, their human and
financial costs, and the imperatives of stability in the
post-conflict phase require early interaction between
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding phases. The
establishment of lasting peace demands judicious
management of the critical transition between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That transitional
phase must be addressed through an approach that
allies security imperatives with development activities
to stabilize a State emerging from conflict. This critical
phase must be approached with a keen awareness of the
high risk of relapse into conflict.

Interlinkages between security and development
are complex, and the transition to peacebuilding must
be managed cautiously in an international environment
characterized by the growing collusion among
transnational criminal gangs, non-State actors and
shadowy terror networks working together to weaken
States, as they do in the Sahel-Sahara region.

The United Nations post-conflict presence must
help to develop national strategies targeting such key
priorities as the promotion of women's rights, youth
employment, the protection of vulnerable social
groups, the establishment of the rule of law and the
strengthening of State institutions. It is vital in that vast
undertaking that the United Nations efforts be
effectively coordinated so as to mesh the establishment
of peace, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development in a coherent manner. The Peacebuilding
Commission has a key role to play in that context.

It is essential that the international community
strengthen the capacities of the host State to reduce
poverty, economic recovery and provide basic services.
Practice has amply demonstrated the critical
importance of national ownership of peacebuilding.
The leadership role of the host State faces challenges,
but it is essential in that it allows for a better
articulation of a national recovery strategy that
combines all dimensions of peace, security and
development. In that regard, it is important to promote
the necessary synergy and coordination among national
and international structures and to mobilize sustained
resources.

The United Nations must strengthen its capacities
to define integrated strategies from the outset and to
coordinate the activities of the various stakeholders on
the ground responsible both for security and for
development. This will contribute to making the
international community's actions more coherent and
coordinated. Moreover, the international economic
assistance provided by bilateral donors and
international financial institutions must target projects
that take account of a given country's economic, social
and even cultural realities, its particular capacities and
the prospects it offers to foreign investors. In that
respect, our active policy is to support peacebuilding in
many African countries, targeting multiplier sectors
that contribute to human development, such as
education, safe drinking water and electrification in
rural areas.

Above and beyond the efforts of the United
Nations and the international community to establish,
maintain and build peace, their role in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention remains
critical and must be developed, strengthened and
adequately endowed with financial and human
resources in the interests of peace and international
security.

