Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for convening
this meeting and Mr. Pascoe for briefing us. I would
also like to thank the representative of the Palestinian
State and the Permanent Representative of Israel for
the statements they made. They added their own
assessments and gave us a small sample of the
obstacles and the difficulties we have yet to overcome.

Although this is Costa Rica's third term of
membership in the Security Council, it is the first time
that we are taking part in a debate on the Middle East,
an item that has been on the Council's agenda since
24 February 1948. It therefore seems appropriate to me
to sum up, in a few words, our vision for peace in the
Middle East from the United Nations perspective and
from the perspective of the Security Council.

Our Vision began to take shape when we voted on
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) on 29 November
1947. On that day, along with 32 other nations, we
supported the independence of Palestine and the
partition of its lands into two States. We proposed
delimiting the borders, supported provisions for the
economic union and committed ourselves to supporting
membership of both States in the United Nations.

Today, a little more than six decades later, we are

still prepared to promote the idea of two States that live

in peace, respect their differences, promote the

enjoyment of human rights for their populations and
cooperate in the promotion of their well-being.

Accordingly, we understand our service in the
Security Council as a great opportunity to support any
efforts that may lead, finally, to a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.

However, we are duty-bound to note that the road
to peace and the desired coexistence is full of
obstacles. In recent weeks and months, from Annapolis
to Gaza, we have seen hope re-emerge yet again, only
to disappear in the face of violence and humanitarian
drama. This story is nothing new. It is the interminable
repetition of the trauma that has dashed the hopes of
generations of Palestinians and Israelis. It is the eternal
history of lost opportunities.

One might believe that those are distant and
foreign realities for us Central Americans. That is not
true. Less than two decades ago in Central America,
blood was shed, and it was shed for the same reasons
that it continues to be shed in Israel and Palestine. In
Central America, as in Palestine and in Israel, others
provided the weapons and we provided the dead.

When one looks at the history of the past six
decades in the Middle East, one clearly sees
interference by foreign interests, which have prevented
the Palestinians and the Israelis from peacefully
resolving their differences. Only open interference by
foreign interests could explain why it will take still
more time for Prime Minister Olmert and President
Abbas to fulfil the commitment that they undertook a
few weeks ago when they expressed their
"determination to bring an end to bloodshed, suffering
and decades of conflict between our peoples, to usher
in a new era of peace based on freedom, security,
justice, dignity, respect and mutual recognition".

Perhaps because this drama is not foreign to us -
because we also killed one another for others'
interests - we understand this tragedy. It took us time,
as it has taken time in the Middle East, to understand
that the solution lay with ourselves. Just like them, we
had to experience pain to finally understand that it
takes more courage to agree than it does to disagree.
We understood, again with pain, that it is easier to erect
walls than to build bridges.

Today, however, we have faith. We believe that,
at last, men like Mahmoud Abbas and Ehud Olmert are
good omens for a better life for Palestinians and
Israelis. They must set out on the path undertaken
much earlier by Itzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat. They
must build peace on so much pain - which is often the
most fertile ground where hope can flourish.

The international community, particularly the
Security Council, has a fundamental role to play. But to
carry out that mission, the Council must also overcome
its own contradictions. For Costa Rica, it is regrettable
that the humanitarian tragedy of Gaza and the terrorist
attacks on populations in southern Israel have occurred
amid the silence of the Council. If we do not overcome
our own differences and set aside our particular
interests, we cannot play the role that those who yearn
to live in peace call on us to play. The Security Council
in particular must finally move foreign interests away
from Palestinians and Israelis and ensure respect for
the goodwill born in Oslo and reaffirmed many times
already.

What we need to do now, from our perspective, is
to advocate a comprehensive approach in the
negotiations and to abandon plans for successive
negotiation phases. We need to leave behind
approaches requiring that one phase be exhausted
before the next can begin. These phased negotiation
schemes have been the trap in which hope has often
been imprisoned. What we must do now is address core
issues, as Olmert and Abbas agreed in Annapolis when
they expressed their determination to "launch bilateral
negotiations in order to conclude a peace treaty to
resolve all remaining issues, including core issues,
without exception".

We note with satisfaction the resolve of Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas. We welcome the
fact that, in the gloomy atmosphere of the past two
weeks, they mustered the determination to have a
conversation last Sunday. Their generosity should lead
to final negotiations. It is no longer possible to delay
negotiations on the borders and the settlements, the
issue of refugees and their compensation and their right
of return and, in addition, the status of the city of
Jerusalem. The vision of a final agreement will
undoubtedly be an element that will strengthen the
work of those who are fighting for a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
17
The Security Council must ensure conditions that
enable the Israelis and the Palestinians to take their fate
into their own hands, without interference by those
who wish to stir up the conflict so that hatred and
intolerance will prevail. Once we have ensured
Palestinian and Israeli ownership of the process, the
international community and this Council must also
facilitate final negotiations on core issues and
guarantee a framework of respect for its decisions.

Finally, we are concerned about the situation in
Lebanon, where a situation of daily violence is
continuing and intolerance has also taken root. Costa
Rica rejects terrorist Violence and welcomes the fact
that, at least in this case, the Security Council has
reached the consensus necessary to condemn that
violence. We are confident in the integrity and unity of
the Lebanese people so that normalcy will return to
their political and institutional life and peace will
return to the country's inhabitants.

