The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first open meeting of the Security Council for the
month of October, I should like to take the opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Stefan Tafrov, Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria to the United Nations, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of September 2002. I am sure I speak for all the
members of the Council in expressing my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Tafrov for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Costa Rica, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Egypt, Ethiopia, Fiji, Georgia, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Liechtenstein, Nepal, the Philippines, Pakistan, Peru,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso),
Mr. Ouch (Cambodia), Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica),
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo),
Ms. Laj (Denmark), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia), Mr. Naidu (Fiji),
Mr. Adamia (Georgia), Mr. Gopinathan (India),
Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic ofIran), Mr. Lancry
(Israel), Mr. Haneda (Japan), Ms. Jarbussynova
(Kazakhstan), Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein),
Mr. Sharma (Nepal), Mr. Manalo (Philippines),
Mr. Akram (Pakistan), Mr. De Rivero (Peru),
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Mejdoub
(Tunisia), Mr. Cengizer (Turkey), Mr. Kuchinsky
(Ukraine), Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen), Mr. Sahovie
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Musambachime (Zambia)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultation, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to His Excellency Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.

It is so decided.

I invite Sir Jeremy Greenstock to take a seat at
the Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 2 October 2002 from the Charge
d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of the
Sudan to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Islamic
Group, I have the honour to request that
Ambassador Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to the United Nations, be invited to
participate in the debate in the Security Council
on item entitled 'Threats to international peace
and security caused by terrorist acts', in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/1105.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ambassador Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamani to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 2 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the African
Group for the month of October 2002, I have the
honour to request that Ambassador Amadou
Kebe, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, be invited to participate in
the debate in the Security Council to be held on 4
October 2002 on the item entitled 'Threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts', in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter and rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

This letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/lll2.

In the absence of objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to
Ambassador Kebe under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure.

It is so decided.

I invite Ambassador Kebe to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. At this meeting
the Council will hear a briefing by the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, Sir Jeremy Greenstock.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
of the Secretary-General at this meeting, and I invite
him to take the floor.


