Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for having convened this important
debate. I would also like to thank Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
his briefing today.

The protection of civilians encompasses a set of
principles, standards and policies aimed at diminishing
the impact of conflicts on people who do not
participate directly in them. Unfortunately, however,
those people are their main victims. When we talk
about the protection of civilians, we generally speak
about an attachment to legality and respect for
international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and human rights.

That is why we vehemently reject the conduct of
those who use situations of armed conflict as an excuse

to ignore standards such as the principle of distinction
between civilian and military targets or the principle of
proportionality in the use of force. We condemn
indiscriminate attacks and the unlimited use of arms
that cause excessive damage, retaliation against
defenceless populations and belligerent actions that
bypass the necessary precautions to minimize the
impact of conflicts on civilian populations.

In recent years, we have been concerned by the
growing number of civilian casualties, which become
the "collateral damage" of military operations. This
euphemism is not a moral or legal excuse to justify the
harm caused to civilian populations. That is why we
believe that any incident in which civilian populations
are primarily affected must be investigated with a View
to holding to account those who have violated the
standards that prevail in conflict situations.

When the Security Council debates the protection
of civilians, it does so in a very specific context and
language. This is neither an academic forum, nor a
body geared exclusively towards political deliberation
or debate. This debate, as with all held by the Security
Council, must be an instrument to guide and to
facilitate specific decision-making. That is why the
challenges facing us are primarily of a practical nature,
requiring more international cooperation and greater
coordination between the Security Council and other
bodies and agencies of the Organization.

In order to overcome those challenges, we also
believe that the Security Council must invest greater
efforts in three key areas: the prevention of conflicts
and of their recurrence, early warning systems, and
rapid and effective responses to situations specifically
threatening civilian populations.

Human security is multidimensional and
comprehensive. In this understanding, insecurity in any
of its dimensions has an affect on a situation in its
entirety. That is why we must continue to address the
deep-rooted causes that lead to conflicts, and above all
to prevent their recurrence.

In this respect, we believe it necessary to
continue strengthening initiatives such as the
Peacebuilding Commission, a useful instrument of
great potential, in order to prevent the recurrence of
conflict. Likewise, the building and strengthening of
national capacities in judicial matters, security sector
reform and rule of law reform are all major pillars of
conflict prevention strategies.

In the area of early warning, the Council must
continuously have timely, comprehensive and updated
information on matters relating to the protection of
civilians, particularly on the identification of situations
that involve imminent risks for civilian populations.
That is why we emphasize the importance of this item
being included systematically in the reports and
recommendations of the Secretary-General in
consideration of specific situations, most importantly
when it comes to the establishment, revision and
renewal of peacekeeping mission mandates. Moreover,
we believe that the expert group on the protection of
civilians is a valuable opportunity to lend continuity to
the analysis and discussion of this issue.

The Council must respond swiftly and decisively
to crises. Civilian protection must be provided at the
outset in efforts to achieve a cessation of hostilities and
to negotiate peace. At all times, we must urge the
cooperation of all parties to a conflict in order to create
areas of security, neutral zones or humanitarian
corridors that will make it possible to evacuate or
provide assistance to the affected populations. We also
highlight the vital importance of safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance, which is a
fundamental prerequisite for its effective provision.

We stress the importance of clear civilian
protection mandates as a key aspect in the design and
composition of peacekeeping missions, as well as the
need for clear guides and standards for military
intervention in order to permit effective protection of
the civilian population. In that regard, my delegation
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation, set
out in his 20 October 2008 report on the Sudan
(S/2008/662), that the Security Council consider
holding a thorough debate on provisions related to the
protection of civilians in imminent danger.

We have listened to and share the concerns
repeatedly expressed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the troop-contributing
countries and the humanitarian community regarding
the lack of clarity in civilian protection mandates. We
believe it is time that the Council, together with the
Secretariat and the General Assembly - in particular
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations -
develop clear civilian protection guidelines that could
be translated into realistic standards applicable to
peacekeeping troops in combat situations. The need for
that was clearly indicated by the Council in resolution
1674 (2006).

Furthermore, it is absolutely essential that
peacekeeping missions be appropriately structured and,
as Mr. Holmes pointed out, provided with the
equipment and technology they need to duly carry out
their civilian protection mandates, particularly in cases
in which greater resources are urgently needed to
expand monitoring, information-gathering and
patrolling activities in conflict zones where there is an
imminent danger of attacks against civilians.

Another major challenge to civilian protection is
the fragmentation of the United Nations presence on
the ground. We believe it is necessary to strengthen
coordination among the humanitarian, military and
political segments to guarantee the security of relief
personnel and create the humanitarian space needed to
provide assistance and an appropriate transition
towards a phase of recovery and the restoration of
order and the rule of law that would ensure full respect
for and the promotion of human rights.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the timely
updating of the aide-memoire to be adopted in the
presidential statement today, and we thank the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the
work done. We appreciate the usefulness and value of
that instrument in analyzing the key issues that we
must consider in attaining the objectives related to
civilian protection. The list of precedents considered
by the Council on that subject is an important historical
memory that will serve as a swift, easy and practical
guide to assist the Council and ensure that the concerns
and issues related to civilian protection will be
appropriately reflected in the relevant resolutions and
in the establishment, review and renewal of the
mandates of peacekeeping missions.

