Mr. Maurer: A couple of months ago, I stood in
front of a four-story building - it was really more the
shell of a building, completely bombed out, burned out
and ripped apart, with steel cables sticking out from
the load-bearing walls and rubble all around. The
only indication that it had once been a hospital was a
surgical lamp, miraculously still attached to the ceiling
of the second floor. I was in Syria, but I could just as
well have been in Afghanistan, South Sudan, Yemen or
any other place.

It is a painful paradox that in times of greatest
need the availability of health care is at its lowest. In
war people are injured, malnourished and sick. Yet
the greater the need for medical treatment, the more
difficult it is to obtain such treatment, because the few
places and persons that can help come under attack.

I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
to brief the Council on such an important issue. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his kind words
at the beginning of this meeting, as well as for our
good partnership and friendship throughout the year
as we confront challenges such as the one we are
discussing today.

The ICRC has found that 2,400 attacks against
patients and health personnel, facilities and transports
occurred in 11 conflict-affected countries over the
course of three years. That is more than two attacks
per day, every day, for three years. And we looked at
only 11 countries in our study. Last year, the World
Health Organization announced that 60 per cent of
health-care facilities in Syria had been damaged or
destroyed, while 25,000 people were being wounded
every month. Stephen O'Brien, Emergency Relief
Coordinator, has stated that, after a year of fighting
in Yemen, one quarter of the country's health services
have been destroyed or shut down. In 2015, the ICRC
registered a 50 per cent increase in Afghanistan in the
number of incidents against health staff and facilities,
as compared with the previous year. That means one
incident every three days, without considering how
many incidents go unreported.

Not always, but far too often, such incidents,
attacks and destruction constitute outright violations of
international humanitarian law. It is no coincidence that
the very first Geneva Convention, in 1864, pertained to
the amelioration of the condition of the wounded and
sick - to be precise, the wounded and sick in armed
forces in the field. As wars and armed conflicts have
evolved from taking place in open battlefields to urban
areas, and from the use of pistols to mass shelling and
bombardment by air forces, the wounded and the sick
are no longer just those in uniform. The wounded and
the sick now include Ramish, who was 9 years old when
he stepped on a mine in Afghanistan. They include
Mathilde, who was raped by fighters while she was
harvesting her fields with her husband in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. They include the wife of Khaled
in Syria, whom I met and who died during childbirth
because there was no midwife or doctor to atttend to
her. And they include all the nameless patients in the
hospital I mentioned at the beginning of my briefing.

Those are just a few examples of the human beings,
and their stories, that the staff and volunteers of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement are confronted with
in the field, every day, around the world. They show
the impact of war on people but, more important, they
show that medical treatment and health care at large
are crucial in time of war. International humanitarian
law therefore specifically protects medical personnel,
facilities and transports precisely because they are
indispensable in time of war. Not doing so risks
multiplying the impact on health systems, which in turn
risk unravelling, with an impact far beyond the region
concerned and imposing a burden on future generations.

Attacking a hospital, threatening a doctor, coercing
a nurse to give preferential treatment to armed fighters,
hijacking ambulances, using patients as human
shields - such acts are not collateral damage, they are
not sad realities that we have to get used to. They are
abominations to fight and trends to roll back.

The direct effects on health-care facilities,
personnel and transports are grave, yet the indirect
effects go even deeper. When a hospital run by Me'decins
Sans Frontieres (MSF) in Yemen's Sa'ada province was
destroyed in October 2015, it meant that 200,000 people
instantly lost access to vital medical care. Five years
into the war in Syria, the entire city of Rastan has one
dentist left, for 120,000 people. Today the reality in too
many war-torn countries is that if you do not die from
shelling or fighting, you die because there is no dialysis
equipment, no diabetes medicine, no antibiotics and no
heart disease treatment. Death rates by communicable
and non-communicable diseases often surpass death
rates by weapons. That, for us as humanitarians,
is an indicator that we are not confronted with mere
temporary disruptions but with system disintegration.
It is notjust a hospital or a doctor affected; entire health
systems unravel under the attacks on health facilities
and personnel. The medical sector, alongside water,
power and education infrastructure, is often the first in
line to collapse under the cumulative impact of warfare,
particularly in urban areas, when heavy explosive
weapons are used. Where a lot of people live closely
together and depend on infrastructure and public
services that are all intertwined, the effects of attacks
and destruction are greatest.

The ICRC, in a recent study, has summarized its
experience with the successive disintegration of urban
services for people in today's conflicts. What we see
from the study is that humanitarian assistance is always
insufficient to cope with the progressive dismantling
of social services over time. What is needed is a
fundamental change of behaviour in warfare. The
humanitarian consequences of the cumulative impact
that results when essential infrastructure like hospitals
is annihilated must be taken into account when

balancing military necessity against the protection of
civilians, in line with the provisions of international
humanitarian law.

It is not true that the guiding principles of the
conduct of hostilities in warfare are wrong or outdated.
Rather, they need to be interpreted differently in
today's environment. Much more weight has to be
given to the impact on civilians and their protection
in order to counter the decade-long trend in which
civilians have borne the brunt of armed conflict or
even become the very objective of attacks. Beyond the
immediate, when attacks and the destruction of health
infrastructure occur, efforts to reduce child mortality,
improve maternal health and fight against diseases,
such as polio, are wiped out in a matter of seconds.
Rebuilding what has been destroyed will take years,
if not decades. International humanitarian law and
humanitarian action play a critical role as guarantors
for development progress during violence and conflicts.
If they are violated, that function unravels, and health-
care services are particularly vulnerable and exposed.

I want to commend the Council for adopting
resolution 2286 (2016) today. I know from my own
experiences at the Organization that every comma
actually has carefully been considered and negotiated,
and the result is strong. In clear language, the Council
has underlined the importance of international
humanitarian law and called on States and all parties
to armed conflict to comply with their obligations and
develop effective measures to protect people's lives by
preventing and addressing violence against medical
personnel, facilities, transport and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties. The
resolution marks a momentous step in the international
community's effort to draw attention to a problem
that we otherwise risk getting used to through the
sheer frequency of its occurrence. We have not yet
been desensitized by such attacks because we are
still outraged after every one. But after outrage must
come action, not complacency. Therefore, while the
resolution is an important step, it must mark not the end
of a political process but the beginning of a practical
effort. I ask the Council to build on the momentum of
the resolution. States and non-State armed groups must
respect their obligations under international law.

Everyone on the Council knows that the ICRC as
an inherently pragmatic institution. We recognize the
dilemmas that exist in times of war, and we recognize
the difficult balance between, once again, military
necessity and humanitarian imperative, between
principles and pragmatism, between short- and long-
term concerns, and between our role as advocates for
victims and as interlocutors of parties to conflicts
to mitigate the effects of warfare on civilians and
civilian infrastructure. We are committed to principled
pragmatism. Norms and accountability for such norms
are an important side of the medal. Condemnations are
first and foremost political, not humanitarian acts. As
humanitarians, we engage to change behaviours and
prevent violations of international humanitarian law,
thereby protecting people.

As members of the Council know, we engage with
everyone who can make a difference, and the first in
line are medical practitioners themselves. Therefore,
together with the World Medical Association, the
International Committee of Military Medicine, the
International Council of Nurses, the International
Pharmaceutical Federation, the International Federation
of Medical Students Associations and the World
Confederation for Physical Therapy, we have drawn up
a document entitled "Ethical principles of health care in
times of armed conflict and other emergencies". Those
organizations today represent 30 million health-care
professionals from the civilian and military realms,
who now have a practical tool to guide them in their
daily work.

Several members of the Council already know first-
hand how we work because we have built jointly with
them a constructive relationship of deep operational
engagement, feedback, dialogue and corrective
measures with regard to the conduct of hostilities. I am
here today not to cry outrage, but to offer the ICRC's
help and constructive engagement to move out of the
deep contemporary crisis of health systems in armed
conflicts. I would like to propose to the Council five
work streams to ensure that the resolution that was
adopted today is not only text but also a spirit that is
respected in the middle of war.

First, we should align domestic legislation
and encourage other States to follow suit, in line
with obligations under international law and with
ethical principles of the medical sector. Secondly,
military personnel should be trained to minimize
disruptions to health-care services, while safeguarding
legitimate security concerns. Thirdly, local health-
care organizations should be supported to maintain
minimum service through specific and tailor-made
solutions. Fourthly, the legal protection for patients and
health-care workers should be improved by ensuring
the proper use of protective emblems, enhancing legal
protection for medical ethics and addressing violations.
And fifthly, we must ensure that every weapons transfer
is done with an assurance to respect international
humanitarian and targeted trainings that focus on the
protection of medical personnel and facilities.
As an organization working on the front lines of
conflicts, we take resolution 2286 (2016) as a critically
important political signal and as an encouragement
to bear fruit on the ground. As a neutral, impartial
and independent humanitarian actor, we are aware
that ours cannot be the task to use the resolution, or
international humanitarian law in general, as part of a
public argument indicting counterparts for violations
of norms. Front-line negotiations will need skilled
negotiators seeking the consent of parties in order to
create an environment in which the key objectives of
the resolution can be concretized and implemented
through practical agreements amongst belligerents. We
need to be cognizant of the tension between the political
guidance that the Council is offering today on such an
important issue and the practical challenges in contexts
of war that frame the work of humanitarian actors on
the ground. That is an additional reason, should we
need one, that a regular exchange between the Council
and front-line organizations like MSF and the ICRC are
of such critical importance.

I told the Council about the destroyed hospital that
I saw in Syria a few months ago. What I did not say is
that since its destruction, doctors, nurses and volunteers
continue to work in the basement of the hospital. Once
a space to stock materials, it has been transformed into
a micro-version of a hospital. In one former storage
room, premature babies lie in a few generator-powered
incubators that were not demolished by shelling. The
hospital may be all but destroyed, but humanity still
lives on.

Humanity in war is what we demand. As we said
earlier, at the ICRC even wars have limits because
wars without limits are wars without ends. Health-care
personnel and facilities are the outer frontier of those
limits. Today, with the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), the Council has reaffirmed the relevance of
the laws of war and the basic humanitarian consensus
enshrined in the Geneva Conventions. To demand that
they be respected through practical measures is the
most decisive next step the Council can take to ensure
that humanity in war is a reality and notjust an ideal.

