Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): It has been a very
long day, so rather than reading out my statement I will
try to summarize its most important points.

There have been important appeals by parties to
conflict for the norms that safeguard humankind to
be upheld, most recently at the World Humanitarian
Summit, but we believe that such appeals must be
supported by concrete action, especially by the
Security Council. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendations in that regard, especially that the
Council should systematically condemn Violations of
international humanitarian law by any party to conflict,
take action on the most serious violations, to apply
targeted sanctions and to mandate commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions. Most important, the
Council should refer situations of large-scale impunity,
such as those in Syria, to the International Criminal
Court and ensure the necessary follow-up.

The potential for United Nations peacekeeping
operations to enhance accountability efforts is still
largely untapped, but there are also encouraging signs
of progress, such as the example of the direct support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
for the special criminal court of the Central African
Republic and the International Criminal Court. We
believe that the Council should consistently task
peacekeeping missions to support the Court's work on
the ground. Missions should effectively implement that
policy and, in particular, consistently apply the policy
of avoiding non-essential contact with fugitives.

Of course, peacekeeping missions can also play a
larger role in preventing and ending atrocity crimes.
They have unique access to information on the ground
that should be put before the Security Council, in
accordance with the Human Rights Up Front initiative.
Acting on such information is then the responsibility of
Council members.

As ofthis morning, with the addition of Canada, 112
States have joined the code of conduct against atrocity
crimes. That includes a majority of the current members
of the Council. Those States have committed to making
the Council more responsive in cases ofmass atrocities.
We call on them, as well as on all Council members, to
do their utmost to live up to that responsibility.

