Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for its choice of theme
for today's open debate. We thank the Secretary-
General for highlighting the efforts of the United
Nations to promote reconciliation among and within
States and war-torn societies, and we took careful note
of the remarks offered earlier by today's briefers.

In reflecting on the role and functions of the United
Nations aimed at promoting reconciliation, we need to
carefully address the challenges associated with and
conditions generating gross violations of human rights
in certain parts ofthe world. While we all recognize that
reconciliation is vital to sustaining peace and security,
it is obvious that crimes of exceptional scope and
magnitude, such as genocide, require a framework of
reconciliation, which entails the right to truth, justice,
accountability and guarantees of non-recurrence.

The irresponsibility of inciting hate speech,
racial and ethnic profiling and the glorification of
hate crimes, especially at the instigation of political
leaders, cultivate fertile ground for discrimination and
marginalization, which if not addressed properly, can
lead to mass atrocities. Attempts to deny, or to justify,
the crime of genocide are not only reprehensible,
but risk undermining the fight against impunity,
reconciliation and efforts to prevent atrocity crimes in
the future. Such challenges require the strong collective
efforts of Member States, international organizations,
religious leaders and civil society to overcome the cycle
of violence and sustain peace on the basis of human
dignity, respect and human rights, including the right
to life.

We agree that reconciliation should be
incorporated into peace efforts throughout all stages
of conflict. Preparing peoples for the return to peace
and the restoration of their violated human rights and
fundamental freedoms is crucial to promote confidence,
trust and reconciliation and pave the way for the
settlement of conflicts. Reconciliation is a process that
must occur at the individual, societal and State levels.

We would like to stress the indispensable role of
women and youth in promoting reconciliation. The
meaningful and inclusive participation of women
affected by conflict in peace processes is instrumental,
as it has proven to increase the chances of achieving
durable and lasting settlements and reconciliation.
Genuine reconciliation should be anchored in drawing
lessons from the dark pages of history. Dealing with
the past can be meaningful if it proceeds from the
unequivocal condemnation of previous crimes, thereby
enabling the realization of the right to the truth.

Religious leaders play an important role in
promoting tolerance, dialogue and peaceful coexistence
and in opposing attempts to commit violence perversely
in the name of religion. Therefore, the attacks on
religious leaders, such as the recent killing by terrorists
of two priests of the Armenian Catholic community of
Qamishli in north-eastern Syria, should be resolutely
condemned and the perpetrators brought to justice.

As a nation that has witnessed the horrors of
genocide in its own historic homeland and continues
to face the challenges of the denial and justification of
past crimes, Armenia bears a special duty to promote
the prevention of the crime of genocide. Derogatory
statements, aimed at justifying genocide by means of
denigrating and insulting the dignity of the victims
and qualifying it as "the most reasonable act", deepen
misunderstanding and distrust and make genuine
reconciliation and dialogue even harder.

Indeed, the recognition and condemnation of
the Armenian genocide is essential to serving truth,
historical justice and reconciliation. It is essential for
the entire international community, and particularly
the potential victims of identity-based crimes - people
who are vilified simply because of their ethnic and
religious origin.

Armenia also remains committed to advancing the
prevention agenda through education and awareness-
raising of gross violations of human rights and identity-
based discrimination against all groups and peoples
that, if not addressed, can lead to mass atrocities
and genocide.

It is by acknowledging the truth and the
commemoration of and tribute to the dignity of the
victims of past crimes that we can pave the way for
genuine reconciliation and sustainable peace.

