Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative taken by Russia to convene
today's public meeting.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
his briefing and commend the United Nations on its
efforts to ease the humanitarian situation in Syria.

The Syrian conflict has lasted more than seven
years, inflicting endless suffering on the Syrian people.
It is our strong hope that all parties in Syria can resolve
their issues through dialogue and consultations. It is
imperative that the international community play a
constructive role to immediately ease the humanitarian
crisis in Syria. As always, China will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to Syria.

More than a month ago, through the concerted
efforts of all parties concerned, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2401 (2018), reflecting
its solidarity and consensus on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. China calls on all parties in Syria
to comply with the resolution in order to achieve
an immediate cessation of hostilities, provide
humanitarian assistance and actively coordinate with
United Nations humanitarian assistance efforts. The
United Nations and the international community must
implement resolution 2401 (2018), pay equal attention
to the humanitarian situation in all regions in Syria,
provide assistance to all areas in need of humanitarian
assistance, and help displaced persons return home as
soon as possible.

I reiterate that China has always promoted the
peaceful settlement of disputes and objects to the use
of force in international relations. We choose to respect
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of all countries. Any action taken by the
parties concerned must be in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
All action must be taken within the framework of
international law. Any unilateral military action that
circumvents the Council contravenes the purposes and
principles of the Charter and violates the basic norms of
international law and international relations, and will
compound efforts to settle the crisis in Syria. China
urges the parties concerned to refrain from any act that
could lead to an escalation of the situation, return to the
norms of international law and resolve issues through
dialogue and consultation.

A political settlement is the only way to resolve
the situation in Syria. China is committed to working
with the international community to facilitate peace
talks, encourage the cessation of hostilities, violence
and terrorism, and advance the process for a political
settlement, including through the Geneva peace talks.
Given the current situation, it is imperative for the
international community to enhance cooperation and
support the United Nations as the primary mediator
to restore peace, stability and calm in Syria and the
Middle East as soon as possible.

