Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of Mexico, I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for presenting his report on the impact of
armed conflict on children. I wish to emphasize that the
report was prepared with an innovative approach that
will undoubtedly affect the way in which the Security
Council deals with this and other issues in the future.

There is no doubt that progress has been made in
regulating this area. In my country's opinion, the entry
into force of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child regarding the recruitment of
children in armed conflict and the Statute of the
International Criminal Court are important
developments reflecting the will of States to strengthen
the legal framework for the protection of children.
However, as practice shows, the enactment of norms is
insufficient if it is not accompanied by action to ensure
their full implementation.

The advances that we have achieved have
therefore been inadequate to reverse a phenomenon of
which we are seeing increasing evidence. My
delegation completely shares the indignation expressed
here by the Permanent Representative of Germany.
Such acts do indeed elicit outrage; among the many
horrible crimes committed in situations of armed
conflict, one that leaves an indelible mark on the future
is violence against and abuse of children, particularly
girls, in armed conflict. It is not enough to make
statements or to enact new international legal norms.
We must act forcefully and effectively.

That is why it is essential to emphasize that the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict is particularly clear and stark. That document
leads to the inevitable conclusion that the United
Nations must take concrete and immediate action to
strengthen the protection of children in situations of
conflict and to ensure that those who violate their
obligations in this connection will be sought out,
brought to justice and punished.

It is therefore particularly important and
promising that the International Criminal Court can
begin its work. It is our hope that this new body will
take immediate measures to bring under its jurisdiction
those who are proven to have committed violations
against and recruited children in armed conflict. The
work of the International Criminal Court in this field
must serve to encourage national legal systems to adopt
much more vigorous measures in the fight against that
scourge.

The situations described in the report of the
Secretary-General are very telling. Children are being
exploited, abused, recruited to participate in hostilities,
compelled to work in the exploitation of natural
resources, separated from their families and denied
access to the most basic services. They fall victim to
such contagious diseases as AIDS that are particularly
virulent among the child population. Mexico condemns
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law and urges the international community to
remain alert to violations of its norms.

The suffering inflicted on minors by those who
are duty-bound to protect them cannot continue to be
tolerated. Mexico therefore expresses its support for
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and is
prepared to cooperate with the United Nations in their
implementation. In this regard, we appreciate the
quality and frankness of the statement made by
Ms. Bellamy and the commitment of Mr. Otunnu in this
regard. We hope that codes of conduct will very soon
be reflected in verifiable results. We note with
particular interest the annex to the report containing the
list of parties to armed conflict that continue to recruit
or use child soldiers. The thorough formulation of the
list, based on reliable information, undoubtedly
constitutes very important progress.

Once groups that violate international
humanitarian law have been detected, the United
Nations must consider the type of actions that can be
taken to put an end to such violations. We trust that, on
the basis of those lists, the States on whose territory
such violations are committed will deal directly with
remedying them. But we also hope that other States,
the United Nations, other international organizations -
especially non-governmental organizations - and the
industry that produces and sells weapons will promote
the cessation of such actions and practices, and that
such actions and practices can be punished. Such
efforts must be directed not only at countries in which
the Security Council has commitments related to the
maintenance of peace and security; follow-up must be
carried out in all countries where the phenomenon of
recruiting children in armed conflicts occurs, whether
or not those countries are on the Council's agenda.

The integration of a child protection perspective
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
inclusion of child protection experts in concrete
operations, more training in that sphere for personnel
participating in such operations, and robust sanctions
against those who carry out acts that violate
international humanitarian norms - especially acts
against the civilian population - are undoubtedly
positive measures that we must continue to develop and
promote. We believe that United Nations actions aimed
at the general protection of civilians in armed
conflicts- such as the separation of civilians and
combatants; the placement of refugee camps; and
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programmes - contribute in an important
way to the protection of children. But, from that
perspective, it is also clear that the specific needs of
minors require policies, measures and criteria in the
field, as well as child protection experts who can
implement them. In addition, we welcome the creation
of a child protection unit within the framework of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
assessment activities being carried out jointly with the
United Nations in the Mano River region.
Under international humanitarian law, all parties
to conflicts must permit humanitarian access. Mexico
supports current efforts to facilitate access by
humanitarian agencies and organizations to all areas
where conflict situations occur. As I pointed out last
December in my statement on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, the participation of non-
governmental organizations in this effort is vital.
Often, they are the international community's only
presence in conflict zones.

That is why Mexico joined the French initiative
to convene a meeting of Security Council members
yesterday, under the Arria formula, in which non-
governmental organizations interested in this subject -
under the umbrella of the Coalition to Stop the Use of
Child Soldiers and the Watch List on Children and
Armed Conflict network - participated in a frank and
interactive dialogue. At that meeting, valuable points
of view were exchanged and conclusions were reached
that could lead to better measures to protect children in
armed conflicts.

Among such measures, we would highlight
recommendations made by non-governmental
organizations to strengthen follow-up and monitoring
mechanisms implemented by international
organizations, in particular the United Nations. It was
also proposed that an informal Security Council group
be established to assess compliance with applicable
international norms by parties to conflict that are
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2002/1299). In addition, the desirability of having
more child protection advisers in the field and of taking
special education and prevention measures aimed at
halting the spread of the devastating AIDS epidemic
among children was mentioned.

No effort aimed at protecting children in armed
conflicts can be complete unless all personnel
participating in humanitarian missions observe
appropriate behaviour in their dealings with civilians,
especially with children. Mexico reiterates its appeal
that other associated parties - such as the civilian
police and military forces working under the direction
of the United Nations, as well as non-governmental
organizations - observe appropriate and scrupulous
behaviour in their dealings with civilians. Mexico also
appeals to troop-contributing countries and to the
Secretary-General to consider the possibility of
including a clause in which observance of the six
principles elaborated by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee is contemplated.

In conclusion, Mexico is a party to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Internal measures are now under way to permit our
ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court. At the same time, we are promoting an internal
culture of protection and respect for the rights of
children at all times, in all places and under all
circumstances. My country is convinced that broad
dissemination of information concerning children's
rights and the consequences of their violation is a very
valuable tool. In that connection, we agree with the
Secretary-General's observations contained in his
report.

In its resolution 1379 (2001), the Security
Council manifested its decision to be actively
concerned with the protection of children in armed
conflict. We encourage the Council to continue to
completely fulfil that commitment.

