Ms. Rice (United States of America): Thank you,
Madam, for having convened this very important
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and participation today.

I would like to express once again our deepest
condolences for the horrific attacks in Pakistan last
week that killed more than 100 people. The United
States stands with the Pakistani people in strongly
condemning these senseless and inhumane acts, which
unfortunately remind us that the scourge of terrorism
remains with us all. We therefore very much appreciate
Pakistan's drawing the Council's attention back to this
critical issue.

Reflecting on the past decade, the Security
Council's sustained commitment to counter-terrorism
has been significant. We have continued to promote a
holistic approach to combating terrorism, strengthening
counter-terrorism efforts at the national, regional and
international levels.

We cannot grow complacent. Even as core
Al-Qaida has experienced major setbacks, it survives
and continues to threaten us all. Moreover, its affiliates
and other violent extremist groups pose grave dangers.
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is a significant
international threat. Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM) and Al-Shabaab continue to sow instability
and exploit safe havens in Mali, the Sahel and the Horn
of Africa, destabilizing societies and obstructing the
delivery of vital humanitarian relief to millions in need.
Elements of Boko Haram in Nigeria have launched
multiple deadly attacks, including against the United
Nations, and transnational terrorist groups remain
active in North Africa, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Syria and elsewhere.

The resilience of terrorist networks underscores
the fact that long-term diplomatic and economic
initiatives, as well as international cooperation, are as
always indispensible. While we have made progress
together, terrorist groups continue to adapt, evolving
into criminal entrepreneurs and engaging in trafficking
and other illicit activities to finance their operations.
AQIM, for example, has increasingly used kidnapping
for ransom to support its organization and finance
terrorist attacks. Kidnapping for ransom is not only
horrific for the victims and their families, but represents
a serious threat to international peace and security that
will likely continue to pose a significant challenge in
the years ahead. The international community must do
much more to combat this scourge.

With the terrorist threat ever more diffuse, the
need for a strategic and comprehensive approach to
counter-terrorism has never been greater. The United
States recognizes that force, while necessary, is not
nearly sufficient to counter the threat effectively over
the long term. We must also prioritize building State
capacity, strengthening good governance and civilian
institutions, promoting economic development and job
creation, countering extremism and reducing the appeal
of violence and the pipeline of terrorist recruits so that
Member States and their citizens are better equipped to
tackle threats within their borders and regions.

At the same time, the United States has intensified
our capacity-building assistance to help countries
secure their borders, thwart attacks, prosecute terrorists
and those who abet them, and neutralize extremism
and its root causes. We have trained more than 9,800
law enforcement officials from over 50 countries in
the past year alone. United States legal advisers are
working with host country Governments worldwide
to build justice sector capacity to deal with terrorism.
Our trans-Sahara counter-terrorism partnership
has provided several countries in the Sahel and the
Maghreb with training and support to tighten border
security, promote economic assistance, disrupt terrorist
networks and prevent attacks. By uniting civilian,
criminal justice and military experts, this programme
pursues a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.
In addition, we established the Center for Strategic
Counterterrorism Communications to confront and
rebut Al-Qaida and extremist propaganda online.

The United States values its partnership with
the United Nations on counter-terrorism, and our
cooperation has produced results. For example, since
effective prison management and good correctional
practices can reduce the risk of radicalization, the
United States has worked with the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute to
develop the Rome good practices on the rehabilitation
and reintegration of violent extremist offenders. We
look forward to close cooperation between the United
Nations and the new Hedayah International Center of
Excellence for Countering Violent Extremism in Abu
Dhabi, which will assist experts to develop tools for
countering extremist ideology and blunting the spread
of radicalism. Strengthening cooperation at the United
Nations and other multilateral organizations and
ensuring that the necessary architecture is in place to
address terrorism in the twenty-first century remains
central to our approach.

The United Nations has worked actively to build
consensus around the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and deliver technical assistance to strengthen
capacities worldwide. The United Nations has a critical
role to play as a forum for advancing collective action
against terrorism. The United States welcomes the
Secretary-General's initiative to appoint a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator and unify the
United Nations counter-terrorism architecture so that
expertise and resources can be deployed as efficiently
as possible.

We hope for even deeper cooperation between
the United Nations and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum in the coming year as the Forum promotes the
implementation of its framework documents on the
rule of law, prisons and preventing kidnapping for
ransom. We look forward to working in the Security
Council and with Member States to further strengthen
implementation of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.

A key lesson of the past decade is the significant
value that civil society can add to counter-terrorism
efforts. Victims and victims associations, for example,
have played important roles in preventing terrorism.
We encourage all relevant United Nations actors to
intensify engagement with and support for civil society
on counter-terrorism objectives and combating violent
extremism.

No single country, no one organization and no
particular tactic or tool alone can neutralize the threat
ofterrorism. Only a comprehensive approach, bolstered
by our shared determination, our continued cooperation
and expanding partnerships can ultimately end the
threat of global terrorism.

