Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your sisterly country's presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also commend your
initiative in convening this important meeting on the
challenges of the fight against terrorism in Africa in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security. This is a good and timely choice. We welcome
the participation of a number of ministers in today's
meeting. In that context, my delegation would like to
extend its condolences to all the victims of terrorism
throughout the world.

My delegation acknowledges the international
consensus on implementing the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted by the United Nations
in 2006. We also welcome the efforts of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force to ensure
coordination in measures aimed at combating terrorism
and implementing the Strategy. In that context, we
again commend the launch of efforts by the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the initiative
taken by the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud of Saudi Arabia,
which led to the opening of the Centre.

Again and again, we are increasingly convinced
that, as we have heard today, terrorism has no
religion, no colour, no gender. The events that have
been witnessed by some countries around the world,
particularly some African States, in recent months,
show that terrorism is on the rise, along with the
spreading roots and grievances on which terrorists
build their misguided intellectual theories. Treating
those root causes therefore is an effective remedy for
eradicating this pernicious phenomenon.

Combating poverty and supporting the renaissance
of Africa, eliminating injustice and inequality and
promoting development, fostering dialogue between
North and South, supporting education and health
initiatives, and enhancing international dialogue are
among the issues that can make a positive contribution to
solving the problem of terrorism. These are universally
agreed issues.

At the national level, the Sudan has signed and
ratified all the relevant international conventions
dealing with combating terrorism. It is also party to
African and Arab regional conventions and participates
actively in the efforts of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation aimed at fighting terrorism. We consider
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to be one of the
most important legal frameworks governing and guiding
the related regional and international institutions and
laws. The counter-terrorism laws adopted by the Sudan
in 2001 conform to the Strategy's principles, as does our
2010 anti-money-laundering law. Efforts are currently
under way in my country to adopt relevant laws on
nuclear energy, cyber crime and chemical materials, in
accordance with the principles of the Strategy. In that
connection, we would like to emphasize the Sudan's
cooperation with the United Nations mechanisms in this
area, as well as its commitment to submitting periodic
reports in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), in
the framework of the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate.

The Sudan plays a leading role within the framework
of the East African Community by hosting numerous
seminars and conferences with a view to coordinating
regional efforts to combat terrorism. The most recent
meeting hosted by the Sudan was a conference of the
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force, focused on combating terrorism financing and
money laundering in the region. That conference was
convened in the Sudan in April.

The efforts deployed by the African Union are
acknowledged and welcomed, in particular those of the
African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism,
which is hosted by the friendly country of Algeria.
By the same token, we welcome the efforts launched
towards enacting a model law for Africa in the area of
combatting terrorism, even if those efforts focused on
the theoretical framework. My delegation would like to
issue a call from this Chamber to support the efforts
of the African Union and our States in the field of
combatting terrorism at the capacity-building level, as
well as the operational and logistical levels.

The efforts of the African Union and other regional
African organizations have played an important role in
containing the phenomenon of terrorism in cooperation
with the Security Council and other States. What has
been happening recently in the sisterly country of Mali
is a case in point that highlights those efforts. We hope
that Mali will emerge from its crisis stronger and less
vulnerable.

In the post-colonial stage, Africa suffered the
ravages of wars that weakened it and slowed its progress
despite the natural wealth and resources it possesses.
Terrorism and its promoters now represent a new
threat to the security and renaissance of the continent.
Africa's rich natural wealth makes the continent fertile
ground for terrorist gangs from outside the continent
that hide behind religious or ethnic conflict. That has
led to interlinkages among those groups and rebel
movements, which supply the former with weapons.
Many parts of Africa have thus become theatres for
terrorist activities by gangs and rebel movements.

There has been a series of criminal terrorist
incidents in my country and neighbouring countries.
Allow me to refer to the incidents of plundering, killing
and pillaging perpetrated by the rebel movement
known as the Sudanese Revolutionary Front in a
number of the villages and cities north of Kordofan
in my country - similar to atrocities carried out by
the Lord's Resistance Army. I am also sad to convey
to the Council news of the terrorist action perpetrated
by terrorists against those who prefer to join the peace
process. Yesterday, they killed Mr. Mohamed Bishr,
leader of the Justice and Equality Movement peace
faction, as well as a number of other leaders who had
joined the call for peace. That incident was strongly
condemned and deplored by the African Union. From
this Chamber, we call upon the Security Council and
the United Nations to condemn such terrorist acts.

My delegation emphasizes the need to respect the
sovereignty of States and human rights in the context
of combating terrorism, particularly for people who are
chafing under the yoke of colonialism and occupation,
as well as to respect their right to self-determination. We
renew our rejection of the unilateral punitive measures
taken by some States for political reasons against other
States on the pretext of fighting terrorism. That gives
rise to suffering and raises tensions in international
relations.

In conclusion, we call for an intensification
of international endeavours to arrive at a global
international convention that specifies a just and clear-
cut definition of terrorism.

