Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Chilean presidency
for its initiative to hold this debate. I would also like
to thank Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.

Chad is concerned by the deteriorating security
situation in Ukraine, in particular in the areas around
Donetsk and Luhansk, in the east of the country, where,
following a period of relative calm, tensions have been
on the rise since the beginning of 2015. Exchanges of
fire and violent confrontations broke out around the
airport of Donetsk on 29 December 2014, resulting
in a number of victims, including Ukraine soldiers
and separatists. That constitutes a serious violation
of the ceasefire under the Minsk agreements of 5 and
19 September 2014.
We deplore this return to violence, including the
firing ofrockets on 13 January at a bus near Volnovakha
in eastern Ukraine, resulting in the death of at least
12 civilians, most of them women. To that, we must
add the violent clashes of the past 48 hours, which have
caused several deaths among Ukrainian troops and
civilians. Chad firmly condemns the return to violence.
We call upon the parties to respect international
humanitarian law, in particular with regard to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Chad takes note of the adoption by the Ukrainian
Parliament, on 20 January, of a law for the partial
mobilization of approximately 50,000 reservists to the
army in 2015. However, we remain convinced that the
solution to the Ukrainian crisis will be political and
that it largely depends on the willingness of Ukrainians
themselves to undertake a genuine negotiating process
to arrive at a lasting peace. In that respect, Chad calls
upon the parties to show calm and restraint and urges the
Government to establish a direct and inclusive national
dialogue in order to bring about national reconciliation.

Ukraine's civil war sadly took a very high toll
in 2014 in terms of lives lost. More than 4,800 were
killed, to which we must add the 298 victims of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7, which was shot
down over eastern Ukraine in July. There have been
10,300 injured, including 300 children, and more than
1 million displaced.

In the light of this human tragedy, Chad encourages
the international community to increase and diversify
its mediation efforts aimed at relaunching the peace
process in Ukraine. We would also call upon countries
that wield influence with the parties to exert the
necessary pressure in the pursuit of peace in Ukraine
with full respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and unity of Ukraine in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

