Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me, first
of all, to welcome you, Madam, back to New York and
to the Council, as you preside over this very important,
historic meeting of the Council. I welcome also the
presence of the Secretary-General and, of course, the
presence of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and of members
of the Governing Council of Iraq, Mr. Adnan Pachachi,
Mr. Ahmad Chalabi and Ms. Aqeela al-Hashemi. Their
presence here is a clear demonstration of the Security
Council's resolve to contribute effectively to meeting
the immense challenges faced by the Iraqi people and
to formulate strategies that will allow the Iraqi people
to recover their national sovereignty and to build a
future of progress and national concord.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's
comprehensive report (S/2003/715), submitted to the
Council, particularly because it addresses the important
initiatives undertaken by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Iraq with a view to fulfilling
the commitments of the Security Council with respect
to the very complex situation in Iraq. The overall
approach outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General to defining the role of the United Nations in
Iraq reveals that the tasks ahead are immense and of
great complexity. The yearning of the Iraqis for the
early restoration of sovereignty and the underlying fact
that democracy cannot be imposed from outside are
important messages that the international community
must take into due account and on the basis of which it
must act.

We fully share the view expressed in the report
regarding the extreme importance of the regional
dimension of the Iraqi issue and regarding the necessity
of working with Iraq's neighbours for the recovery and
reconstruction of the country. In that connection, we
commend the concrete steps outlined to us this morning
by Special Representative Vieira de Mello regarding
the contacts that have been made with leaders in the
region.

The United Nations is particularly well suited to
making a decisive contribution to meet the great
challenges ahead, and we are confident that the
experience of our Organization can be of decisive
added value in addressing and helping to resolve the
key priority areas of life in Iraq: ensuring future
stability; the political process itself; respect for human
rights; the rule of law; national reconciliation; the
development of civil society; and economic
reconstruction.

The establishment on 13 July of the Governing
Council represented a big step forward in the overall
task of restoring Iraq to normalcy. The approach
taken - one of inclusiveness and participation,
reflecting the broad spectrum of Iraqi society - was a
very positive one. The next important step is to
delegate effective power to the Iraqi interim
administration, allowing it to set policies and take
decisions.

We encourage the Governing Council to appoint,
as soon as possible, a constitutional commission in
order to start drafting a fundamental law as a
prerequisite for the recovery of the country's national
sovereignty. It is clear that the provision of a
constitution to the country will favour the beginning of
an electoral process through which Iraq must recover,
at an early date, its full national sovereignty.

We took note of the emphasis placed in the
Secretary-General's report on the issue of human rights
and the rule of law. The former Iraqi regime's human
rights record gives the international community an
added responsibility to address and resolve this
important issue as a means to guarantee the respect of
the Iraqi people's fundamental rights, which, in the
past, were so clearly violated.

The eagerness of the legal community in Iraq -
to which the Secretary-General's report refers - to see
established the rule of law and the functioning of an
independent legal system is fully understandable. In
this regard, we welcome the establishment by the
Governing Council of a judicial commission, while
recognizing that international assistance will be
required to support the efforts of the Iraqi people to
ensure the credibility and impartiality of the judicial
system itself.

Humanitarian assistance has been at the centre of
the United Nations activities in Iraq. A large amount of
resources has permitted the United Nations and its
agencies to play a fundamental role in assisting the
Iraqi people to overcome the difficulties imposed by
sanctions, war and other barriers erected in the past.

Another positive development is the avowed
intention of the Special Representative to ensure a
smooth and integrated transition from humanitarian and
emergency rehabilitation to economic recovery and
reconstruction. Such an approach reflects positive
realities and encourages us all in the belief that a better
future awaits Iraq.

The economic reconstruction of Iraq, together
with the political process leading to the recovery of
national sovereignty, the respect of human rights and
the rule of law, leading to the Iraqi people's
sovereignty, is, according to our understanding, the
third great challenge that Iraq and the international
community will face. A great deal remains to be done
to repair and rehabilitate the economy's physical
infrastructure and in terms of the reduction of poverty
and economic reform. We totally agree that, for a
profound transformation of the economy to be
successful, the goals set and methods used must be
inclusive, command broad-based Iraqi political support
and must have qualified Iraqis in the lead in the
planning and management of Iraq's recovery.

In this connection, we welcome Special
Representative Vieira de Mello's statement this
morning, which reinforces and strengthens our
confidence that this will, indeed, be the way to act. The
Iraqis will be put at the helm of a ship sailing through
rough waters but towards a very clear destination.

My delegation fully agrees with the stated focus
of the United Nations actions in Iraq for the remainder
of 2003, as well as with the areas which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General lists as the
ones in which the United Nations could positively act
and add value.
Let my express my delegation's agreement with
the proposals formulated by the Secretary-General, in
particular the structure of a proposed United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, in the expectation that the
Security Council will, in due time, start considering
approval of such a proposal.

