Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Let me take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency, and to compliment your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Portugal, Ambassador
Monteiro, for his excellent leadership of the Council during
the month of April.

The Italian delegation fully endorses the statement
made by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of
the European Union.

We welcome the Security Council's decision to hold
a formal meeting on the issue of protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations. We believe that the Council cannot fulfil the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security entrusted to it by the Charter without
focusing on the underlying elements upon which peace
and security are built. In this regard, the issue debated
today is of crucial importance. It does not only address a
fundamental moral imperative - to assist human beings
in need, while protecting them and the providers of
help - it also represents an essential component for the
peaceful settlement of a conflicts.

In the past few years, the principles which should
inspire the response of the international community to the
threat posed to civilians by the spread of conflicts have
been called into question. Reports of the mistreatment and
even the killing of refugees and the threats to
humanitarian workers in the Great Lakes region are a
matter of the greatest concern. But they are not the only
events of this nature. In the territories of the former
Yugoslavia, violence against civilians, obstruction of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and harassment of
relief workers have taken place on a large scale. In
countries as far apart as Liberia and Afghanistan, Angola
and Tajikistan - just to mention a few - similar
episodes of targeting of civilians and humanitarian
personnel by military factions has occurred.

The presidency of the European Union stressed
several points on which further reflection by the Council
is needed. My delegation draws attention, in particular, to
the necessity to hold personally accountable those who
violate basic principles of international humanitarian law.
We believe that the establishment of a permanent
international criminal court remains the most adequate
instrument to ensure the prosecution and punishment of
these crimes.

In all the episodes I mentioned, the response of the
international community has been far from satisfactory.
We acknowledge that the United Nations and its Member
States are now confronted with a new type of conflict,
one which often originates within a State. The
consequences for the fabric of society and for the plight
of civilians are even more disruptive because of the
historical animosities and ethnic rivalries frequently
involved.

It is difficult for the international community to
formulate a strategy to deal with situations of such

 

complexity. However, human suffering and the danger of
further deterioration exact a high price for inaction. It is in
this spirit that the Government of Italy, confronted with the
humanitarian crisis in Albania, proposed a limited
multinational protection force to facilitate the delivery of
basic goods to the population and to help create a secure
environment for international organizations in Albania. To
ensure the success of this operation, a number of practical
steps have been taken. A steering committee has been
created for guidance and for close cooperation with the
participating States and with international organizations
active in Albania. Cooperation with the Albanian
Government, through such modalities as the presence of its
representatives at the steering committee meetings, is of
course, of the utmost importance.

The multinational protection force operates in close
coordination with governmental and non-governmental
organizations engaged in humanitarian assistance. Their role
in Albania is essential too, as is the contribution provided
by international financial organizations. The close
coordination of all these efforts is the key to the success of
the international community in Albania. A strong
commitment by the international community, in conjunction
with the Albanian authorities and people, is now needed to
finalize and implement a clear programme of political,
economic and financial assistance, which is necessary to
strengthen the democratic dialogue and the recovery of the
Albanian economy.
As we proceed with the operation in Albania, we are
exploring with our partners in the mission and with the
Albanian Government ways and means to fulfil its primary
objective, namely the well-being of the Albanian people.

As the developments in Albania clearly demonstrate,
humanitarian issues have an increasing and visible impact
on the activity of the Council. In our fast-changing world
they affect international peace and security in a number of
ways. Therefore, while it is not easy to define the correct
approach, respect for human life should always be the
paramount consideration. It is clear that the international
community is only now beginning to address these new and
complex scenarios.

