Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to also thank
Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing today and for his tireless
and ceaseless efforts to improve the working methods
of the Security Council.

I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency for February. I would also like
to thank you and your colleagues for the kind words
that you have had for the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural

Questions in the past two years and, in that connection,
for my delegation as well.
We feel that this is an important meeting and we
appreciate the fact that the Council regularly listens
to the views of the wider membership on its working
methods. I shall follow your instructions, Mr. President,
and distribute the full text of my statement and try to
be concise.

Codification and practice are mutually reinforcing
and necessary to improve the working methods of the
Security Council. While we were in the Council, Japan
tried to tackle both. Today I would like to share a few
observations from Japan's recent Council membership.

First, we need to do things that may seem simple,
like listening to each other - to what others say in
Council meetings or consultations. We all have our
national positions and important engagements, but
unless we at least try to be in the room and listen to
each other, effective action by the Council is less likely
to be produced. In that connection, how the Council
conducts its open debates may also be further explored.
I would encourage the President, ifI may, to be present
until the end of the open debate to listen to the views
of the wider membership. Presidential summaries can
also be useful.

Secondly, the drafting process of Council outcome
documents remains at the core of the Council's working
methods. Any Council member with willingness and
ideas should be encouraged to take the initiative. The
Chairs of sanctions committees may be in a position
to contribute more on the drafting of sanctions-related
resolutions. Troop-contributing countries may be able
to contribute on mandate renewals. Co-penholding may
not solve everything, but could be explored further
in practice.

What is more important, I believe, is how the
negotiations are conducted. Penholders have the heavy
responsibility of making every effort to explore the
best possible outcome through an inclusive process
by having face-to-face negotiations, providing
sufficient time for the consideration of drafts by all
members, being receptive to inputs and suggestions,
or proactively reaching out to those outside of the
Council with expertise, such as troop-contributing
countries, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
or regional countries.

Given that, there may be cases in which urgency
on the ground necessitates a flexible, expeditious
process. We should not lose sight of the fact that what
is most important is for the Council to take the best
possible action in the timeliest manner for the sake of
international peace and security.

Much of what I have just said is referred to in
presidential note S/2017/507. We should make the
best use of the latter, and try to develop further
practices whereby we can. I have every confidence
that Kuwait will contribute to the improvement of the
Council's working methods as the new Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

I would like to conclude my remarks by stating that
improving working methods is not the end. Reforming
the composition of the Security Council to reflect the
geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century can be
effective in dealing with the unprecedented challenges
that we face today. Japan will continue to work with all
Member States towards that goal.

