Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
May I begin by thanking Ethiopia and the Russian
Federation for their iniative in convening today's
open meeting. We welcome Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov. We stand ready to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Office under his leadership. We also wish to thank
Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and Mr. Scharia, Officer-in-Charge of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
for the briefings.

Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind.
The international community must use uniform
standards. We must resolutely fight terrorists no matter
where they are, what flag they fly, which country they
attack or whatever means they employ. In countering
terrorism, the sovereignty of the countries concerned
must be respected, the leadership role of the United
Nations and the Security Council must be given full
play and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations must be observed.

Terrorism must not be associated with any
particular ethnicity or religion. The international
community should promote the use of political means
and dialogue to address regional conflicts and eradicate
the root causes that give rise to terrorism. Countries
should enhance border control and law-enforcement
cooperation and disrupt the network by which terrorists
operate. More robust efforts should be made to combat
terrorism financing. The international community
should undertake pragmatic and results-oriented
cooperation by joining hands to combat the use of
the Internet for terrorist purposes such as terrorist
propaganda, financing, recruitment, incitement
and planning.

In recent years, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), as an important platform of the Security
Council in dealing with counter-terrorism issues, has
closely monitored the new terrorist threats and trends
and facilitated the comprehensive implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions by Member States. The
CTC works in close coordination with other United
Nations entities to advance the international counter-
terrorism agenda, which has produced positive and
effective results.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) is the executive arm of the
CTC. Through country visits and assessments, it
assists Member States in identifying deficiencies and
challenges they face, while facilitating the exchange of
counter-terrorism experience and providing technical
assistance to Member States. In that way, it plays an
important role in strengthening the capacity of Member
States to combat terrorism.

China supports the enhanced cooperation among
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
CTC, CTED and the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2001). On the basis
of the functions and responsibilities relating to counter-
terrorism as mandated by the General Assembly and
the Security Council, the Office assists Member States
in the implementation of the relevant counter-terrorism
resolutions of the Security Council and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Along
with the broader membership of the international
community, China will continue to strictly implement
the relevant Council resolutions and proactively
promote international counter-terrorism cooperation so
as to maintain international peace and security.

