Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open briefing of the Council
this afternoon on the question of Somalia. This attests
to the international community's attention to and
concern about Somalia and demonstrates its valuable
support for the efforts to promote peace made by
Kenya and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). This will help to exert a positive
influence over the peace process in Somalia.

I would also like to thank the IGAD facilitator
and the foreign ministers of Kenya, Djibouti and
Ethiopia, as well as the representative of the African
Union, for their statements. I would like to express
deep appreciation for their enormous contributions
aimed at the achievement of reconciliation and the
establishment of an effective Government.

Encouraging progress has been made recently in
the Somali nationalization process, as can be seen from
the establishment of the transitional federal parliament,
the election of the speaker and President and the
smooth process of appointing the Prime Minister. All
of these developments have provided a real
opportunity - and a solid basis - for achieving peace
and stability in Somalia. We hope and believe that all
the parties in Somalia take advantage of this
opportunity and keep up the momentum by assuming
their primary obligation and responsibility to restore
peace and security, thus creating a favourable
environment for the new Government.

We welcome the fact that President Yusuf
Ahmed, President of the Transitional Government, has
committed himself to the promotion of the nation's
unity and reconciliation in a spirit of tolerance and
inclusiveness. We sincerely hope that the Transitional
Government, having overcome the many difficulties
and challenges facing it, will soon be officially
established and return to Somalia to begin the process
of national reconstruction and economic development.

The African Union has called upon the
international community to provide to the new Somali
Government all necessary assistance, including for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

We believe that the international community
should respond actively to the appeal of the African
Union. We are pleased to see the convening of the
symposium by the African Union on the plan for
Somali stability in the transitional period, and we
welcome the convening of the meeting of donor
countries in Stockholm. We are in favour of the United
Nations playing a coordinating role to achieve peace,
and we look forward to the submission, at an
appropriate date, by Secretary-General Kofi Annan of
proposals to the Security Council.

China has been closely following the peace
process in Somalia. In recent years it has been the
facilitator in the Council on the question of Somalia.
We have worked hard to facilitate the international
community's efforts in mediating the conflict in
Somalia. We have provided material assistance, within
our means, for the peace and reconciliation conference,
and have provided humanitarian assistance to the
people of Somalia and other supplies to the
Transitional Government of Somalia. We hope to see
national reconciliation, unity and the restoration of
peace, stability and security achieved at an early date,
and to that end we will work with the international
community in continuing to play an active role.

