Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
and on its work during the month of April. I am fully
confident that, given the crisis and the suffering
that your country, Rwanda, has known during its
contemporary history, you more than anyone are aware
of the human tragedy that is being experienced by the
brotherly Syrian people.

I should like to express my thanks to Ms. Valerie
Amos, Mr. Antonio Guterres, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura and Ms. Leila Zerrougui for their respective
important briefings.

Two years have passed since the crisis began
in Syria, and the painful figures mentioned by the
representative of the United Nations and its various
organizations speak not only to the magnitude of
that humanitarian disaster, but also to the inability
of the international community to take the measures
necessary to put an end to the cycle of violence and the
intensifying massacres, as well as to the violations of
human rights and the targeting of civilians going about
their daily life. It is the responsibility of the Council
and of the United Nations to ensure that the suffering of
those people is recognized. The brotherly Syrian people
- men, women, children and the elderly, wherever they
may be 7 are always under the threat of bombings,
or they have been displaced or become refugees in
neighbouring countries. All of them deserve a better
life that will meet their aspirations and hopes - a life in
which their dignity and aspirations are respected.

From the Council, Lebanon has consistently
reiterated its firm principled position of support for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, as
well as Lebanon's policy of distancing, which is aimed
at preserving unity and stability. That policy, which
has received support at the national and international
levels, does not represent a distancing by Lebanon from
the Syrian people in their humanitarian crisis. As the
Minister for Social Affairs of Lebanon said last August
in the Council (see S/PV.6826), Lebanon has never
distanced itself from international law or international
legality. It has also remained faithful to the historical,
geographical and neighbourly ties between the
Lebanese and the Syrian peoples. Lebanon has not
forgotten that the Syrian people hosted hundreds of
thousands of Lebanese refugees during the barbaric
Israeli aggression against Lebanon during the July
2006 war.

As the Council is aware, the number of Syrian
refugees in Lebanon who have been registered or
who have received aid from the Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees is approximately 416,000,
up until 12 April of this year. That number does not
include the tens of thousands who have not asked to be
registered with the Office of the High Commissioner.
According to statistics from the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, by 31 March, more than 35,000 Palestinian
displaced persons had come to Lebanon from Syria,
with more than 3,000 refugees arriving every day. We
expect that figure to reach 1.2 million before the end of
the year. Furthermore, the number of people affected
by that movement of people - combining Syrians,
Palestinians and Lebanese returning from Syria,
in addition to Lebanese host families - will reach
2.5 million before the end of the year.

According to United Nations agency statistics,
approximately 34.8 per cent of those refugees have
special needs, with 22.9 per cent of them being children
in a precarious situation and approximately 10 per
cent having serious medical conditions - bearing in
mind that about half of the refugees in Lebanon and its
neighbouring countries are children and young people.

We and others have ceaselessly issued warnings
about the impact of the unending crisis, not only on
Syria but also on neighbouring countries. We are now
seeing the impact of the fighting in Syria, which has
reached military dimensions, reaching the borders
of Lebanon, which is threatening the security of my
country. We condemn such violations, whatever their
origin or whatever the reason for them.

With regard to the impact of the serious issue of
refugees arising from the crisis, it has begun to affect
Lebanese society and its composition. It is also having
a substantial socioeconomic and security impact, given
that the majority of refugees live in the poorest areas
of my country. As a result, there is growing pressure
on the labour market and more demand for basic
resources, such as food, with the concomitant inflation
and increases in housing costs that entails.

Let me reiterate today that Lebanon will never
close its borders to anyone, individuals or families,
who, fleeing the horrors of violence and destruction,
come to seek refuge in our country. We will not send
anyone back who comes to us.

Lebanon remains committed to providing
assistance to all refugees from Syria and to seeing
to all their essential needs in terms of protection,
shelter, food, health care and education. But it is the
right of Lebanon to ask neighbouring States and the
international community to share the burden, given that
ours is the smallest country in terms of size and the one
with the least resources, even though we are the country
receiving the greatest number of Syrian refugees. That
number will very soon reach almost a quarter of the
Lebanese population, which is the highest reception
rate of all the countries hosting refugees.

The truth, as witnessed by representatives of the
United Nations and its agencies, is that Lebanon will
not be able to provide the necessary care to refugees
if the numbers keep growing as they are now, whether
the refugees be Syrians, Palestinians or even Lebanese
returning from Syria. Lebanon will not be able to cope
without an increase in assistance from the international
community.

Among those who have spoken out on this situation
is the regional representative of the High Commissioner
for Refugees, Ms. Ninette Kelley, who, earlier this
month, said, with regard to assistance,

"The plans are in place, the staff is ready, but the
funds are drying up. At this level of funding, vital
programmes to ensure food, clean water, schooling
for children, health care and shelter for newly
arrived refugees are simply impossible".

Furthermore, Mr. Etienne Labande, head of country
operations for the World Food Programme in Lebanon,
said that "In one month, and with the current funding,
more than 400,000 Syrian refugees in Lebanon will no
longer receive food assistance".

Mr. Antonio Guterres, the High Commissioner
for Refugees, who has joined our meeting today, aptly
summed up the situation when he said,

(spoke in English)

"Lebanon needs massive support; it cannot do it
alone."

(spoke in Arabic)

Allow me to reiterate the call addressed by the
President of Lebanon, Mr. Michel Sleiman, to the Doha
summit last month on the holding of an international
conference on Syrian refugees. He said that the
conference should not simply collect donations that
had been pledged at the earlier Kuwait conference,
but should work towards finding a way of sharing the
burden of costs in accordance with the principle of
shared responsibility, in order to reduce the negative
impact of the refugee flow on internal and regional
peace and security. Lebanon's President reiterated
that message at the beginning of this month, when he
encouraged the creation of camps on Syrian territory far
away from the combat zones and under the protection
ofthe United Nations. We urge the Council to look into
that possibility.

Finally, Lebanon would like to join its voice
to those of United Nations officials - Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Ms. Ertharin Cousin, Executive Director of
the World Food Programme; Mr. Antonio Guterres,
High Commissioner for Refugees; Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF; and Ms. Margaret Chan,
Director-General of the World Health Organization - in
exhorting the Council to take action,

(spoke in English)

"In the name of all those who have so suffered, and
the many more whose futures hang in the balance:
Enough! Summon and use your influence, now, to
save the Syrian people and save the region from
disaster."

