Ms. Bellamy: The actions pursued by the Security
Council on the related themes of conflicts in Africa,
promoting peace and humanitarian action have set the stage
for today's discussion on protecting civilians. The United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) appreciates very much
the significance of the Council's attention to this issue, and
we are grateful for the opportunity to speak to it as it
relates to children and women.

In the space of about four years, the scope of
UNICEF's humanitarian activities has almost
quadrupled - from 15 countries convulsed by conflict to
over 50. Our work in these places is closely coordinated
with allied agencies, including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the World
Food Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office for
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as the International Committee of
the Red Cross and numerous other non-governmental
organizations.

UNICEF is operational before, during and after
armed conflicts, and so we have seen how the same
children that we have helped nurture, immunize and
educate are now being systematically targeted and
brutalized - many of them recruited as killers or pressed
into service as porters and sexual slaves. Others end up
maimed or psychologically traumatized.

This horrific abrogation of child rights is simply
intolerable. Yet simply saying so is not enough. That is
why the Security Council's recent Presidential Statement
on children and armed conflict is so very important, for
it has helped greatly elevate the relevance of these
concerns to international peace and security, and it has
opened new opportunities for improving standards for
child protection while strengthening humanitarian
assistance.

In this connection then I would like to propose a
series of elements that would make up a peace and
security agenda for children.

First, we must end the use of children as soldiers.

Over 300,000 children, girls as well as boys, have
participated as combatants in the 30 most recent conflicts.
Many are recruited; others are abducted. Some join
simply to survive. Many of these children, some less than
10 years old, have witnessed or taken part in acts of
unspeakable violence, often against their own families or
their own communities.

In establishing 18 as a minimum age for
participation in its peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations has set an important precedent - one aimed at
ensuring the highest standards for the Organization. The
United Nations has further recommended that this policy

 

serve as an example for police and military forces
worldwide.

UNICEF wholeheartedly supports this position. We are
mindful of the sensitivities within the Security Council
concerning the recruitment issue. But we would be derelict
if we did not reiterate, in the strongest possible terms, that
until the minimum age of recruitment is universally set at
18, the ruthless exploitation of children as soldiers will
continue.

At the same time it must be acknowledged that the
reasons that give rise to children's participation in armed
conflict are often the very causes of the conflicts
themselves: poverty, discrimination, displacement and
marginalization. Yet these reasons do not justify inaction.

Preventing the recruitment of children is as important
as demobilization. Both objectives require a long-term
commitment to education and vocational training and
attention to psycho-social needs, as well as to reuniting
children with their families. Without these elements,
children are easily remobilized.

At the same time, peace agreements and peacekeeping
operations must include full-fledged demobilization
programmes specifically designed for child soldiers. These
must be aimed not only at reclaiming and destroying
weaponry, but also at providing former child soldiers with
material benefits and vocational alternatives.

We have already made a start. Through programmes
such as birth registration campaigns, family reunification,
dialogue with non-State parties and psycho-social support,
UNICEF programmes in a number of countries are helping
to heal children who have participated in conflicts.

Education - I wish to emphasize this - is an
extremely important tool in these efforts. In Tanzania's
refugee camps, for example, where children from Rwanda,
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
attended schools under trees, we have found reaffirmation
that education helps to re-establish stability even in the
midst of chaos, not only for children but for families. I
might point out, though, that in many cases donors classify
education as development and not as activity that would
take place in the course of the humanitarian emergency,
very often denying the funds for the kind of work that
could help so much to prevent some of these problems.

Secondly, we must protect humanitarian assistance and
we much protect humanitarian personnel.

UNICEF and its partners on the ground struggle
daily with the task of gaining humanitarian access to
endangered civilian populations - a struggle made all the
more difficult as the issue of access, as the Council has
heard, becomes politicized. This is why we need to
vigorously promote political solutions while finding
innovative ways to reach civilians at risk, of whom
children and women continue to make up the vast
majority. Of the nearly 25 million refugees and internally
displaced people, 80 per cent are women and children.
Many of them are trapped in the highly militarized
environments found in camps for refugees and the
displaced, where children and women are especially
vulnerable to violence and sexual assault, and boys to
forced recruitment.

We have already reached tens of thousands of
children and women using such programmes as "corridors
of peace" and "days of tranquillity" in regions like
Central America, South Asia and the Middle East, as well
as through the principle of Operation Lifeline Sudan and
through agreements like the recent United Nations accord
to supply humanitarian relief to people in previously
unreached parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Our work is informed by the internationally
recognized principles of humanity, impartiality and
neutrality. To ensure that these principles always guide
our actions, we have just launched training programmes
in humanitarian principles for staff, agency and non-
governmental organization partners who provide direct
support to children in conflict situations. We must also
take steps to improve the safety and security of
humanitarian workers.

In their efforts to protect civilians, our courageous
United Nations staff members - indeed, aid workers
generally - have been increasingly targeted for violent
attack, murder and rape. Their right to use
communications systems for their own operations has
been denied in some instances. United Nations property
has been looted with impunity, with losses exceeding
many tens of millions of dollars. If a peace and security
agenda for children is to be effectively implemented, this
must stop.

At the same time, all United Nations staff members
must be given proper training in how to cope with the
lawlessness and violence that awaits them. UNICEF,
together with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, has invested quite heavily in
this area. We are pioneering the development of an

 

incident-tracking system and we have distributed security-
awareness training programmes to over 200 duty stations.
But these measures are, I might say, only a beginning and,
by themselves, they cannot begin to meet the security needs
of the 30,000 United Nations staff members in the field.

Third, we must support humanitarian mine action.
Repatriation, which is fundamental to any peace process,
cannot be conceived of, let alone undertaken, without the
requisite resources and commitment to clearing mine fields
along repatriation routes and in destination areas. Yet, in
places like Cambodia, there are twice as many anti-
personnel mines as children.

UNICEF welcomes the coordinating role played by the
United Nations Mine Action Service and we are working
closely with a group of United Nations partners to ensure
mine-awareness education, victim assistance and
rehabilitation for children and communities. We currently
support such programmes in every region of the world.

Moreover, the Ottawa Convention has immense
potential to bring about dramatic improvements in affected
communities. That is why we are so fiercely committed to
promoting its widest implementation. We are concerned,
however, that many affected countries will require United
Nations assistance to meet their Convention obligations.
Political will and donor support in these areas will be
critical for a coordinated response.

Fourth, we must protect children from the effects of
sanctions. In the interests of children, sanctions should not
be imposed without obligatory, immediate and enforceable
humanitarian exemptions, along with mechanisms for
monitoring their impact on children and other vulnerable
groups. In all countries under comprehensive economic
sanctions, the inadequacy of current provisions has resulted
in alarming rates of child malnutrition and in child and
maternal mortality. These inadequacies must be addressed.

We welcome the Security Council's recent call to
monitor the humanitarian impact of sanctions on children
and to create more efficient exemption mechanisms. We
believe that child-impact assessments are central to this and
should be carried out before, during and after sanctions are
imposed.

Humanitarian assistance represents just less than 5 per
cent of all of the goods presented for Sanctions Committee
exemption. I would therefore underscore the need to
develop a list of essential humanitarian goods for
exemption, and I would urge that those items include
educational supplies.

Fifth, we must ensure that peace-building specifically
includes children. In concluding peace agreements, we
have an opportunity to ensure that peace-building
activities are developed in conformity with human rights
and humanitarian norms, while promoting respect for
these standards by non-State entities. While respect for
child rights is rarely mentioned in peace agreements, it is
noteworthy that the peace processes in El Salvador and in
Guatemala reached agreement on human rights and on the
need for national and international verification
mechanisms.

It is true that much more could have been done to
address children's special needs. But at the same time,
important precedents were set that we very strongly
support. The United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala (MINUGUA), for example, pursued projects
to strengthen child-rights institutions that ultimately led to
the creation of a special Government office to promote
awareness of child rights, to investigate violations, to
monitor public institutions providing services for children
and to influence legislation to ensure conformity with
Guatemala's obligations under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. We believe that support for such
activities should be extended further to other national
institutions, which would include police and judicial
systems.

Sixth, we must challenge the impunity of war
crimes, especially against children. Children's recruitment
as members of armed forces, their rape and slaughter and
the targeting of their schools and hospitals are recognized
by the International Criminal Court Statute (ICC) for what
they are: heinous atrocities. Ratification of the ICC
Statute is a major priority for us and we will work to
ensure the Statute's effective implementation at the
national level through training and support for legislative
reform. The ICC Statute's entry into force this year would
be, we believe, the most significant commemoration of
the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions as well
as of the tenth anniversary of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, and would indeed be a fitting way to
mark the arrival of the next millennium.

Seventh, we must promote early warning and
preventive action for children. Early warning and
preventive action can help deter human rights violations
as well as defuse situations that might lead to armed
conflict. International field personnel, including military,

 

civilian and humanitarian, are often the first to witness
egregious violations against children and women. Yet the
procedures and mechanisms to assess, report, monitor,
prosecute and remedy them are woefully inadequate.
Deploying human rights field monitors and observers in
preparatory missions and with field operations should be
considered a fundamental aspect of all Security Council
efforts to promote peace and to resolve conflicts. To be
effective, these components should be adequately resourced
and staffed to handle child rights and gender-based
violations.

To this end, we have developed a training package on
gender and child rights protection in complex emergencies.
These are presently being used by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and several national peacekeeping
training institutes. We have made similar material available
to the Kosovo Verification Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and, at a
country level, for example in Mozambique, we are working
with the United Nations Development Programme on child
rights, gender and juvenile justice training for the police.
Most important, we must support the establishment of
permanent independent national institutions that will protect
human rights and reinstitute the rule of law in the transition
to democratic governance.

The protection of children in armed conflict must be
framed by the standards and norms embodied in
international human rights instruments and humanitarian
law. We have that framework in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. It is not only history's most universally
embraced human rights treaty, but the only one that
explicitly incorporates humanitarian law. In this connection,
therefore, let me conclude with these urgent
recommendations:

We must ensure that children are always identified as
an explicit priority in all efforts to build peace and resolve
conflicts, whether as part of demobilization mandates or
observer missions or in concluding peace agreements. In
current practice, I would point out, children are officially
overlooked. For example, the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL)'s latest human rights
assessment of the shocking situation in Freetown, which I
read last night, focuses almost exclusively on violations
against children and women. Yet the Mission's mandate
fails to address their desperate need for special protection.
Likewise, the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
made no mention of children in either the demobilization or
humanitarian aspects of its mandate. And by the same
token, the United Nations Mission in Angola did not
include children in the demobilization, disarmament or
demining aspects of its mandate.

We must move towards ending the use of child
soldiers by continuing to press strongly for an
international requirement that raises the age of recruitment
to 18.

We must protect children from the effects of
sanctions.

We must secure full implementation of the global
ban on anti-personnel landmines.

We must achieve a dramatic reduction in the
availability of small arms and light weapons, which only
serve to sustain war and conflict and whose portability is
a major factor in the ease with which children are
transformed into combatants.

We must ensure that there be specialized child-rights
training and codes of conduct for all - all - military,
civilian and peacekeeping personnel, so that they will
understand their legal responsibilities to all children,
including the need to shield them from egregious
violations of their rights.
We must make adequate resources available to
ensure the safety and security of humanitarian personnel.

And we must ensure that those who commit war
crimes against children are brought to account before a
fully empowered International Criminal Court.

UNICEF stands ready to support the work of the
Security Council in any way possible and, as well, to
keep it fully informed.

Let me say in closing how much we appreciate the
Council's concern with the issues of civilians in armed
conflict, especially the plight of children and women. We
are confident that this discussion will enhance mutual
understanding of the issue and will lead to greater and
more active cooperation.

