Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We extend our sincere appreciation to our briefers for their valuable updates and insights into the situation on the ground, which is, frankly, heartbreaking. The protracted conflict in Yemen continues to deteriorate, as the security situation remains volatile without a viable political solution. Coupled with this is the worsening of the humanitarian situation, which has been significantly compounded by the coronavirus disease pandemic. To that end, we underscore the need for unhindered passage of humanitarian aid to those people who are most in need. Urgent as this is, however, it is not a solution, but merely a measure to assuage the abject consequences of the crisis. The only sustainable solution is a political one. We reaffirm our support for the work of the Special Envoy and all actors that have been facilitating dialogue between the parties. As Ms. Raja Abdullah Ahmed Almasabi said, we need to do more; we need to do better. We express concern over the shortfall in funding, which is impacting and hindering humanitarian operations. The disbursement of pledged funds is urgently needed to ensure the continued delivery of life-saving assistance. We need to do more; we need to do better. The Council recently convened a meeting to discuss the issue of the FSO Safer oil tanker, which remains unaddressed. We underscore that the environment, economy and people of Yemen and the region will be gravely impacted by any explosion or leak that occurs. Consequently, in advancing this issue, these concernsmust remain a priority, ahead of political interests and political dynamics. To avoid a catastrophe, an assessment of the condition of the tanker must be carried out and appropriate steps to eliminate any threat taken. We need to do more; we need to do better. In concluding, we reiterate our appeal to all parties to cease hostilities and return to the negotiating table. While we encourage constructive engagement with the Special Envoy, we recognize that an effective outcome can be achieved only through an inclusive Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political process. This is the only palpable path to the advancement of Yemen's people, institutions and political expressions. I close by echoing Mark's plea. We must help Yemen now or watch Yemen fall into the abyss.
