Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
France for raising this issue in the Security Council
and for its efforts to generate the groundbreaking
counter-terrorism financing resolution we adopted this
morning (resolution 2642 (2019)). We also thank our
briefers today.

The Security Council has been instrumental in
building a global framework for Member States to
counter the financing of terrorism, beginning with the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), which we drafted
after 11 September 2001, which provides the foundation
for our global counter-terrorism financing efforts. The
Council has come a long way to tackle the financing
of terrorist groups, including by adapting our robust
sanctions regime against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIS) and Al-Qaida pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) to the evolving threat we face and adopting
important resolutions, such as resolutions 2199 (2015),
2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017), which target the use of oil
and antiquities by ISIS to raise funds as well as other
illicit activities.

The comprehensive resolution adopted today is an
important step forward in adapting United Nations tools
to address today's counter-terrorism financing threat.
As we heard from the President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), United States Assistant Secretary
of the Treasury Billingslea, the resolution brings the
obligations of Member States under Security Council
resolutions further into line with the FATF standard
on criminalizing terrorism financing. Specifically,
the resolution obligates Member States to criminalize
terrorism financing even in the absence of a link to
a specific terrorist act, so that States are equipped to
stymie the general operations of terrorist groups and
individual terrorists. This new and very important
global obligation will help ensure that Member States
have the frameworks in place to utilize effectively
an important counter-terrorism financing tool, the
prosecution of those who knowingly finance and
otherwise support terrorist groups.

The Security Council is clear in its intent when
creating this obligation. As we have reaffirmed many
times before, Member States must implement resolution
2462 (2019) in a manner consistent with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international refugee law. The United States supports
the essential work of humanitarian actors and relief
agencies that provide life-saving assistance to those
suffering through conflict. We are the single-largest
humanitarian donor worldwide and urge Member States
to coordinate and strengthen risk-mitigation efforts,
so that those in need can receive aid and so that the
terrorists who cause their suffering do not benefit from
such assistance. The resolution adopted today also
underscores the critical need for the full and effective
implementation of all targeted financial sanctions
flowing from the United Nations sanctions regime
against ISIS and Al-Qaida pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), as well as from the domestic sanctions regime of
each Member State pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
so as to fully disrupt terrorism financing.

The United States employs a comprehensive
approach to counter terrorism financing. We use
financial sanctions, other financial measures and
law-enforcement action to cut off terrorists from
their sources of revenue and from the international
financial system, which involves close coordination
and information-sharing with our inter-agency
and international partners. It also involves strong
collaboration with the private-sector, non-profit and
civil society groups to share and receive information
on terrorist-financing threats. We must disrupt the
financing of groups like Hizbullah that export violence
and instability across the Middle East and have a
long history of destabilizing activity that continues
to threaten global peace and security. Hizbullah,
which continues to fight wars on two fronts, in Syria
and Yemen, uses an increasingly sophisticated array
of tools and international networks of companies and
brokers, including seemingly legitimate businesses,
in the construction and pharmaceutical sectors, for
example, to generate revenue, conceal the procurement
of weapons and circumvent controls to disrupt money-
laundering and terrorism financing.

Social networks and tools cannot be tackled in
isolation, or in any one corner of the globe. We cannot
let proven terrorist groups such as Hizbullah continue
to stay one step ahead of our international monitoring
and counter-terrorism financing efforts. All of us
must recognize Hizbullah and other such groups for
what they are: a global threat to peace and security.
The terrorist-financing threat that Hizbullah, ISIS and
Al-Qaida pose requires employing the full range of
tools highlighted in today's resolution.

We enhance the impact of our individual efforts
to counter terrorism financing by working with
key international partners. For example, the United
States, together with its fellow co-Chair, Saudi
Arabia, established the Terrorist Financing Targeting
Center, in Riyadh, to facilitate coordinated disruptive
actions, information-sharing and capacity-building
to target terrorist-financing networks and activities
of mutual concern that pose national security threats
to the United States and the Gulf. Together, we are
countering evolving terrorist-financing networks,
including those supporting ISIS, Al-Qaida, Hizbullah
and Lashkar-e-Taiba. Since the Center's inception,
in May 2017, we have implemented three rounds of
multilateral designations, sanctioning 36 individuals
and entities. We also work multilaterally through the
FATF, the global standard-setting body that promotes
the effective implementation of its standards through
a rigorous peer assessment and follow-up process, to
ensure States are taking action to combat terrorism
financing, money-laundering and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

In conclusion, we must continue to bring all of our
tools to bear on combating terrorism financing around
the world. Our collective efforts have had a tremendous
impact thus far and, while there is much more work to do,
today's unanimous vote reinforces the Council's resolve
to suppress the financing of terrorism worldwide.

