Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Sweden welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2371 (2017) today, which
shows that the Council continues to stand united and
that we are fully determined to deal with the growing
threat posed by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's nuclear and missile programmes. With this
vote, the Security Council continues to shoulder its
responsibility and assert its authority with respect
to a situation that jeopardizes international peace
and security.

The latest missile test, again of intercontinental
range, is yet another breach of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea international obligations, in defiance
of numerous Security Council resolutions. This is a
cause for utmost concern for the region and, indeed, for
the whole world. The potential dangers are evident, and
the threat is growing. We express our deepest solidarity
with the neighbouring countries and their peoples,
living under the constant shadow of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's threatening behaviour.

Sweden therefore condemns the latest tests in the
strongest possible terms. We reiterate our call on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to cease all
development of its ballistic-missile and nuclear-weapons
programme. We urge it to take immediate steps towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement
of the programme, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We further call on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to speedily and
unconditionally re-engage in a meaningful and credible
dialogue with the international community, with a view
to fulfilling the obligations laid out by the Council.

The international community must, on its part,
redouble efforts to effectively and fully implement
current resolutions and to act swiftly to implement the
new sanctions adopted today. All States Members of
the United Nations must do their utmost in this regard.

At the same time, sanctions alone will never solve
this situation. Sanctions must be accompanied by
dialogue and confidence-building measures so as to
reach a long-term, sustainable solution. There is an
urgent need to avoid escalation and to take steps to
prepare for a peaceful, diplomatic and comprehensive
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula, and
for the wider region.

It is also of key importance to re-establish
inter-Korean communication channels. As a member of
the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, Sweden
strongly encourages the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to resume contact and cooperation with the
Commission at the border station in Panmunjom.
This would contribute to reducing tensions as well as
increase trust and transparency.

We must contribute to finding diplomatic openings,
and we welcome all initiatives to facilitate a peaceful
and comprehensive solution through dialogue. As we
have said previously in the Council, it is deeply worrying
that tensions have continued to rise in recent months,
and the potential for mistakes, misunderstanding and
miscalculation is high. A regional security mechanism
should be the medium-term goal.

There is no military solution to this situation. We
strongly support today's resolution and stand firmly
united with Council members in condemning the
actions of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
But in parallel, creative diplomacy aimed at bringing
about dialogue and negotiations is also urgently needed.
We call again on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to re-engage in a credible and meaningful
dialogue with the international community.

