We thank Ms. Plasschaert for her comprehensive briefing, her leadership and the great work of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in fulfilling its mandate, which we firmly support. First, we welcome the formation of the new Government led by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi and would like to express satisfaction for the prompt confirmation of all ministers by the Council of Representatives, as well as for the inclusion of women and members of minority groups in the Cabinet. Similarly, we commend the measures taken thus far aimed at addressing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and enhancing the Government's response to this health crisis, as well as the measures to breach the gap of the budget deficit and improve financial liquidity. In this vein, the support, cooperation and assistance of the international community to Iraq is fundamental to better address the health and economic crisis and to respond to them with preventive actions more effectively. With regard to the relations between Baghdad and Erbil, we welcome the resumption of talks between the federal and the regional Governments in relation to the agreement on resources and income sharing. We salute the meetings between the President of the Kurdistan Regional Government and the President of the federal Government, preceded by other meetings with the respective authorities, resulting in the transfer of partial funds to the Kurdistan Regional Government. We hope that dialogue continues, relations are further tightened and an agreement can be reached in this regard. On another aspect, we want to express concern for the security developments in Iraq, particularly in relation to terrorism activities, which have gradually increased. We continue to encourage the international community to strengthen the cooperation with Iraq towards counter-terrorism efforts in order to prevent the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant from gathering strength, as well as the efforts to establish accountability for the heinous crimes committed by this terrorist group. In relation to regional stability, we urge other countries to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and airspace of Iraq and to show restraint and avoid the utilization of Iraq's territory as an arena for hostile confrontations. Moreover, we call on parties to refrain from performing any military activity without the Iraqi Government's consent. On another aspect, we observe with satisfaction the creation of the high- level fact-finding committee to investigate the use of force against civilians while they exercised their right to protest and assembly and to allow compensation for the families of the victims. The identification of the perpetrators, as well as the establishment of accountability, for those crimes is paramount. There is no peace and stability where impunity prevails. Considering the increase in cases of gender-based violence, including domestic violence during the implementation of social distancing measures due to COVID-19, we reiterate our call on UNAMI to actively engage with the relevant civil society organizations to find ways to better address the issue and assist the Government in this task. In addition, we urge the Government of Iraq to take the necessary steps to hold the perpetrators of domestic violence accountable and provide appropriate assistance to the victims. Regarding the file of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, we are hopeful that procedures will resume as soon as restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic are lifted. Also, we note with great satisfaction the display of commitment by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi with regard to solving this issue, as well as the recent visit by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait to Iraq, which we consider crucial steps towards solving this long-pending and important matter for the Government of Kuwait and the families of the missing persons. Finally, we stress that UNAMI's electoral assistance to Iraqi authorities is crucial for the conduct of fair, free, credible and inclusive Iraqi-owned and Iraqi-led elections in order for Iraq to consolidate its democracy. The Dominican Republic extends its full solidarity to the Government of Iraq in those endeavours.
