Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Let me
begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Le Roy for
his briefing and for introducing the Secretary-General's
very helpful report (S/2009/352). It is very welcome
that we have Mr. Margelov with us today; it is good to
have him here, and his comprehensive statement was
very helpful to the Council.

The Sudan remains at the top of the Security
Council agenda. We are focused on Darfur today, but
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement remains the
highest priority and the most urgent issue. Let me just
put on record that United Kingdom welcomes the
responses of all parties to the decision of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration on Abyei, which I think will move
the situation on the North-South process forward.

On Darfur, the Council's strategy is focused on
four tracks: peacekeeping, political, humanitarian and
judicial. The Secretary-General's report shows that
progress has been made on some of these but that we
still have further to go.

On the first track - peacekeeping - we
welcome the progress highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report on deploying the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). The improved cooperation from the
Government of the Sudan is particularly welcome. The
Secretary-General reports serious concerns still over
the slowness with which visas are being issued for
UNAMID staff despite the progress of the Tripartite
Committee, and we call on the Government of the
Sudan to solve that problem and to ensure access to the
region for UNAMID personnel and freedom of
movement within Darfur, which the Secretary-General
also highlights as a serious concern.

Overall, UNAMID's performance still has room
to improve. It is now two years since this Council
adopted resolution 1769 (2007), and UNAMID has not
had the effect that we all wanted it to have. We
welcome the Secretary-General's commitment to
reaching 92 per cent deployment by the end of this
year, but we are all conscious that previous such targets
have been missed. Those relate to the numbers of
personnel. The more important measure is UNAMID's
capability to implement its mandate across Darfur, and
I welcome Mr. Le Roy's estimate on what proportion
of UNAMID's design capability is now in place and
what proportion will be in place by the end of the year.

The United Kingdom agrees with the Secretary-
General that the protection of civilians and the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance should be the
priority tasks for UNAMID. As UNAMID becomes
more able to implement its mandate, it will also be
important for us to monitor its progress, identify where
the obstacles lie and adjust the tasking and
configuration of the force accordingly.

On the second track - the political process -
progress remains painfully slow. However effective
UNAMID becomes, it will not be able to solve
Darfur's problems alone. UNAMID is designed as a
peacekeeping force and it needs a peace to keep. The
United Kingdom supports the African Union-United
Nations Joint Chief Mediator, Mr. Bassole, and the
contribution of the Government of Qatar. I would like
to echo what Mr. Margelov said earlier. We urge all
parties, including rebel movements, to engage with the
Mediator without preconditions and show maximum
flexibility to resolve areas of disagreement.

On the third track - the humanitarian - as the
Secretary-General notes, the security situation in
Darfur remains volatile and the situation for civilians
deeply troubling. A staggering 4.7 million Darfuris
need humanitarian assistance, with about a third of the
population - 2.6 million people - internally
displaced and unable to return home. Banditry and
sexual violence continue to plague civilians across
Darfur, as the Secretary-General's report notes.

It remains inexplicable why the Government of
the Sudan wanted to add to the misery of the people of
Darfur by expelling 13 international non-governmental
organizations. The Secretary-General's report suggests
that now some 5,000 fewer international aid workers
are in Darfur than before the expulsions - a fall of
over 25 per cent. That can only complicate the delivery
of humanitarian relief. So efforts must continue to
close the gap between need and provision.

The Under-Secretary-General also commented on
the regional dimension, and we echo his call for
improved relations between Chad and the Sudan. Those
are is essential if the people of Darfur are to have a
safe and secure future. We need real cooperation
between Khartoum and N'Djamena and less trading of
accusations.
The fourth track is the judicial one, where
progress is needed. No one has been held to account
for the crimes of the past six years. We call again on
the Sudan to comply with resolution 1593 (2005),
relating to the International Criminal Court. To
consider article 16 of the Rome Statute for any
indictee, we would need to see concrete action for
peace by the Government of the Sudan, reflected in
changes on the ground and genuine cooperation with
the International Criminal Court.

Lastly, UNAMID's mandate expires at the end of
this month, and, as Mr. Margelov mentioned, the
United Kingdom has circulated a draft resolution to
extend it for a further year. In line with the Secretary-
General's report, the draft resolution underlines that
the protection of civilians and humanitarian relief are
the priority issues for UNAMID. In line with the
Council's wider peacekeeping agenda, it requests the
Secretary-General to develop benchmarks and
timelines to track and measure UNAMID's ability to
implement its mandate, as we have done with other
peacekeeping missions, such as the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan, the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad, and the United
Nations Observer Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The draft resolution expresses support
for the peace process and calls on all rebel groups to
engage, and it calls for an improvement in the
humanitarian situation, including the implementation
of the Joint Communique between the Government of
Sudan and the United Nations on Facilitation of
Humanitarian Activities in Darfur.

We will continue to conduct consultations with
other delegations in order to reach a broad agreement
on the draft resolution to put it to the vote next week.

