Ms. Honore (spoke in French): I would like to
express my sincere gratitude to France, in its capacity
as President of the Security Council, and to all Council
members for organizing this meeting called to consider
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission Stabilization in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2015/157), dated 4 March 2015. I also take this
Opportunity to welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would especially like to thank all the countries
contributing troops and police elements to MINUSTAH,
as well as all the Member States that have participated
in the stabilization process, for their valuable support

to the consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.
(spoke in English)

Since the Security Council's visit to Haiti from
23 to 25 January, the country has made measurable
gains towards the holding of long-overdue elections by
the end of 2015. Despite the uncertainty created by the
absence of a functioning Parliament since 12 January
2015, the political consensus reached in the 11 January
accord between the executive and a number of political
parties has opened a path towards inclusive and
transparent elections this year.

Following the establishment of a new Government
and of a new provisional Electoral Council, provided
for in the accord, the Council engaged in a series of
consultations with political parties, the presidency
and the remaining senators on the electoral law and
the electoral calendar. On 2 March, President Martelly
promulgated the electoral law, and after receiving
a proposed electoral calendar from the Electoral
Council, he followed through on 13 March by issuing a
presidential order convening a first round of legislative
elections on 9 August 2015, and a second round of
legislative elections, combined with the first round
presidential and the local elections, on 25 October.
If required, a presidential run-off is to be held on
27 December.

With that, the prerequisites for the holding of
elections this year have been established. Some political
parties have voiced discontent over the electoral
calendar. Nonetheless, most ofthem have signalled their
intent to take part in the planned elections. I call on all
political actors to continue a genuine dialogue and a
transparent and consultative approach that contributes
to building confidence among all stakeholders.

It is imperative that the Government provide
the necessary resources for the Electoral Council to
implement the ambitious calendar for what will be a
highly complex electoral operation, in a timely and
independent manner. That will allow, as provided for
in the Constitution, for the fiftieth legislature to be
installed on 11 January 2016, and for the transfer of
power to a new President on 7 February.

In that context, I am encouraged by the provisional
Electoral Council's swift resumption of its operational
activities following the installation of the new
counsellors on 23 January, including by reactivating
its technical commissions. When I was last before the
Security Council (see S/PV.7262), on 11 September
2014, I spoke about the need for Haitian institutions to
eventually assume full responsibility over the conduct
of elections. It is time for Haitian authorities, including
the Electoral Council, to demonstrate their capacity and
assume even greater ownership ofthe electoral process.
Within our means and capabilities, the Mission, together
with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and other partners, is supporting the relevant
Haitian authorities.

That support notwithstanding, the continuing
generous assistance of the international community is
still indispensable, including with respect to filling the
funding gap that is being ascertained by the Electoral
Council and UNDP. Equally, international observation
of the elections will be crucial to strengthening the
confidence of political parties, candidates and voters in
the process and to enhance transparency and fairness.
I encourage all partners to contribute to election
observation missions upon invitation by the Haitian
Government.

Beyond the developments on the electoral front, the
political situation has been marked by a rise in tensions
between Haiti and its neighbour. The skilful handling
of the situation by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the two countries led to a mutual reinforcement of their
diplomatic ties with the full resumption of consular and
embassy activities last Friday. I am encouraged that,
as evidenced in the Jimani declaration of 13 March,
the Foreign Ministers have undertaken to address the
question of the status of persons of Haitian origin in
the Dominican Republic. In that context, the United
Nations country team and I have advocated for the
resumption of a high-level dialogue between both
countries to de-escalate tensions.

Over the past six months, the security situation in
Haiti has remained relatively stable. As the Secretary-
General's report outlines, however, we have witnessed a
recent increase in certain crimes, gang-related violence
and public unrest. Particularly troubling is a spike in
violence between rival gangs in the fragile commune
of Cite Soleil and other parts of the metropolitan area
of Port-au-Prince since the beginning of the year.
The radical opposition has continued to criticize the
recent political breakthrough and has not desisted
from organizing anti-Government demonstrations,
calling for the resignation of President Martelly and
capitalizing on socioeconomic grievances, such as the
recent general strikes over fuel prices and teachers'
salaries.

As per the Secretary-General's report, most public
protests have been small in size and have taken place
without major incidents. Those that involved some
degree of violence were for the most part handled by
the Haitian National Police (HNP) without operational
support from MINUSTAH. The Mission supported
the National Police primarily by providing planning
and technical advice for crowd control operations.
However, in some case, formed police and the military
were still called upon to actively engage in crowd
control, together with the National Police, and crowd
control by the military was mostly needed outside of
Port-au-Prince. The Mission's police and military
components further supported the National Police in
addressing specific threats to security and safety in the
metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince.

The further development of the Haitian National
Police is vital for enduring stability in Haiti. In line with
its commitment to the implementation of the Haitian
National Police 2012-2016 development plan, the HNP
has, with the support of the international community,
achieved tangible results in the reconstruction of
police infrastructure, recruitment, training, crime
investigation, public order management and in the
overall professionalization of police officers. Over
the past year, the National Police has demonstrated
significant improvements in operational readiness
and in the performance of its crowd control units.
Notwithstanding this progress towards the build-
up of a professional and accountable police force
and the important contributions made by bilateral
partners, resources are still insufficient to achieve all
the targets of the 2012-2016 development plan. The
sustained commitment of the Haitian Government
and the continuous generous assistance of the
international community will remain critical, not only
to enable the National Police to progressively assume
full responsibility for internal security, but also to
strengthen the management and administrative capacity
and oversight mechanisms required.

Recent developments in the area of the rule of
law are reassuring. Following years of consultations
and repeated reviews, the presentation, on 13 March,
of a draft penal code to the President of the Republic
by the Commission for Judicial Reform brings Haiti
one step closer to renewing its 179-year-old criminal
law framework. The appointment of a highly regarded
judge as the new President of the Supreme Court and
the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the launch by
the Ministry of Justice of an initiative to expedite the
processing of cases so as to decrease prolonged pretrial
detention are also positive steps taken in early March
towards addressing deficiencies in the rule of law and
the continued challenges of overcrowding and detention
conditions in Haitian prisons.

With regard to the humanitarian situation,
while concerted efforts by national authorities and
international partners have succeeded in drastically
reducing the number of reported cholera cases - down
from a peak of over 350,000 in 2011 to 27,753 reported
cases in 2014, there was a spike in the last quarter of
2014. The newly appointed Government has set up
an interministerial task force to coordinate response
activities at the technical level. However, the lingering
epidemic and high levels of other waterborne and vector-
borne diseases will persist until gaps in infrastructure
and services are definitively closed.

Haiti has continued to make progress on the
relocation ofpersons displaced by the 2010 earthquake,
with 79,397 persons still remaining in camps as of end
2014. Due to a drought in some areas of the country
and a reduced production in crops in 2014, of an
estimated 600,000 people suffering from severe food
insecurity, the number of persons experiencing acute
food insecurity in the country increased during the
first three months of 2015, from 65,000 in 2014 to
roughly 165,000. The United Nations country team's
response entails a mix of instruments ranging from
direct food aid and life-saving support for children
suffering acute malnutrition to structural programmes
aimed at improving access to social safety nets and
income-generating activities.

In order to strengthen the continuum from recovery
to development and to address remaining humanitarian
shortcomings, the United Nations and partners, together
with the Haitian Government, launched a transitional
appeal in Port-au-Prince, on 11 March, and in Geneva,
on 13 March, to replace the humanitarian action plan of
2014. The cost associated with the transitional appeal
is $401 million, and I would like to encourage Haiti's
partners and friends to consider making financial
contributions.

With regard to the consolidation of the Mission, in
accordance with resolution 2180 (2014), the military
component has planned the reduction of its personnel
from the authorized 5,021 to 2,370 troops. As Haiti
enters a complex electoral period, and while the military
component will reduce its presence, it is vital that the
Mission's police component be fully staffed to support
the Haitian National Police in all the departments
during the electoral process and to enable the Mission's
uniformed presence to be as effective, mobile and
visible as possible. I therefore wish to invite all partners
of Haiti to make an additional effort to assist us in
reaching the authorized number of 2,601 police.

MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
have also initiated the transition planning to underpin
the gradual reconfiguration of the United Nations
presence in Haiti beyond 2016. To support that process,
we aim at developing a transition plan that will draw on
the consolidation benchmarks and the revised integrated
strategic framework to ensure effective harmonization
with existing planning frameworks. Close coordination
and partnership with the Haitian Government will be
critical as part of that process.

In conclusion, the continued good will of the
Government and of all the political actors is essential
to build confidence in the electoral process and create
the necessary conditions for the upcoming elections to
take place in as peaceful and serene an environment as
possible.

(spoke in French)

It is in that context that I would like to welcome
the Haitian political actors' acceptance of the principles
of dialogue and compromise, which allowed them
to embark upon the path towards holding the long-
delayed elections in 2015. Holding a fair, transparent
and inclusive electoral process in a peaceful climate is
the sine qua non for Haiti to continue to make progress
towards stabilization, democratic governance, the
strengthening of the rule of law and socioeconomic
development. I urge all political actors to do their part
to ensure that these elections, which are so important,
are held in an atmosphere of peace and trust, thus
enabling the broadest possible participation.

(Spoke in English)

I call on all members of the international community
to continue to lend their support to Haiti's electoral
process.

