Mr. O'Brien: I thank my colleague Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his authoritative and comprehensive
briefing, and I shall complement his remarks on the
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Last month, I also provided an overview of
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory (see S/PV.7792). Today, I will focus my
remarks on the increasing challenges humanitarian
actors are facing in responding to the needs of those
vulnerable Palestinians, and for which we need greater
support from the Council.

In the occupied Gaza Strip, 70 per cent of the
population currently receives some form of international
assistance, mostly food aid. Yet our ability to deliver
that assistance has become increasingly restricted.
Israel bans or restricts the import of certain goods into
Gaza, on the grounds that they have a dual military
and civilian purpose. Affected items range from
communications equipment to cement, wood and even
water pumps, fire trucks and medical X-ray machines.
Mr. Mladenov has already spoken about the growing
and dramatic gap between how much material Israel is
permitting to be imported to Gaza through the Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism, and the growing waiting
lists of beneficiaries. That translates very directly into
the humanitarian realm, with 60,000 highly vulnerable,
displaced persons in Gaza still waiting for their home
sto be rebuilt, who need rental assistance and much
more in the interim.

It is not just about concrete. Urgent projects, which
aim to reduce the risk of flooding that threatens nearly
500,000 people as winter approaches, have been on hold
for 10 months as they await clearance of equipment.
Projects to rehabilitate water wells and the construction
of a neonatal intensive care unit are other examples of
urgent needs suffering unnecessary long delays.

Aid workers have also been caught up in the
increased restrictions. United Nations staff in Gaza
require a permit to leave Gaza in order to meet with
their managers in Jerusalem or Ramallah, or to attend
training programmes elsewhere. While those permits
were relatively easy to receive in previous years, when
never more than 10 per cent were typically rejected, last
month more than half of our United Nations applicants
were turned away, with some advised not to apply again
for 12 months. No explanation other than "security"
is cited, leaving us at a loss as to how to respond and
with a growing morale problem. Non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), embassies and others are
experiencing similar trends.

Those new access restrictions are hitting other Gaza
residents hard as well, of course; over half of the 2,000
permit applications by patients seeking urgent medical
treatment outside Gaza in October, most typically for
cancer treatment, were not approved by Israel. Inside
Gaza, the operating space for NGOs is also difficult.
The de facto authorities, Hamas, regularly seek to do
audits, review staff or beneficiary lists or introduce new
permit requirements and restrictions on work in certain
areas of the Strip. NGOs need to resist those pressures
and navigate anti-terrorist legislation set up by many
Member States, which generate their own restrictions
on the type of programming that is allowed and with
whom one can and cannot engage.

The ongoing internal divisions between the
Palestinian authorities in the West Bank and those in
Gaza also inevitably transfer an increasing burden
onto humanitarian actors and humanitarian budgets,
as unstaffed operating theatres, dilapidated equipment
and breaks in fuel supplies take their toll on people
and services.

Ultimately, real progress in Gaza requires a
full lifting of the blockade by Israel, in line with the
resolutions of the Council and the General Assembly.
Until that happens, Israel must ensure that items needed
for reconstruction, relief and emergency preparedness
are allowed entry, and that aid workers are able to move
about to do their vital work.

While it is not a substitute for the opening of
access to Israel, we also look to Egypt, in line with its
own security considerations, to maintain the welcome
increase in openings at the Rafah Border Crossing, which
remains, literally, a life line for some. We must also see
greater action from Palestinian leaders in Ramallah and
Gaza; internal differences must be resolved for the sake
of Palestine's most vulnerable constituents.

In the occupied West Bank, as the pressures
increase on communities in Area C, so too do the
obstacles to our operations there as well. As I have
reported to the Council before, the pace of demolitions
and confiscations of Palestinian property by the Israeli
authorities has far exceeded any previous years on
record - more than double this year as compared to
2015. Those have occurred mainly within herding
communities in Area C, which count among Palestine's
most vulnerable households. Obstruction to our
operations in those areas is occurring in the most
egregious way, with our relief items themselves
frequently demolished or confiscated by Israeli forces.
The rate of demolition or seizure of such donor-funded
relief is on a trajectory to potentially triple as compared
to 2015. Affected relief items include shelters and tents,
water cisterns, animal pens and other basic structures
for survival and livelihoods.

More fundamentally, Palestinians in Area C
are living in an increasingly coercive environment
that is created by discriminatory planning policies,
demolitions, the active promotion of plans to relocate
Bedouin to new townships and other practices that
generate miserable living conditions and create
pressure on people to move elsewhere. Much of that
occurs in the line of sight of new or expanding Israeli
settlements, which are illegal under international law,
as reiterated by successive resolutions by the Council.
About a quarter of the structures targeted this year were
in Palestinian Bedouin communities located within or
near the area allocated to the E-l settlement expansion
project on the outskirts of occupied East Jerusalem.

It is critical that the interests of those vulnerable
Bedouin communities be placed first. They need
and deserve our unequivocal support to resist those
coercive pressures by the occupying Power, and
must not be burdened by still more pressures from
Palestinian leaders, some of Whom appear to view those
communities as a key battleground in Palestine's long
struggle. Those vulnerable civilians have no place as
instruments in a political strategy.

Ireiterate the Secretary-General's call to Israel to end
the policies and practices that place those Palestinians
at risk of forcible transfer. I also remind the Palestinian
authorities of the need to respect the principles of
independence, impartiality, neutrality and humanity,
which are the bedrock of the humanitarian imperative.

The continued lack of a resolution to the core
drivers of the ongoing humanitarian crisis has left
Palestinians stuck in a perpetual cycle of humanitarian
relief, increasingly dependent on assistance and
facing an ongoing lack of respect for their rights
and heightened instability. We need a coherent
international response that will enhance the protection
of civilians and deliver accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. That is especially important in the
absence of an active political process between Israeli
and Palestinian leaders.

Israel, the main duty-bearer, is a signatory to the
Fourth Geneva Convention and has clear obligations
as an occupying Power, and both Israel and Palestine
have ratified the major human rights treaties. They are
bound by customary international law as well, as are all
countries. The members of the Security Council have
a vital role to play in motivating the parties to respect
their obligations, Similarly, all parties to the Geneva
Conventions have an obligation not only to respect
them but also to ensure that others respect them.

The challenges facing Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territory, and the challenges that
humanitarian personnel face in trying to assist them,
require action not only by the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities but by every member of the Council. If we
want to prevent further deterioration in a region already
overwhelmed with humanitarian emergencies, the
Council's decisive collective action is vital. If it would
help the members of the Council to have a specific
list of humanitarian relief actions that should be taken
or avoided, I and my colleagues will be pleased to
provide it.

However, those actions notwithstanding, the
principles of international humanitarian law do and
must must apply. That includes all members of the
Council, all those in the occupied Palestinian territory,
both Israelis and Palestinians, and all who have
signed international legal obligations to which they
are, and must be held, accountable. We look to the
Council to ensure greater respect for obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law and to enhance the protection of civilians.
We look to the Council to safeguard the operational
space that aid workers require to provide assistance
to those most in need. And we look to the Council to
address the underlying driver of Palestine's protection
crisis through a political resolve to end the occupation,
which is now approaching its fiftieth anniversary.

