Mr. Sumaida'ie (Iraq): I wish to thank the
Council for granting my request to address it today. I
note with satisfaction that this is the second time in a
row that Iraq has been invited to speak at an open
briefing on its current affairs. That is both natural and
fair. I look forward to continuing to be at the disposal
of the Council whenever it deliberates matters
concerning Iraq. Such dialogue is helpful and will not
fail to be productive.

The Secretary-General has presented to the
Council a comprehensive report on the situation in Iraq
and on the United Nations involvement in it. On the
whole, it represents a fair evaluation and contains a
welcome reaffirmation of values and goals set out in
resolution 1546 (2004) and, more recently, by the
international conference on Iraq held in Sharm
el-Sheikh. Whilst we agree with most of the report,
there are parts which require some reflection and
comment.

Few issues now before Iraq loom larger than the
upcoming elections set for 30 January 2005. The
Transitional Administrative Law sets out a process
designed to lead to a system of democratic Government
with checks and balances such as Iraq has not
previously known. The elections are a key step in that
process. The raison d'etre of the Iraqi Interim
Government is to guide Iraq through that stage of the
political process and to ensure the holding of elections.
In the next stage an Iraqi transitional Government will
draft a permanent Constitution and oversee the next
elections, which, pursuant to that Constitution, are to
be held by 15 December 2005, with the new
Government assuming office by the end of 2005. That
is an ambitious schedule, but Iraqis need, and
overwhelmingly desire, a legitimate Government and a
return to normalcy as soon as possible.

My Government is obviously fully aware of, and
preoccupied with, the current security situation. But we
believe that we have a legal and political obligation to
the people of Iraq - an obligation that we intend to
discharge and, to the extent possible, to do so on time.
In that the Transitional Administrative Law and
resolution 1546 (2004) stipulate the timetable for
elections and the great majority of the people of Iraq
want and expect them to take place as planned, to
postpone them might be seen as giving in to the
terrorists, whose goal is to wreck the political process
and prevent elections from ever taking place.

The Secretary-General's report refers to those
who have called for a boycott of elections. It also
states:

"While a number of parties and other entities
have announced their support for the elections to
be held as scheduled, others have announced that
they might boycott the elections. This underlines
the urgent need to promote consensus on this
important issue within the broader framework of
the challenge of national reconciliation."
(5/2004/959, para. 10)

Reading that, one might get the impression that
those who are calling for a boycott of the elections are
as numerous as those who want to participate. That is
far from being the case. Moreover, if by the word
"consensus" we mean unanimity, then we are setting
ourselves an impossible task. Having said that, we are
fully aware of the need for national reconciliation,
which will be pursued vigorously. There are indeed
some groups and individuals who have arrogated to
themselves the right to speak on behalf of whole
communities within Iraq. Yet, there is no reason to
suppose that they speak for any sizeable contingent of
Iraqis. They are, of course, entitled to their views. As
long as they do not resort to violence to enforce them,
they are encouraged and welcomed to take part in the
political process.

There is no reason to believe that those calling
for a boycott will be heeded by any sizeable segment
of Iraq's population. Boycotts have failed in other
countries transitioning to democracy. Iraq is unlikely to
be an exception in that regard. Given the opportunity,
Iraqis will turn out in large numbers to participate in
the first free elections of their lives.

Any risk to the election and its credibility and
inclusiveness is likely to come not so much from a
boycott but from the campaign of violence and
intimidation that is being directed at the general
population in order to thwart the election. The
Government is doing its utmost to combat that and to
reduce the effects of that campaign of terror to a
minimum, while safeguarding the rights of all citizens
to express their will freely. In that we shall need
continued help from all concerned; and we shall need,
and insist upon, help from our neighbours.
The report of the Secretary-General notes that the
security situation in Iraq has deteriorated in some
places, although it also notes that there is relative calm
in most areas of Iraq. It indirectly criticizes the use of
force to dislodge terrorists from Fallujah. Yet it offers
no alternative that has not already been tried for
months, to no avail. The report takes note of, and
commends the Interim Government of Iraq for, efforts
to reach out to, and engage, groups willing to talk. But,
despite all such efforts, we have witnessed increased
audacity and brutality in the targeting of Iraqi children,
women and men for wholesale massacre. The Interim
Government of Iraq concluded that those responsible
for those atrocities were not interested in negotiating
and that those who were in dialogue with the
Government were incapable of delivering an end to
violence. The strategy of the Interim Government of
Iraq therefore had to be to deprive terrorists intent on
destroying the transition process of any safe haven in
Iraq. No responsible Government could do anything
else.

The discoveries made in Fallujah during recent
military actions vindicate the Interim Government of
Iraq. We found in Fallujah no less than 203 major
weapons caches, ll factories for improvised explosive
devices and three slaughterhouses for captives and
hostages. Is the Government supposed to stand by
while the inhabitants of Fallujah, foreign aid workers
and the rest of the people in Iraq are terrorized and
murdered? Without law and order there can be no
Government, and without Government only chaos and
more misery can ensue. I have here a map showing the
locations of all the places to which I have referred. We
can make available detailed photographs of those finds
to anyone interested in them.

The encouraging result of its intervention in
Najaf earlier this year provides further vindication of
the Interim Government of Iraq's firm policy. Much to
the relief of the inhabitants of Najaf and Sadr City,
general calm now exists and reconstruction
programmes are in place that involve the communities
themselves. The report itself provides evidence of that.

Using large-scale military force in any city
cannot be a preferred option by any responsible or
compassionate Government. It becomes a duty,
however, if it is the only way to save a whole nation
from greater suffering and to secure its future.

With regard to the United Nations participation in
assisting us to prepare for elections, we welcome the
Secretary-General's decision to increase the number of
elections workers in Iraq. But the increased numbers
are still not enough, and we are concerned that that
shortfall might adversely affect our preparedness for
elections. We wonder how it is that the United Nations
can play the leading role mandated by resolution 1546
(2004) if it remains largely insulated from the people.
The phrase "as circumstances permit" should not
become a mantra, repeated to justify insufficient
presence on the ground in Iraq.

The Secretary-General's report is quite candid
about the fact that much of the work of the Special
Representative occurs within the confines of the
international zone or remotely, in foreign capitals,
rather than where it is needed, namely, throughout Iraq.
The preferred mode of interaction with Iraqi officials
seems too often to be video-conferencing or telephone
calls from outside Iraq - or, indeed, through letters
that inevitably find their way to the press. We believe
that not only elections preparations but also vital
humanitarian and developmental work can be greatly
enhanced through direct contacts in Iraq between
United Nations officials and their counterparts in the
Interim Government of Iraq and in the provinces.
Despite the relative peace and stability there, there is
even a dearth of United Nations workers in northern
and southern Iraq. It is hoped that steps will be taken
urgently to build up the United Nations presence in
those regions of Iraq. This is an area in which progress
should be possible quite quickly. We also urge a quick
replacement for former Deputy Special Representative
and Humanitarian Coordinator, Mr. Ross Mountain.

The Interim Government of Iraq commends
Special Representative Ashraf Qazi for his efforts,
given the constraints within which he works.

No one can forget the tragic and heroic sacrifice
of United Nations workers on 19 August 2003. Yet, in
the limited time we have left before elections, it is
critical for the United Nations to bolster its presence
and intensify its activities in Iraq.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that we agree
generally with the report of the Secretary-General. We
greatly appreciate all the efforts made by him and his
colleagues to help Iraq. The Secretary-General's report
states that

"A mutually reinforcing dynamic between a
credible political process and an improving
security situation offers the best hope for
achieving the goal of a stable, durable and
democratic transition." (ibid., para. 8)

We totally concur, and we would add a third
factor, namely, resuscitating the economy. In all this,
help from the United Nations and the international
community is indispensable.

