Mr. Skau (Sweden): I would like to join you,
Mr. President, in welcoming the Secretary-General to
the Security Council today for this important briefing,
and thank him for his sobering and comprehensive
briefing. The Secretary-General's call for action in
February should not have been necessary. However, by
giving his voice to some of the most vulnerable people
in our world, he may have made it possible to avoid
a humanitarian disaster of massive proportions. His
early warning to the Council, asking for our support in
addressing an acute risk of famine in Yemen, Somalia,
South Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, triggered the
early action needed to prevent a catastrophe.

That type of interaction between the Council
and the Secretary-General, with prevention at its
heart, presents a model for the future, particularly
as humanitarian crises are increasingly being driven
by conflict. The Council's presidential statement,
proposed by Sweden and others, makes it clear that
ongoing conflicts and violence are having devastating
humanitarian consequences. Moreover, those
conflicts are, at the same time, hindering an effective
humanitarian response, leading to shocking levels of
human suffering, including famine, in those situations.
That is a worrying trend.

The Secretary-General's consistent leadership
and advocacy for the humanitarian and longer-term
response to the threat of famine has been invaluable.
Since his call to action, the international community
has mobilized, and humanitarian efforts have been
scaled up in all four countries. Yet, as was pointed out
today, much is still needed. I would like to make three
points this afternoon on the response so far and what
more can be done.

First, I pay tribute to the women and men of
local communities who have been at the forefront of
the response to those crises. I also pay tribute to the
humanitarian workers, who risk their lives to save others.
They must receive our full support. We are appalled by
the lack of humanitarian access and continuing attacks
on humanitarians, as well as on hospitals, clinics and
medical personnel. That is unacceptable and endangers
the lives of humanitarians, as well as undermining their
ability to save the lives of others. As has been stressed
by the Council before, the full respect by all parties for
international humanitarian law is essential.

We welcome the generous response from
international donors to the Secretary-General's
call to action. Ambitious commitments have been
made by donors at successive donor conferences in
Oslo, London and Geneva. Sweden, for its part, has
supported the response in the four countries with more
than $131 million in bilateral humanitarian assistance.
The flexible and time-critical humanitarian funding
available from the Central Emergency Response
Fund, which has so far allocated $118 million, has
also been particularly important in kick-starting the
humanitarian response.

As the Secretary-General said last month, keeping
famine at bay does not mean keeping suffering at
bay. For that reason, we welcome the strengthened
engagement by development actors as part of a more
comprehensive response that seeks to build long-term
resilience. We also welcome the renewed, deepening
and active partnership between the United Nations
and the World Bank, which is an essential part of the
work to break the cycle of vulnerability, need and
humanitarian response.

Secondly, while we can rightly welcome the
response to the Secretary-General's call to action, we
must also recognize that we have failed collectively by
allowing those crises to develop to their current level on
our watch. Widespread food insecurity, as well as the
risk of famine, remains in those four countries, as well
as in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and, sadly, in an unacceptable number
of other places. What those crises have in common is
that they are not accidents or natural disasters but man-
made catastrophes, driven by conflicts and violence.
Yes, we need more funding; yes, we need more access;
but that will not end those crises or stop new ones
from emerging. There must be political solutions to
the conflicts that are driving those entirely preventable
humanitarian crises, exponentially increasing the
needs and suffering that make a robust humanitarian
and longer-term response so much harder. Ending such
conflicts also means tackling the root causes that are
driving them, including underdevelopment, inequality
and exclusion, which are, in turn, exacerbated by the
effects of climate change. We need to make, build and
sustain peace. We all have a role to play in such longer-
term response strategies - as host communities,
Governments, regional partners, humanitarian donors
and members of the Council.

Lastly, Sweden took the initiative of proposing a
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/14) on the risk
of famine in those four contexts and the humanitarian
response. We did so because we believed that it
was important to ensure that the full weight of the
Security Council was behind the Secretary-General's
call to action. The issue of how conflicts are driving
humanitarian crises and preventing the humanitarian
community from responding is not unique to the four
countries addressed in the presidential statement.
Delivering essential humanitarian assistance to those
most in need is a challenge that humanitarian agencies
are increasingly faced with as they seek to carry out
their lifesaving work.

The Security Council has a role to play in ensuring
that those agencies can do theirjob when a conflict with
devastating humanitarian consequences, a conflict that
hinders an effective humanitarian response, creates the
risk of an outbreak of famine. We are ready to continue
to lead on humanitarian issues in complex emergencies
during the remainder of our term on the Council and
to work with present and future members to explore
further Council action. In that regard, and as a first
step, we will welcome an update from the Secretary-
General in early 2018 on where we stand in relation to
the challenges that have been outlined today, on any
lessons learned that could be applied more broadly and
on what further support is needed from the Council to
address those challenges and prevent further suffering.
We are committed to standing with the Secretary-
General in those efforts.

