Mr. Bessho (Japan): The situation in the Middle
East remains volatile and complex. Many issues affect
one another, further deepening their complexity. The
Palestinian issue is one of the most complex.

Japan continues to support a two-State solution
based on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed swaps,
which will achieve peaceful coexistence of a viable
Palestinian State and Israel within secure and
recognized borders. The final status of Jerusalem
should be resolved through negotiations based on the
assumption that it will be the future capital of both
sides. We must continue to work together to achieve a
solution that is just and sustainable.

Since the previous open debate on this issue (see S/PV.7929), we have not seen any breakthroughs.
The familiar obstacles to peace that we have seen for
years persist. Japan is seriously concerned about the
escalating tension in Jerusalem and the West Bank.
The attack that occurred in the Old City of Jerusalem
cannot be justified for any reason, and Japan condemns
it. Japan stresses the importance ofrespecting the peace
of the holy sites.

The cycle of violence that followed shows how
violent incidents can snowball into a highly volatile and
dangerous situations. Violence is incompatible with
the peaceful resolution of conflict, and the relevant
parties must continue to work together to de-escalate
the situation.

Settlement activities continue in both the West
Bank and east Jerusalem. The physical expansion of
settlements erodes the viability of a two-State solution.
Japan has issued a series of statements deeply deploring
such activities. Settlement activities are in violation of
international law, and we have called upon Israel to
freeze such activities. Japan does not recognize any
unilateral change by either party that may prejudge the
final resolution.

Resolution of the conflict through dialogue and
agreement is also the spirit of resolution 2334 (2016).
Reconciliation among Palestinians is another important
element in promoting peace. The deepening divide
between the West Bank and Gaza is concerning, and
it is the people of Gaza who bear the burden of that
divide. Japan believes that the re-establishment of
effective governance by the Palestinian Authority over
Gaza will contribute to the overall peace process.

The current plight of the people of Gaza is serious.
Fatah and Hamas must find a way to alleviate this
suffering. We should also recall that the blockade of the
Gaza Strip directly affects livelihoods in Gaza. Japan
stresses the importance of improving the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip by further easing the
blockade while securing the prevention of the inflow
of arms.

International efforts to relaunch the dialogue
continue against the backdrop of these persistent
obstacles. We are encouraged by the Quartet's more
visible engagement. Japan also appreciates the
continued engagement by the United States, which is
particularly crucial.

The agreement on the allocation of water through
the Red Sea-Dead Sea project to Palestinians shows
what dialogue can achieve. Confidence-building,
though concrete cases of cooperation, is in line with
Japan's efforts over the years. Japan believes that
such confidence-building efforts constitute part of the
endeavour to promote the overall peace process through
negotiations. These include the Jericho Agro Industrial
Park, which hosts six Palestinian firms, with some of
their products being exported to Jordan. We encourage
interested parties to come and see what cooperation
between Israel, Palestine, Jordan and Japan can achieve.

The international community is playing an
important role by encouraging dialogue and mutual
trust. However, the political will of the parties is
required first and foremost to relaunch negotiations
and to rein in obstacles to peace. We must continue
to encourage the parties to make difficult decisions.
Japan will continue its engagement through the three
pillars of political dialogue, confidence-building and
economic cooperation.

