Mr. Holmes: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Council on my visit to Ethiopia, the Sudan
and Somalia from 26 November to 4 December.

In Ethiopia, I wanted to assess the humanitarian
situation in the Somali region and discuss with the
Government widespread fears of a severe humanitarian
crisis there. The Somali region, one of the poorest
regions of Ethiopia, has long been badly affected by
the conflict between Government forces and the
Ogaden National Liberation Front. Intensification of
the conflict during 2007 has led to fears that already
chronic food insecurity could give way to real famine
conditions for a significant part of the 4.5 million-
strong population.

A United Nations assessment team, which Visited
the region in early September, identified specific
reasons for concern. First, the military operations, and
in particular Government concerns about the
smuggling of weapons from Somalia, had severely
limited movement of commercial traffic across the
2
Somali border. This is a historic trade route supporting
the livelihood of 1.4 million people, predominantly
pastoralists, whose income to buy food from across the
border depends on the export of livestock.

Secondly, insecurity has also had a direct effect
on the delivery of food aid, required in recent years to
assist the most vulnerable elements of the population.
For example, it is currently estimated that 950,000
people require 53,000 metric tons of food for the next
three months, but the process of moving the first 9,000
tons to the district capitals has only just been
completed. A poor recent rainy season and evidence of
worrying health and nutrition situations have added to
these fears.

Finally, humanitarian access to the military
zones, already heavily restricted, was aggravated in
July when the Government expelled the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and Medecins
Sans Frontieres-Holland from the region.

The Government did not necessarily accept the
evidence presented in the United Nations report, but it
nevertheless agreed to implement its recommendations,
in particular on commercial trade and food aid. After
further negotiations, they have now allowed the United
Nations to set up offices in two locations within the
military zones, namely Kebri Dahar and Degehabur.
Eighteen non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
have now been cleared to work in the military area to
deliver much-needed humanitarian assistance.

Against that background, I Visited Jijiga, the
regional capital, and Kebri Dahar. I talked to the local
authorities, and to United Nations and NGO
humanitarian workers. I saw briefly a food distribution
in Kebri Dahar, which might have been particularly
staged for my visit. I was also able to look into the
local market, where food was on sale, but at prices that
seemed well above those in previous years, although
food prices have increased significantly in Ethiopia
generally in recent months.

In Addis Ababa, I talked to members of the
Government, from Prime Minister Meles Zenawi
down, about their views of the situation and ways to
improve the humanitarian response. We also discussed
reported human rights violations.

The Government's View, in brief, is that claims of
major humanitarian problems are much exaggerated,
that there are now no restrictions on commercial trade
07-62908
and that there should be no difficulty in getting food
aid to the people, including in the remote areas. We had
to agree to disagree about the analysis of the crisis,
although we will try to reconcile our respective data.
But the Prime Minister helpfully confirmed that the
Government would respond as if our worst-case
scenario predictions were justified. He assured me that
all necessary steps would be taken to avoid any famine.

On that basis, I urged him and the Deputy Prime
Minister to allow full humanitarian access to the
region, to speed up relief efforts, to enable more NGOs
to operate within the military zone, to allow World
Food Programme (WFP) trucks to move, in at least the
safer areas, without military escorts, to allow
government officials to resume their normal work,
particularly in the health area, and to establish a high-
level regular coordination forum between the
Government and the humanitarian community.

There has not yet been agreement to all those
requests, but I believe we have made some progress,
including in terms of access and presence on the
ground. Nevertheless, there is still a huge amount to
do.

My own initial assessment of the crisis, on the
basis of my visit and the contacts I was able to make, is
that, while there may not currently be a humanitarian
catastrophe, there are strong reasons to believe that
such a catastrophe could occur in the next few months
if all the necessary action to avert it is not taken. I
should nevertheless make clear that no one from
outside has yet been able to Visit many of the remote
rural areas, where the conflict has been worst. The
situation could well be even more serious there.

We have all also seen and heard worrying reports
about the human rights situation. The United Nations
report recommended that the Government allow them
to be investigated independently. I heard, indirectly,
further reports of the same alarming kind while I was
in the region. I took these up with the Government and
urged them again to allow independent investigation
and monitoring. They contested the reports but said
they would be responding to them. I take this
opportunity to repeat the plea that any local
investigation should also involve independent outside
experts. Otherwise, suspicions about dreadful things
happening, involving all sides, cannot be dispelled.

In sum, the commitments of the Ethiopian
Government, at the most senior level, to do everything
07-62908

necessary to make sure there is no famine give me a
measure of hope. But I repeat that, if all the steps I
have talked about are not taken, a disaster could unfold
with frightening speed. For my part, I will continue to
monitor this very closely and am ready to authorize
more resources, for example from the Central
Emergency Respond Fund, if that should be needed.

In the longer term, a return of peace and stability
to the region would obviously be the best guarantee
against disaster. I hope some kind of inclusive political
dialogue to that end can start again soon. Meanwhile, I
encourage the international community, not least
members of the Security Council, to monitor the
situation and to encourage political progress, in the
light of the potential implications for peace and
security in an increasingly explosive region.

Allow me to turn to the Sudan. My objective was
to review the implementation of the Joint Communique
between the Government of Sudan and the United
Nations on Facilitation of Humanitarian Activities in
Darfur, signed just after my first visit in March, and to
assess the humanitarian situation on the ground.
Currently, some 13,300 relief workers in Darfur are
assisting 4.2 million people affected by the conflict,
including almost 2.4 million displaced persons. But the
situation is gradually deteriorating, and the operation
in many ways remains fragile. My serious concerns
include restrictions on access, Violence affecting
civilians and aid workers and respect of humanitarian
principles by all parties to the conflict.

The Joint Communique has helped to reduce
some of the bureaucratic obstacles hindering relief
agencies. While this progress is welcome, significant
problems still remain. There are continuing challenges
regarding the implementation of some of the fast-track
procedures, such as the issue of initial entry visas, exit
visas for NGO workers and the release of equipment
from customs. Nevertheless, I welcome the clear
assurances I was given about the renewal of the fast-
track procedures when they expire on 31 January 2008.
In my meetings with Government representatives, I
also stressed the importance of strengthening trust and
confidence between the Government and the
humanitarian community and ensuring full
implementation of the Joint Communique in spirit as
well as in letter.

Clashes between signatories and non-signatories
of the Darfur Peace Agreement, aerial bombardments,
3
militia and inter-tribal clashes, banditry and general
lawlessness continue to have a major impact on the
population of Darfur. This year, nearly 280,000 more
civilians have been forced to flee violence, many for
the second or third time, to already overflowing camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs), or to seek
refuge in the bush. The consequences are significant;
they include increases in malnutrition in several areas
of Darfur.

There are other grim consequences too. In Adilla,
an area in eastern South Darfur not far from Haskanita
in North Darfur, where fighting started in August, one
medical clinic reported 183 cases of sexually
transmitted infections in September, including 40 cases
in children under five years old. Some of the survivors
were in the camp I Visited near Ed Daein in South
Darfur, although heavy security prevented me from
speaking to them privately.

Continuing hostilities and the unpredictable
security situation are the greatest obstacles to access.
But there is also justified concern over the refusal of
national authorities to allow access in certain areas, for
example Adilla and Jebel Marra, where there are tens
of thousands of civilians in severe need. Access to
some of the IDP camps near Nyala in South Darfur has,
on occasion, also been restricted.

Meanwhile, attacks on humanitarian personnel
continue at unprecedented levels. Since the start of the
year, 128 humanitarian vehicles have been hijacked,
118 staff temporarily taken hostage, more than 59
personnel physically or sexually assaulted and
74 convoys ambushed and looted. Tragically, 12 relief
workers have been killed. In other words, those who
have come just to help continue to be attacked in an
atmosphere of near-total impunity.

Those responsible for these attacks are often hard
to identify with certainty. But they appear to come
mainly from rebel groups and Sudan Liberation Army
(SLA)/Minni Minawi elements. Hijackings and
compound break-ins are also a growing phenomenon in
and around the main towns such as Nyala and
El Fasher, where the Government is clearly in control.
In that context, I welcomed the pledge from a senior
Government official to increase patrols in such areas.

During my visit, Government officials repeatedly
suggested that some humanitarian staff in Darfur were
engaged in inappropriate activities. It is important to
emphasize, as I did, that monitoring and speaking up
for the rights of civilians and respect for humanitarian
law and principles are fundamental to humanitarian
action and reflect the concerns of this Council. During
my visit, I appealed to the Government to use the high-
level Committee as a forum for discussion to address
any concerns, rather than to take unilateral actions,
such as the recent expulsion of the head of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) office in South Darfur, which we have
strongly contested. Humanitarian workers are there to
help the people of Sudan and to help the Government
of Sudan fulfil its responsibility to protect its own
citizens, not for any other reason.

The return or relocation of IDPs is clearly a very
sensitive issue. Like the IDPs themselves, the United
Nations and NGOs working in Darfur look forward
eagerly to a time when peace is a reality and when
people can return to their areas of origin in conditions
of safety and dignity, or make the choice to settle
elsewhere. In line with international principles and
agreements between the United Nations and the
Government of Sudan, return or resettlement must be
voluntary - free of pressure or coercion - and may
take place only after consultations with the displaced
themselves and the humanitarian community. In several
areas, such as Marla and Yassin in Southern Darfur,
and near Kutum in Northern Darfur, some voluntary
return has occurred with the support of the
humanitarian community. However, the necessary
conditions for large-scale returns across Darfur do not
yet exist, in my view and in the view of most outside
observers, and to encourage return without security
would endanger the lives of those who have already
suffered too much. The United Nations, nevertheless,
stands ready to work on returns with the Government
and the displaced, as and when the conditions are
appropriate.

Another key current issue in some of the more
volatile camps, such as Kalma, near Nyala, is the
presence of arms, which jeopardizes the safety of all
concerned. I call on all parties to respect the civilian
character of the camps. Recent constructive discussions
between the Government of Southern Darfur and the
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) about how to
tackle the problems in KaIma camp are welcome and
show the way forward.

The reality is that the need for humanitarian
assistance in Darfur continues to grow. The 2008
workplan for the Sudan will appeal for $825 million
07-62908
for humanitarian needs and for some early recovery
activities in Darfur. In this context, let me repeat how
much I would like to see the moratorium on restrictions
and the fast-track procedures formally extended soon,
since that would give all partners of the workplan,
particularly NGOs, the certainty they need to plan
ahead for 2008.

I have detailed these challenges to underscore
that, despite its scale and relative success in sustaining
millions and saving hundreds of thousands of lives, the
humanitarian operation in Darfur is increasingly
fragile. Morale among the humanitarian aid workers is
low - lower than when I was last there in March -
because of the multiple pressures I have mentioned.
The political context is changing as rebel groups
jockey for position and some Arab groups flex their
muscles in new ways. The Government of Sudan, and
all the armed groups, have a particular responsibility to
avoid any unravelling of the humanitarian operation.

The main requirement, as we all know, is an
inclusive peace agreement as soon as possible,
reinforced by a peacekeeping force capable of
monitoring the peace and ensuring the protection of
civilians. But, while it is right to ensure a focus on the
justice, political and peacekeeping tracks, the
humanitarian operation itself could soon be in real
jeopardy. It requires close monitoring from all
concerned, not least this Council.

Finally, I have talked only about Darfur today. I
did not visit Juba in the South on this mission. But
there are significant continuing humanitarian
operations in the South, and I take this opportunity to
underline as forcefully as I can the fundamental
importance of the North-South relationship, including
for Darfur.

The last leg of my mission was a brief visit to
Somalia, for the second time this year. I visited the
area where a large proportion of those fleeing the
capital have sought shelter. The United Nations
estimates that more than half of the city has been
emptied of its citizens, or 600,000 people altogether.
Some 230,000 of them are now living along a
lS-kilometre stretch of road between Mogadishu and
the small town of Afgooye, probably the single largest
IDP gathering in the world today.

I drove along most of this road and was able to
see the extent of the over 70 IDP camps. Some have
mushroomed in the past month. Others already have
07-62908

signboards advertising the name of the settlement and
even the phone number, as if they expected to last. All
the people I spoke to in the camps had fled the violence
and intimidation that have made life in Mogadishu so
unliveable. Some spoke to me of snipers fuelling panic
in the streets. Many left with nothing but the clothes on
their backs.

I visited a recent IDP settlement called Gutale,
hosting about 600 families. The shelters were
rudimentary, literally branches and cloth, and people's
distress was clear. Nevertheless, an active relief
response is now visible. Clean water is being trucked
in; distributions of plastic sheeting are providing cover;
the building of much-needed latrines and sanitation
facilities is making progress. A five-day vaccination
campaign for all of the children in the areas was well
under way while I was there, and the World Food
Programme had recently distributed food to 180,000
people.

I also visited the largest camp, known as
Dr. Hawa Abdi, named after the doctor who has run a
clinic there for the past 16 years, with more than 4,000
families or 25,000. Dr. Hawa Abdi runs a treatment
centre there, which also hosts a therapeutic feeding
centre run by Medecins Sans Frontieres Switzerland.
Every one of the 60 beds for malnourished children
was being used, reflecting the alarming malnutrition
rates. Dr. Abdi herself is an inspiring example of the
dedication of some Somali citizens to relieve the
suffering of their own people.

Virtually all these relief activities are
implemented through local partners or national staff of
international NGOs and United Nations agencies. With
very few exceptions, international humanitarian staff
do not feel able to work in the area because of security
concerns, including extortion and violence at
checkpoints and roadblocks. Our convoy had the
benefit of heavy security arrangements. Armed
elements were nevertheless clearly visible along the
road. The prevailing atmosphere of mistrust between
the authorities and the international organizations, and
the resulting incidents and administrative difficulties,
have not helped.

Let me, therefore, pay warm tribute to the
humanitarian workers who operate in such a hostile
environment, particularly national staff, who have
often themselves now been displaced from Mogadishu
with their own families.
5
While a decent relief effort may now be under
way in the area I visited, there are still huge
challenges. I am particularly concerned about the
seriousness of the situation of the other hundreds of
thousands of people displaced from Mogadishu,
scattered over inaccessible areas in South and Central
Somalia. I am even more concerned about those still in
Mogadishu. A World Food Programme programme to
serve up to 50,000 prepared meals a day to the most
vulnerable has just started. However, such efforts are
far from enough to cover the needs - particularly if
violence and displacement continue at their current
pace.

In Baidoa, I met the newly appointed Prime
Minister, Nur Hassan Hussein, former President of the
Somali Red Crescent Society. Mr. Hussein shared my
concern about the severity of the humanitarian crisis
and agreed that there should be no distinction among
vulnerable people when it comes to the right to be
assisted. He also promised the Government's full help.
We discussed ways to overcome the mistrust between
the Transitional Federal Government and the
international humanitarian organizations, and the
priority to be given to the protection of civilians,
particularly in Mogadishu. He made it clear that the
humanitarian crisis, security and political
reconciliation were his three top priorities. We need to
see that translated into action.

Meanwhile, we need to step up our relief efforts
further. There are some 1.5 million people in need
altogether. I, therefore, appeal to the donor community,
the agencies and the international NGOs to increase
their presence and the resources dedicated to Somalia.
In 2007, we requested $300 million for the
Consolidated Appeal for Somalia. In 2008, that figure
will rise to at least $400 million.

But a robust humanitarian response cannot make
up for the absence of desperately needed political and
security progress. I fear, on the basis of what I heard,
that increasingly terrible things are now happening in
Mogadishu, as it descends into the nightmare of urban
guerrilla warfare and reciprocal atrocities. Respect for
international humanitarian law is essential, now more
than ever, a point I raised strongly with both the
Ethiopian and Somali Governments, but which applies
just as much to those fighting them.

The international community has the
responsibility not to abandon the Somali people to their
6

fate, but to help all concerned to find a way out of the
traps they find themselves in. There is no simple
solution, certainly not a military one. Peacekeeping
forces need a peace to keep, above all in this troubled
country. But lack of high-level attention is not an
option for Somalia, any more than it is for Darfur.

I am extremely concerned by the humanitarian
situation in all three areas I visited. They are a
reflection of the huge and linked political and security
challenges that this region now faces and which must
be a major concern for this Council.

