Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

At the outset, allow me to express my
appreciation to Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his presentation. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad,
Permanent Representative of the United States, for his
statement on behalf of the Multinational Force.

We have before us the first report (S/2007/608) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) pursuant to resolution 1770
(2007), which included the expansion of UNAMI's
mandate. That expansion has enjoyed wide acceptance
in the Iraqi Government, which considers it a reflection
of its continuing demands for activating and
strengthening the presence of the United Nations in
Iraq. We are confident that the skills, ability, and
effectiveness of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, Mr. de Mistura, along with
his team, will play a major role in the success of
UNAMI's efforts in Iraq.

On behalf of the Government of Iraq and my
delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to Mr. Qazi for his efforts as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq during the previous period. We wish him
continued success in his new position as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Sudan.

The Secretary-General's report presented an
account of the major political developments in Iraq,
UNAMI's activities, developments in the security
situation and the status of the International
Reconstruction Funding Facility for Iraq (IRFFI). We
support the Secretary-General's valuable remarks at the
end of his report. However, we would like to outline a
few key aspects related to the main challenges facing
Iraq. Those challenges are still present, but their danger
has begun to diminish. They impose on the
Government and people of Iraq enormous tasks that
need to be accomplished.

The first challenge is terrorism and the means to
confront it. The security plans carried out by the Iraqi
army and the national security forces with the
assistance of the Multinational Force have contributed
to surrounding the terrorists in separate parts of Iraq.
The remnants of Al-Qaida, along with the Saddamists,
are suffering continued defeats. That has been clearly
reflected in the security situation in Iraq, which has
witnessed tangible improvement, and the decline in the
levels and number of terrorist activities, along with a
significant reduction in the threat of civil war in Iraq.

The second challenge, which is a legacy of the
previous regime, is a shattered infrastructure and a
weak economy caused by internal and external wars
waged by the former regime in Iraq. It was therefore
incumbent upon the Government of Iraq to launch
ambitious plans for comprehensive reconstruction, to
provide the necessary services for the citizens of Iraq
and to rebuild the economy on a sound and modern
basis that would enable the Iraqi economy to contribute
effectively to the international economy. However, Iraq
cannot accomplish those goals without the effective
assistance of the international community.

The International Compact with Iraq, which was
launched at Sharm el-Sheikh in May 2007, plays a
significant role in that respect. It has reinforced and
strengthened national and international commitments
in the political and economic fields, the rule of law, the
reinforcement and protection of human rights, and the
establishment of democracy. As is well known, the
United Nations has a lead role in the Compact.

The third challenge is achieving national
reconciliation, and here I would like to refer to the
statement made by the Iraqi Prime Minister before the
General Assembly on 26 September. He said:

"We think of national reconciliation as a life
boat, a perpetual peace project and a safe harbour
for the political process and the democratic
experience. We also believe that national
reconciliation is not the responsibility of the
Government alone. It is a collective responsibility
held by the political powers, intellectual leaders,
religious leaders, the educated, civil society
organizations and all the active powers in the
Iraqi arena. National reconciliation is the
strategic choice that has saved our country from
slipping into the pit of a sectarian war that was
planned by the enemies of freedom and
democracy after they blew up the tomb of the two
Askari imams in Samara." (A/62/PV.6, p31)

Despite those challenges, the Iraqi Government is
continuing the reconstruction process in different
fields. The budget for 2008 has been set. It is the
largest budget in Iraq's modern history. A sum of
$10.5 billion has been allocated to investment
programmes, and the budget for the provinces has
increased by 25 per cent relative to last year's budget.
The investment law, which will transform the Iraqi
economy from a centralized to a market economy, has
been approved, and the Iraqi Government has
completed a draft oil and gas bill that will secure the
fair distribution of Iraq's oil revenues. Furthermore, the
Government is also working towards strengthening the
purchasing power of Iraqi citizens and raising the
salaries of current and retired employees. It is also
preserving the stability of Iraq's currency and
preventing its fluctuation against other currencies.
With regard to political reconciliation, the Iraqi
Government has completed an accountability and
justice bill that it has presented to the Council of
Representatives as a substitute for the de-
Baathification law. Tens of thousands of officials of the
former Government have been returned to their former
Government positions regardless of their political
affiliation.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report, there
is concern about the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Iraq due to the flow of refugees to
neighbouring countries and the internal displacement
of people escaping terrorist, militia and criminal
activities. The Iraqi Government has been working
hard to fulfil its responsibilities in that regard and to
create suitable conditions for the return of refugees and
internally displaced individuals to their homes by
confronting illegal activists regardless of their
sectarian or political affiliation.

The improvement of the security situation in several
unstable areas has contributed to the return of a large
number of families to their homes. However, the problem
continues and requires support and large contributions
from concerned international organizations, foremost
among which are the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Organization for Migration, the World Health
Organization, UNICEF and UNESCO. Those
organizations need to assist the refugees and the host
countries alike, and the Iraqi Government has pledged to
offer its assistance to those countries as well.

Regarding human rights, the main challenge for
the Iraqi people is terrorist activities and crimes that
target innocent civilians. We are pleased to see positive
signals in the Secretary-General's report on the
cooperation of the concerned Iraqi authorities and the
authorities of the Iraqi Kurdistan region with United
Nations human rights officials. We hope that the
upcoming visit of the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on torture and other inhuman and
degrading treatment or punishment will achieve
positive results in reinforcing and protecting human
rights in Iraq.

Pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007), UNAMI's
mandate covers critical and essential issues related to
the present and future of the new Iraq. The most
important of those are UNAMI's role in national
dialogue and reconciliation, the requirements of
holding elections and referendums, and assisting in
constitutional review, in addition to achieving
compromise regarding internal borders and facilitating

regional dialogue concerning the issues of border
security, energy and refugees. There is no doubt that
those issues are critical and should be addressed with
specific mechanisms and with the prior approval of the
constitutionally elected Iraqi Government, as stated in
the letter of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
6 August, contained in document S/2007/481, which
refers to the Iraqi Government's desire to expand
UNAMI's mandate. Without doubt, the effective
implementation of that mandate requires the return of
the specialized agencies, funds and programmes to
work in Iraq and to increase their staff in the field.

We look forward to Iraq's playing an active role
in achieving stability and security in the Middle East.
Iraq aspires to be an arena for all parties to engage in
dialogue, rather than a space for settling issues.
Towards that end, we initiated the neighbouring
countries' meeting and hosted the American-Iranian
dialogue in Baghdad because stability and security in
Iraq positively affect the security and stability of the
whole region and contribute to the enhancement of
international peace and security.

To achieve that goal, Iraq must be capable of
advancing itself and should be able to shake off the
legacy of the former regime and be liberated from its
financial burdens. Iraq is still suffering from the heavy
burden of compensating for the Kuwait invasion by the
Saddam regime, while it remains in need of the support
of the international community and the donor
countries. Iraq has paid large sums amounting to more
than $22 billion dollars, and it continues to pay.

In that regard, I would like to refer to the letters
of the Prime Minister of 24 June and of the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of 15 August addressed to the Security
Council concerning that issue. The letters request the
Council at the present time to suspend the deductions
and to reduce the proportion of deductions to a level
that Iraq can maintain given its current situation. That
would be achieved in coordination with the
Compensation Committee until the matter can be
addressed at an international conference or resolved
bilaterally between Iraq and the countries concerned.
We hope that the Council responds positively to Iraq's
request.

