Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): At the outset, allow me
to express our condolences to the Government and the
people of Egypt for the tragic terrorist attack perpetrated
on Sunday, which took so many innocent lives.

I thank the United States for convening this debate. I
congratulate the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Sandra Honore, on her briefing and reiterate
my Government's appreciation for her leadership.
I also appreciate the contribution of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Regis.

I would like to start by commending Haitian
political actors and the efforts of the leadership of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to support the political process, which
allowed the completion of the electoral process and the
return to constitutional order last February.

Brazil supports the Secretary-General's positive
assessment regarding stability and security in Haiti.
In this context, we agree to the gradual withdrawal of
the military component, as proposed by the Secretary-
General, attuned to realities on the ground.

As the United Nations reduces its military
footprint, development assistance should be scaled up.
Very often, however, as troops depart development
and humanitarian actors and resources follow suit. A
future presence of the United Nations in Haiti should
be able to reverse that trend. It should be based on
the broad repertoire on the relation between security
and development, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and sound transitions.

Aware of MINUSTAH's accomplishments, we
must bear in mind that the United Nations work in
Haiti is not over. There are still many challenges
ahead. In this regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation that a new United Nations
peacekeeping mission be established in Haiti following
the possible termination ofMINUSTAH by 15 October,
in order to continue to assist the Government of Haiti
in consolidating its gains by reinforcing Government
institutions and strengthening the national capacity in
the rule of law, police development and human rights.

MINUSTAH's experience has shown the potential
of innovative approaches that should continue to
be carried out by the new mission. Tools such as the
reduction of community violence and quick-impact
projects have played an important role in supporting
core stabilization objectives and will certainly be
crucial for the consolidation of the rule of law in Haiti.
We also reiterate our support to the United Nations
for its new approach to cholera in Haiti and the full
implementation of that approach in order to tackle the
significant increase in the number of suspected cases of
cholera. It is alarming that 440 Haitians are still dying
per year from the disease.

Brazilian society has been very supportive of
Brazil's engagement with MINUSTAH since its
inception. Moreover, the past 13 years have provided
a unique and unprecedented experience for Brazil, as
it led the command of MINUSTAH's troops and the
deployment of more than 30,000 soldiers, working
side-by-side with peacekeepers from our region and all
around the globe, to support the Haitian authorities in
their efforts to ensure a secure and stable environment
for their people, and also to help them to reconstruct the
country after natural disasters.

During that period, we identified several
best practices and lessons learned related to the
implementation of MINUSTAH'S mandate that
could be further discussed and incorporated in other
peacekeeping missions, such as the Group of Friends
of Haiti, enhanced civilian-military coordination
in the field, community-approach strategies as
confidence-building measures, the innovative use of
engineering units and the important role of women in
all areas of the stabilization process.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Brazil's long-
term commitment and solidarity with Haiti and our
confidence in the Haitian people's determination
to persist and succeed in their quest for stability,
democracy and prosperity.

