Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Mr. Deng Xiaoping, who was deeply loved by
Chinese people of all ethnic groups, passed away in
Beijing on 19 February 1997.

Mr. Deng Xiaoping was an outstanding leader whose
high prestige was acknowledged by the Chinese
Communist Party, the Chinese People's Liberation Army
and Chinese people of all ethnic groups. He was the chief
architect of China's reforms, opening up and
modernization, and the founder of the theory of building
socialism with Chinese characteristics.

Mr. Deng Xiaoping devoted his entire life to the
liberation and development of the Chinese nation and
made indelible contributions to China's national
independence, the liberation of its people and the
founding of a New China.

Mr. Deng Xiaoping had made significant
contributions at all stages of development since the
founding of the People's Republic of China. He drafted
a new blueprint for China's development by drawing on
others' experience and breaking with outmoded
conventions in the light of the developments in today's
world and China's actual conditions. This has brought
profound changes to China, from the countryside to cities
and from coastal special economic zones to inland areas,
with the economy booming and people living and
working in peace and contentment. Mr. Deng Xiaoping
also creatively proposed the concept of "one country, two
systems", providing a fundamental guarantee for the
gradual accomplishment of the cause of China's reunification.

 

Mr. Deng Xiaoping's life was a great and glorious
one. He made historic contributions to charting a course for
development that was suited to China's national conditions,
creating and developing the theory of building socialism
with Chinese characteristics, carrying out reforms, opening
up and achieving modernization, accomplishing the cause
of national reunification, opening up a new situation in
China' s relations with foreign countries, and developing and
strengthening China's friendly relations with all countries
in the world on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence. He proved himself to be a great son of the
Chinese people. He deeply loved his motherland and people
and was deeply loved and respected by the Chinese people.
The passing of Mr. Deng Xiaoping is an immeasurable loss
to Chinese people of all ethnic groups.
The collective leadership, with President J iang Zemin
at its core, will lead the Chinese people in carrying forward
the legacy of Mr. Deng Xiaoping, advancing the great cause
he pioneered: building China into a prosperous, democratic
and civilized socialist country and developing friendly
relations of cooperation with all countries in the world, thus
making more and greater contributions to peace,
development and the progress of mankind.

At today's Council meeting, the President of the
Council and other Council members expressed their
condolences to the Chinese delegation on the passing of
Mr. Deng Xiaoping. I wish on this occasion to express, on
behalf of the Chinese delegation, my heartfelt thanks to the
President and to other Council members. I will convey
these condolences and sincere sentiments to the Chinese
Government, the Chinese people and the family of
Mr. Deng Xiaoping.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia (S/1997/135)

