Mr. Vervaeke (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the European Union's action in
support of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel)
and its Joint Force - part of a global approach that
combines political dialogue and support in the areas of
security, development aid and humanitarian assistance.

In terms of its efforts in Africa, the European
Union has been most actively providing support to the
countries of the G-5 Sahel region. Today's meeting
takes place in the context of increasing deterioration
in the security situation, characterized by increasingly
targeted and sophisticated attacks. We pay tribute to
the victims and to the sacrifices that the countries
of the region have made. In that regard, during the
ministerial meeting that the European Union and the
G-5 Sahel held in July in Ouagadougou, chaired by
High Representative Federica Mogherini and Minister
for Foreign Affairs Alpha Barry, whose presence I
welcome here today, together we decided to strengthen
our approach to supporting the G-5 Sahel towards a
responsible and accountable partnership.

In that spirit a mutual commitment, the European
Union decided to renew its support to the Joint Force
by pledging to it an additional €138 million, which
covers the operationalization of the Joint Force,
the implementation of its human rights compliance
framework and the development of its police component.
Progress is expected, in particular with regard to the
work of the Joint Force and its functioning - allow me
also to commend the success of the Force's most recent
operation 4 and the strengthening of the coordination
and leadership role of the permanent secretariat of the
G-5 Sahel, which includes the G-5 Sahel's development
of an integrated strategic framework for security and
development. That joint document will focus on the
stabilization of the most vulnerable priority areas and
will be adopted during the next G-S Sahel summit. It
will enable the European Union to provide its support in
a more efficient manner. Equally important is the need
for the Joint Force and its member States to effectively
implement the compliance framework on human rights
and international humanitarian law.

Under this new configuration, the European Union
and the support instruments that it is implementing are
adapted to the security situation on the ground. That
applies to our now-permanent political dialogue with the

G-5 Sahel; the advisory and coordination cell that was
relocated to Nouakchott to provide permanent support
to the structures of the G-5 Sahel; the coordination hub,
Whose functions are currently being transferred to the
G-5 in accordance with the principle of ownership; and
the mechanisms of our military and civilian advisory
and training missions in the Niger and Mali. In that
regard, actions are under way to enable our missions to
better support the Malian authorities in their efforts in
the centre of the country.

Beyond its efforts to strengthen the autonomy of
the G-5 Sahel, the European Union also supports the
mobilization of regional and international partners to
promote the stabilization of the Sahel region. To that
end, the European Union has decided to provide direct
support to the efforts of the partnership for security and
stability in the Sahel, an initiative launched by France
and Germany within the framework of the Group of
Seven. That is also why the European Union supports
the commitment of the Economic Community of West
African States to regional security and the action plan
it is set to adopt at its next summit. The European
Union also reiterates its commitment to working
closely with the United Nations and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.

In conclusion, in order to achieve the dual objective
of empowering partners and mobilizing regional and
international actors, the support and leverage of the
Security Council are more essential than ever. For the
European Union, increasing the capabilities of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force will continue to remain a priority
issue as we support the G-5 Sahel during this crucial
time. The countries of the Sahel can count on the full
mobilization and solidarity of the European Union.

