Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
sincerely thank Sweden and you, Mr. Prime Minister,
for convening this open debate on the protection
of children in armed conflict and its impact on the
prevention and maintenance of peace. We particularly
appreciate the forward-looking focus of this debate.

My delegation also appreciates the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/465) and the briefings we
have heard this morning by the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and Ms. Yenny Londofio of
Colombia, a country that is so dear to all of us.

Chile associates itself with the statements made by
the representatives of Canada, on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and of
Argentina, on behalf of the group of States endorsing
the Safe Schools Declaration.

Faced with the multidimensional nature of conflicts
and the increase in and persistence of violations of
children's rights, attacks on schools and hospitals, and
the actions of extremist groups that victimize the most
vulnerable groups, the international system as a whole
must act preventively and decisively. We agree that it is
time to stop the onset of future conflict.

We therefore echo the call of the international
community to go further in its resolve and action to
protect children who have been victims of conflict
in order to guarantee them a better future that will
allow them to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals established in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and lasting peace. As concrete measures,
we urge States to ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to
support the Paris Principles, the Vancouver Principles
and the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration. We attach
importance to maintaining child protection advisers
in peacekeeping operations and to considering new
appointments where such advising is required. We also
underscore birth registration as a means of proof to
prevent the recruitment of children and to ensure their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

We consider it relevant to include the issue
of children in peace negotiations, ceasefires and
mediation and support processes for sustaining peace,
and to ensure that peacekeeping contingents receive
adequate training in the promotion and protection of
human rights. We reiterate the importance of combating
impunity and prosecuting and punishing those
responsible for heinous crimes against children. In the
absence of such capacity or willingness, it is the task
of the International Criminal Court to address crimes
under the Rome Statute. In addition, we must ensure
predictable, sustained and flexible financing for the
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict so
that child protection actors can create viable alternatives
to military life and prevent their re-recruitment.

In conclusion, Chile believes that the international
community cannot and should not accept the violation of
children's rights anywhere or under any circumstances.
Ensuring a peaceful global society requires that
priority be given to the protection of its children and
the development of conflict prevention and resolution
strategies in order to achieve sustainable and lasting
peace that will guarantee future peace for all.

