Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Addressing the Security Council on behalf of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, I would
like to begin by congratulating the United States of
America on assuming the presidency of the Council
and by thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this
open debate in a timely manner on the very important
matter of children and armed conflict. 1 would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report entitled
"Children and armed conflict" (S/2014/339), which
covers global trends on the subject. My thanks also go
to the briefers and to Ms. Sandra Uwiringiyimana for
their valuable reports to the Council.

Current world events indicate that children are
suffering in massive numbers as a result of armed
conflicts. Despite all the efforts made at the international
level for the protection of civilians in general and
despite the measures adopted by the Security Council
and the relevant humanitarian institutions, it is still
regrettably true that armed conflicts continue to take
a heavy toll on children. As the Secretary-General's
report indicates, we are still witnessing the recruitment
and use of children, sexual violence against children,
the killing and maiming of children, and recurrent
attacks on schools and hospitals, in contravention of
international law.

Children in the occupied Palestinian territories
have always suffered the heaviest casualty rate. They
continue to be harshly affected by the ongoing military
occupation, conflict and blockade. The Secretary-
General's report indicates that in 2013, eight Palestinian
children were killed and 1,265 injured in the occupied
Palestinian territories, while 54 boys between the ages
of 14 and 17 years of age were held in Israeli military
detention for alleged security violations. Moreover,
according to the United Nations, in the latest round of
Israeli aggression against Gaza, at least 501 children
were killed and over 3000 injured, while 373,000
Palestinian children need immediate psychosocial first
aid. According to UNICEF, at least 219 schools have
been damaged by Israeli air strikes, while 22 were
completely destroyed.

In light of the foregoing, the Non-Aligned
Movement would like to take this opportunity to
call for accountability for the crimes and violations
committed by Israel, the occupying Power, during
its recent military aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population, and for the wanton destruction
of vital civilian infrastructure in the Gaza Strip. The
international community, including the Security
Council, should ensure serious follow-up efforts to
bring an end to Israel's impunity and to secure justice
for the victims.

The Non-Aligned Movement calls on all parties
to armed conflict to redouble their efforts to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, including the principle of proportionality, inter
alia, and the prohibition against the targeting of
civilian populations, civilian property and certain
special property during an armed conflict, and the
obligation of the parties to a conflict to ensure general
protection against the dangers arising from military
operations for civilian installations, hospitals, schools,
means of transportation and relief materials and their
distribution.

The Movement of Non-Aligned Nations has
also expressed its resolve to eliminate all forms of
discrimination and violence against women and girls,
especially in situations of armed conflict and foreign
occupation, including the systematic use of abduction
and rape by the parties to a conflict as an instrument
of war, as well the trafficking in and victimization
of women and girls. In that regard, the Non-Aligned
Movement has called upon States to take all necessary
measures against the perpetrators of such acts and to
ensure compliance with international law and domestic
legislation. That should include legislation to protect
women and girls in situations of armed conflict, bring
perpetrators to justice and ensure access to justice for
survivors.

Finally, the Movement acknowledges the progress
achieved in protecting children in situations of armed
conflict. To sustain those advances, it is crucial for all
stakeholders to continue to work closely to ensure that
the reports and documents on that important issue are
based on clear, accurate and verifiable data. It is, after
all, on such data that all comments and recommendations
are based. In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
stresses that gaps in the reporting process must be
addressed and that efforts should be made to improve
the reporting process. Such efforts should include
enhanced cooperation and coordination among the
countries concerned and the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Security Council Working
Group on the subject. The Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Security Council Working
Group must take cognizance of those gaps and ensure
that they are addressed. The integrity of the reports and
the work of our Organization rest on that fundamental
requirement.

