Mr. Moeller (Denmark): The Security Council is
meeting today on a very serious set of issues. It is
therefore only apt that the meeting has been convened
at the ministerial level. At stake are the sovereignty
and integrity of Lebanon, the principle of the rule of
law and the credibility of the Security Council in
following through on its own resolutions, particularly
resolution 1595 (2005).

The report of the Independent Investigation
Commission has set out a most disturbing, but at the
same, unfortunately, rather compelling case.
Converging evidence gathered by the Commission so
far thus seems to suggest that there might have been a
conspiracy among senior Syrian and Lebanese security
officials behind the terrorist assassination of former
Prime Minister Hariri on 14 February.

This is a preliminary report and the presumption
of innocence applies. Nobody, of course, should be
presumed guilty until so proven in a court of law. That
is the reason why Mr. Mehlis has asked for - and the
Secretary-General has granted, at the explicit request
of the Lebanese authorities - an extension of the
investigation until 15 December. We fully concur with
that decision by the Secretary-General.

We believe that it is absolutely essential to get to
the bottom of this case so as to ensure that the
perpetrators of this despicable terrorist act are brought
to account and that justice is served. In order to
complete the investigation and achieve those
objectives, we need, as stipulated in resolution 1559
(2004), the full, immediate and unconditional
cooperation of all relevant parties.

While we welcome the full cooperation extended
by the Lebanese authorities to the Commission, we are
seriously concerned by the information contained in
the report that Syria's "lack of substantive cooperation
with the Commission has impeded the investigation
and made it difficult to follow leads established by the
evidence" (S/2005/662, para. 35). That lack of
cooperation is neither acceptable nor in Syria's own
best interest.

It is, in those circumstances, imperative that the
Council ensure proper working conditions for the
Commission - a Commission that it has itself
established - so that it can finish its work.

The resolution before us aims at exactly that. It
relays the strong and unambiguous message to the
Syrian Government that we expect its immediate, full
and substantial cooperation in this investigation -
nothing more and nothing less. At the same time, the
resolution stipulates that continued non-cooperation by
Syria will have further consequences. The individual
measures outlined do not have a punitive content, but
are designed to elicit cooperation from the individuals
concerned and to ensure that they do not flee the
investigation. The fact that it has been adopted
unanimously reinforces that strong message.

Should the Lebanese authorities express a need
for technical assistance for the purposes of the next
steps of the investigation, I can tell them that Denmark
stands ready to continue to provide further assistance.
Denmark is also ready to support the ongoing efforts in
Lebanon to improve the country's permanent
investigative capacity.

It has been argued that, by pursuing this
investigation and the truth about the assassination of
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, we risk
jeopardizing the stability of Lebanon and the region,
but an important prerequisite for regional stability is in
fact respect for Lebanon's political independence. That
has evidently been violated in the case of the Hariri
assassination. The Council must continue to strive for
full implementation of both resolutions 1559 (2004)
and 1595 (2005). Denmark remains committed to that
goal. Syria must realize that it poses a real danger to
peace in the region by being involved in arming
terrorist groups and by not securing its borders with
Iraq.

