Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): On behalf of the
delegation of Ukraine, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important meeting. I would also
like to acknowledge Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and thank her for introducing the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339) on that issue.

Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made
earlier in this debate by the observer of the European
Union. My delegation would like to make the following
statement in its national capacity.

Ukraine strongly believes that the full and effective
implementation of the obligations undertaken by
Member States in accordance with the basic documents
in the field of the protection of children's rights must
be a priority at the national, regional and international
levels in daily life, let alone armed conflicts. We fully
share the Secretary-General's concern over the impact
that ongoing armed conflicts have on children. Although
not on a scale as large as in some other parts of the
world, but no less dramatic, the issue of children and
armed conflict has, unfortunately, become pertinent to
Ukraine.

Since the beginning of the conflict provoked
by the Russian Federation - and more recently
Russia's unconcealed military aggression against
Ukraine - there have been repeated abductions of
children by Russian-sponsored terrorist groups in
eastern Ukraine, including from orphanages and
medical facilities. They have been illegally moved
outside the country. Children are being killed and
wounded as a result of the activities of armed groups
active in eastern Ukraine. According to the latest report
of Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights on the human rights situation in
Ukraine, at least 23 children have been killed since
mid-April, while and at least 38 have been wounded in
eastern Ukraine.

The protection of civilians, particularly children
as the most vulnerable group, has been a top priority
to the Government of Ukraine while conducting
its anti-terrorist operations. The Government has
taken a number of practical steps in order to enhance
coordination in evacuation activities. A significant
number of children has already been evacuated from
the zone of the security operation. Several groups of
children who had been forcibly moved outside Ukraine
by illegal armed groups were successfully returned to
Ukraine and are now safe.

According to the latest official statistics, 35 per cent
ofthe the internally displaced persons (IDPs) registered
by the Government are children. In order to facilitate
their enrolment in schools, the Government of Ukraine
allowed school administrations to enrol IDP children
based only on a written request by their parents.
Authorities are also working to simplify the procedure
for children to obtain medical care. On 8 August, the
President of Ukraine signed a law that allows for the
transfer of State property to local authorities in order
to establish new kindergartens. The Government
of Ukraine is also addressing the need to provide
psychological assistance to children who have been
affected by the atmosphere of fear and intimidation.

In that light, we deem it necessary to increase
Member States' commitments to the topic under
discussion today by acceding to, and effectively
implementing, the relevant universal and regional
instruments, in particular the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

Ukraine commends the work of UNICEF and
other specialized United Nations agencies in the area
of children and armed conflict. We greatly appreciate
the assistance provided to us by the United Nations
and the relevant humanitarian organizations aimed
at addressing the adverse implications that Russian
aggression continues to inflict on children in Ukraine.

