Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I welcome the
opportunity to speak today on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum member States represented in New
York, namely, Australia, Fiji, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own
country, New Zealand.

At the outset, I would like to stress that the
member States of the Pacific Islands Forum fully
recognize the importance of resolution 1540 (2004)
and take their obligations seriously. There are
considerable capacity and resource challenges in our
region, particularly for smaller States, in meeting the
resolution's obligations, both in terms of reporting and
implementation. In that regard, we particularly
welcome the comments made by the representatives of
South Africa and Indonesia this morning, namely, that
the Council should take both capacity and proliferation

risks into account when working with Member States.
From our perspective, cooperation between the
Council, international and regional organizations and
Member States can be extremely helpful in addressing
the challenges we face in our region. We would like to
offer several brief comments on how to optimize that
cooperation.

First, when planning outreach through regional
groupings, particularly to the small States in our
region, the Council needs to be realistic about the
capacity and competing obligations of those States.
That means that, where possible, the Security Council
should try to combine the approaches of the three
relevant Committees so that there can be a coordinated
dialogue between the Council and the regional
organization concerned over reporting and
implementation obligations. We understand fully that
the scope of the three resolutions is different, but we
do think that there are synergies and efficiencies
possible in combined outreach from the Security
Council. A streamlined approach will be far more
effective in building successful engagement.

Secondly, it is important to recognize that small
States have extremely limited resources and are not in
a position to absorb multiple technical assistance
approaches. To be specific, in our own region, we feel
that more than one or two such projects a year would
be difficult. Given the limitations imposed by the
capacity restraints of small Member States, the Council
should be prepared to prioritize its requirements. We
note that joint planning is currently under way between
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to hold a workshop in our region on
legislative drafting mid-year. We note that the expert
group of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) is also interested in a regional
workshop. We hope that the Committee can consider a
single coordinated event.

Thirdly, one size does not fit all. Workshops need
to be targeted to the specific needs of the region, and
should be developed in close cooperation with regional
members well in advance of the event. Consultation
and a realistic lead time should help the development
of a project of the greatest possible relevance to the
region. Assistance also needs to be able to take into
account the specific requirements of individual States.
Fourthly - and this is our last point - technical
assistance needs to be a whole package. Workshops are
very helpful, but they are only part of the solution.
There needs to be a continued focus on capacity-
building through the implementation stage. It is
important to set up ongoing and more tailored technical
support in follow-up to workshops. That requires
ongoing investment and support from the international
community. We welcome the fact that the
representative of the Department for Disarmament
Affairs made comments to that effect this morning.

Speaking briefly in my national capacity, I would
also like to assure the Council of New Zealand's strong
commitment to providing assistance in our region. New
Zealand is engaged in ongoing bilateral assistance
projects with partners in the Pacific region to assist
with reporting and the implementation of resolutions
1257 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We hosted
a regional meeting in May 2006 that was aimed at
building mutual understanding between the Council
and the Pacific region on those issues. We believe that
helped to lay the foundation for a new style of
engagement.

In conclusion, we in the Pacific region greatly
appreciate the efforts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to engage with our
region. We have the will to play our part, and we look
forward to the international community's ongoing
interest and assistance.

