Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremic',
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, as well as
Mr. Skender Hyseni. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to thank him and the others for
their briefings.

Despite some isolated incidents and the
differences in the positions of Albanian and Serbian
Kosovars, we are pleased with the overall stability in
the security situation in Kosovo. We pay tribute to the
role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also commend the
coordination and cooperation between UNMIK and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).

The report (S/2009/300) of the Secretary-General
includes a number of positive elements that can be
built upon to normalize the situation between
communities and achieve lasting stability of Kosovo,
beginning with the rebuilding of homes in the northern
part of Kosovo following an agreement between
Albanian and Serb citizens. Some progress has also
been made in the search for solutions to protect Serbian
heritage in Kosovo, and 26 bodies have been identified
and returned to their families.

We also note with satisfaction the efforts of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to
help returnees and reconstruct homes, including its
promise to rebuild 45 residential units by the end of the
year as part of the UNDP-managed Sustainable
Partnerships for Assistance to Returns in Kosovo. We
would also like to commend UNMIK's support for the
reconstruction of cultural and religious heritage sites
damaged in the wake of the violence in 2004.

Despite the peaceful and positive developments
taking place in Kosovo, we continue to be concerned
that areas in the North still operate independently from
the rest of Kosovo. We are also concerned about the
ongoing divisions between the northern and other
police forces in Kosovo. In that regard, we believe it
important to encourage all citizens to take part in local
police and administration.
UNMIK's establishment of the Office for
Community Support and Facilitation is an important
step that we should all support. It is also important for
UNMIK to focus on minority affairs, including by
supporting the return process, monitoring human rights
and continuing to mediate among local communities.

We stress the need to increase the effectiveness of
the Human Rights Advisory Panel as a credible
instrument to address claims pertaining to Violations of
human rights in the framework of UNMIK.

We hope that all parties will continue to
cooperate with EULEX in coordination with UNMIK,
pursuant to presidential statement S/PRST/2008/44 of
26 November 2008. We also hope that dialogue will
continue between Pristina and Belgrade to enforce the
ad hoc arrangement on the six common points set out
by the Secretary-General in his letter to the President
of Serbia dated 12 June 2008.

In conclusion, we call upon all parties to make
further efforts to keep the channels of constructive
cooperation open with a view to promoting peaceful
coexistence and harmony among all parties and
communities and avoiding confrontation and violence.
We would also like to emphasize the need for all
refugees to return home and to protect all internally
displaced persons and cultural and religious sites. The
issue of missing persons should not be politicized.
There must be common ground if peace and stability in
Kosovo and the Balkans are to be maintained.

