Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, my delegation
wishes to pay tribute to Mr. Merrem, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General; Brigadier-
General Izydorczyk, Chief Military Observer; and all the
men and women serving with the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT). It is thanks to their
dedicated efforts on the ground that the concrete process
of implementing the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan
has recently begun.
Japan finds it encouraging that both the Government
of Tajikistan and the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) are
maintaining the ceasefire and making serious efforts to
carry out their commitments under the General
Agreement, including actions with regard to the
Commission on National Reconciliation (CNR).

Given this positive development of the situation, I
strongly believe that the international community should
strengthen its assistance to the parties in their efforts to
establish lasting peace. In this context, the Government of
Japan fully supports the Security Council draft resolution
(S/1997/887), which extends the mandate of UNMOT
with increased strength, as recommended by the
Secretary-General.

At the same time, we cannot but be concerned about
the security situation on the ground, especially in the
central part of the country, due to various violent actions
of armed groups. Improving the security situation is a
prerequisite for further efficient activities not only by
UNMOT but also by the peacekeeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and other international organizations. My
delegation thus welcomes the recent agreement on the
formation by the Government of Tajikistan and the UTO
of a joint security unit to enhance the safety of UNMOT
personnel, and hopes that this unit will be established
without delay.

Finally, I am pleased to confirm that the
Government of Japan has already made substantial
contributions to the welfare of the people of Tajikistan in

 

the form of humanitarian, refugee and technical assistance.
It will continue such efforts, including the possible dispatch
of civilian personnel to the strengthened UNMOT, thereby
joining the international endeavour to facilitate the peace
process in Tajikistan.

