Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): The
Security Council is to going to take a decision on a
matter of particular importance to Mali. As is known,
Mali is presiding over the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). Today's vote comes
after the important meeting of the Security Council
with the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council
Committee on Sierra Leone, held in this same chamber
on 21 June.

The Security Council is going to take an
important decision on Sierra Leone following
liberation, thanks to the efforts of ECOWAS, one of
whose member States is called into question in the
draft resolution before us. How can we not also think
now of the many - and I am thinking of the 222
soldiers and 11 military observers - still surrounded?
The Security Council will decide today about Sierra
Leone, even while a joint high-level meeting between
ECOWAS and the United Nations Secretariat is
scheduled at Lome on 10 July, in a few days, to be
followed by an operational meeting, both focusing on
the situation in Sierra Leone.

Mali has often recalled that the main concern of
ECOWAS is the revival of the peace process in Sierra
Leone. In this context, the Security Council meeting
with the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council
Committee on 21 June provided a useful opportunity to
hold a candid and constructive dialogue, during which
the ECOWAS eight-point action plan for Sierra Leone
was abundantly explained. This plan has been
circulated to all the members of the Council and to all
members of the United Nations as well. It contains a
number of points covered in the draft resolution, in
particular the matter of diamonds. The declaration
made by the Security Council and ECOWAS after the
meeting very aptly underscored that the meeting had
been held in a spirit of genuine partnership, which the
participants decided to pursue and strengthen in the
future.

The draft resolution we have before us, however,
does not seem to be part of this dynamic, since it does
not sufficiently take into consideration the concerns
expressed by my delegation. The draft openly accuses a
member of ECOWAS, the President of which played a
constructive role, with other ECOWAS leaders, in the
peace process in Sierra Leone. We are concerned about
the repercussions on the peace process of the finger-
pointing at Liberia.

This reference is unacceptable to ECOWAS. We
feel it is not timely while the ECOWAS enquiry into
the diamond trade is not yet completed. This is why my
delegation will not be able to support the text as now
before us.
Starting right now, we must think about the
future - in other words, what comes after the
resolution. In particular, we must think about the way
in which we can protect President Taylor's constructive
commitment with regard to the peace process. We must
also reflect on the way in which we might help
ECOWAS to play a more effective role in the solution
to the crisis in Sierra Leone.

