Mr. Inzko: When I addressed the Council six
months ago (see S/PV.7555), we were on the eve of the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
That was an opportunity to mark how far Bosnia and
Herzegovina had come, but also to recognize that
there was much more work needed to ensure lasting
stability and a better future for the people of that
beautiful country. The signifance of that event was also
underlined by an important conference held in Dayton,
Ohio, in which former United States President Clinton,
one of the peacemakers 20 years ago, participated.

Against that backdrop, on 15 February the country
took the historic step of applying for membership in
the European Union. Bosnia and Herzegovina chose
its direction clearly, and that direction is a future in
the European Union. Of course, transition is a process
and not a event, and the transformation that the country
must undergo on the path to membership will make
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina better off.
Accordingly, we are fully united in supporting the
country in its European Union (EU) aspirations. What
lies ahead for Bosnia and Herzegovina will undoubtedly
be a challenging period, but it is one the country can
navigate if all parties work together and fully respect
the Dayton Peace Agreement.

As I stress in my report (8/2016/395, annex),
developments on the ground over the past six months
have been mixed. It remains unclear at what point we can
say Bosnia and Herzegovina is irreversibly on course
for Euro-Atlantic integration. On the positive side, as
I mentioned, the country submitted its membership
application with the European Union. Associated with
this, the authorities have also taken steps to implement
a reform agenda, including the adoption of new labour
legislation in both entities. In this context, I would like
to praise the significant efforts of the European Union
Special Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Lars-Gunnar Wigemark. He has really gone the
extra mile.

While the progress achieved by the authorities
on the reform agenda is indeed very welcome, let
us not lose sight of the need to accelerate the pace
of reform. There must be much more urgency in the
decision-making process. From the point of View of my
mandate to uphold the Peace Agreement, I welcome the
fact that the authorities of Republika Srpska have not
taken further steps to implement a referendum on the
authority of the State Court and the Prosecutor's Office
and on the authorities of the High Representative, as
that would be a clear violation of the Peace Agreement.
That step is indeed welcome.

My current assessment is that although the
referendum has still has not been officially withdrawn,
it does appear to have been put aside. I must note,
however, that various political actors have continued
to advocate the organization of yet another entity
referendum on the validity of a recent decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
this context, I need to stress that the Peace Agreement
explicitly states that the decisions of the Constitutional
Court are final and binding.

In addition to efforts made to meet European Union
requirements, I would like to commend the efforts of
the authorities to register military properties to the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is a condition
for the activation of a NATO membership action plan
and one of the prerequisites set by my Steering Board
for the closure ofthe Office of the High Representative
(OHR). I call on Republika Srpska authorities to enable
the registration of such properties located on the
territory of that entity, as the Federation has been doing.
If Republika Srpska authorities are as keen to see the
closure of my Office and my departure as they claim,
then they need to deliver the results needed to enable
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board to
take that decision.

Another largely positive factor has been the regional
situation. Serbian Prime Minister Vueie's high profile
commitment of notable donor funds to Srebrenica
did much to foster reconciliation. By the way, he
has personally visited Srebrenica twice. The very
important firstjoint session of the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Government of the
Republic of Serbia in November was a very welcome
and positive step forward. A similar joint session with
the Croatian Government has been announced, and is
also a positive development.

In the broader region, a decision was taken a
few days ago in Zagreb by the Presidents of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Turkey to reinvigorate
the process of trilateral meetings among those three
countries. I take this opportunity to encourage Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its neighbours to significantly
increase the level of State-to-State cooperation, to the
benefit of all sides.

Despite these positive developments, the forward
momentum they created was diminished, regrettably, by
a number of parallel developments during the reporting
period. The readiness ofsome political actors to question
and challenge the Peace Agreement, including new
attempts to undermine the sovereignty and authority of
the State and its institutions, continues to cast a shadow
over positive efforts to advance economic and social
reforms. Sharply divergent reactions to the verdict of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in the case of wartime Republika Srpska President
Radovan Karadzie highlighted the need for greater
efforts towards reconciliation.

Iwas deeply shocked by the high-profile opening by
the current Republika Srpska President of a dormitory
named after Karadzie only two days before his first-
instance conviction for genocide and crimes against
humanity In our countries, it would be unthinkable
to glorify individuals convicted of committing mass
atrocities. With this act, the Republika Srpska President
sent an insidious message to those affected by the
horror and trauma of wartime ethnic cleansing, and
put himself outside the standards and morality of the
civilized world. I also take this opportunity to reject
his thesis that fairness in transitional justice requires
the prosecution of equal numbers of war criminals from
different ethnic groups. We must seek justice for every
innocent individual victim and his or her parents and
relatives, but applying a principle of ethnic parity to
mass graves or war criminals would do a disservice to
victims and survivors of all nationalities.

The passing of time brings new challenges to all
of us, and Bosnia and Herzegovina is no different. A
terrorism-inspired act carried out by a single attacker
in Sarajevo on 18 November resulted in the death of two
soldiers of the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The attack once again highlighted the challenges facing
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the fight
against terrorism.

An additional issue of concern is the participation
of some citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina in foreign
conflicts, some of whom have returned and could
pose a threat to the future stability of the country.
Additional incidents continue to occur that threaten
to undermine inter-ethnic relations. For example,
processions organized in March in Srebrenica and
other municipalities by supporters of Vojislav Seselj to
celebrate his first-instance verdict of not guilty. This
raised fear among Bosniak returnees who are still
trying to come to terms with the crimes of the past.

Other direct challenges to the Peace Agreement
during the reporting period included the conclusion
reached by the Republika Srpska Government in
December that the entity's institutions would cease
cooperating with the State Investigation and Protection
Agency, a State-level police agency, over a legally
authorized raid on a police station in Republika Srpska
in relation to war crimes investigations. While the
Republika Srpska authorities eventually resumed
operational cooperation under a signed agreement,
that apparent interference of politics into police work
is unacceptable, in particular at a time when agencies
need to be strengthening their cooperation.

The continued policy by representatives of the
ruling party in the Republika Srpska, in particular its
President, to advocate for the secession of that entity
from Bosnia and Herzegovina troubles me deeply and
raises fundamental questions about the commitment of
some officials and political parties to fully respect the
Peace Agreement. In that context, I remain concerned
that that party's official platform includes a threat to
organize an independence referendum in 2018 if certain
conditions are not met. I take this opportunity to say
once again that the Peace Agreement does not grant the
entities the right to secede, and any attempt to change
the Peace Agreement requires the agreement of all the
parties.

In my previous report to the Council, and again
today, I described the opportunity provided to Bosnia
and Herzegovina's leaders by the European Union and
how critical it was for them to demonstrate that they
were ready and able to deliver on the reform agendas
they had set for themselves, while also fully respecting
the Peace Agreement. That opportunity must now
be embraced with both hands. What that means in
practice is an acceleration of concrete results. When
I next report to the Council, in six months" time, I
sincerely hope that the authorities will have undertaken
that challenge with greater urgency. Let us therefore
together issue a challenge to the authorities to deliver
on the following five points: first, publication of the
results of the 2013 census; secondly, a final agreement
on the EU coordination mechanism; thirdly, the full
implementation of decisions of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the rulings on the
Mostar elections, State property and the 9 January Day
in the Republika Srpska; fourthly, measurable progress
on fiscal and economic reforms, including meeting
the outstanding requirements set by the International
Monetary Fund for a new arrangement; and, lastly, real
progress on implementing the outstanding requirements
for the closure of the OHR. For that to happen, political
leaders will need to stop linking issues into ever-more
complex and out-of-reach packages and put the needs
of citizens first.

The year 2016 can be one of progress towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, economic growth and
job creation, but only if the country pulls together
and works as one. Questioning and challenging the
fundamentals of the Peace Agreement - which is also
the Constitution - is not a formula for success. Given
the complex environment that continues to prevail in
the country, the presence of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in Bosnia and Herzegovina with an
executive mandate remains of vital importance, thereby
enabling my Office and others in the international
community to fulfil our respective mandates, as well as
reassuring citizens from all ethnic groups throughout
the country of a safe and secure environment. I very
much hope that in six months' time I will be able
to report to the members of the Council a marked
improvement based on the delivery of concrete results
and a situation where there is full respect for the Peace
Agreement. That is the surest way forward for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

I would like to conclude today with some positive
news, which offer encouragement in our efforts to
ensure sustainable stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but also serve to highlight the challenges. The first
is a small, even trivial, example, but one of broader
symbolic significance. Just a few days ago, several local
associations agreed to create a single karate association
for the whole country. But even that small step required
20 years of efforts towards reaching that goal. The
second piece of news is of great significance. The
day after tomorrow, the splendid Ferhadija Mosque in
Banja Luka, demolished in the war along with 15 other
mosques in the city, will be reopened. That will be an
event of broader significance for reconciliation and
tolerance in the region and beyond, and a huge number
of honorary guests are expected from Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia, Turkey and elsewhere. It
will be a very special moment not only for Banja Luka
but for humankind as a whole.

On that positive note, I would like to thank the
Security Council for its attention and continued support
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

