Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like first to thank you, Madam President, and
the delegation of Luxembourg for having organized this
debate on Haiti. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore', for her briefing on the situation in Haiti, and
to assure her of Canada's continued support to her
and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We acknowledge the ongoing efforts of
all the MINUSTAH staff to strengthen stability in Haiti.

Although progress has been made since the
Security Council last discussed Haiti in August
(see S/PV.7024), more work is needed to ensure its
sustainable development and stability. One example of
this progress is the relocation of thousands of families
living in displaced person's camps; 90 per cent of the
population displaced by the 2010 earthquake have now
moved out of these camps. We must continue to work
until the remaining 10 per cent have homes. In January,
Canada announced further support to help relocate
another 53,000 internally-displaced persons over the
next year.

(spoke in English)

Canada has shared a unique partnership with Haiti
for decades. Since 2006, Canada has provided more than
$1.4 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
These efforts have been designed to complement to
and support the efforts and actions of our allies and of
multilateral and regional bodies in Haiti. Canada has
worked to make improvements in a number of areas
including economic growth, food security, governance
and - in line with Canada's Group of Eight Muskoka
initiative - has placed a particular focus on maternal,
newborn and child health.

Canada welcomes the fact that Haiti has
made economic development, including trade
and investment, a top priority. We welcome the
Government's emphasis on modernizing the business
environment so as to facilitate foreign investments,
and we strongly encourage actions that can lead to
further gains in transparent governance, economic
development and sustainable job creation. A private
sector creates employment and employment builds
an economy. Transparency, accountability, economic
competitiveness and diversification are all essential to
Haiti's development and sustained revenue generation
for the Government. We encourage continued action
in improving the business environment, which can
transform Haiti's economic potential into concrete
outcomes for the Haitian people.

(spoke in French)

If Haiti is to succeed on the path of development
in accordance with its own objectives and plans,
accountable institutional and political stability are
necessary. We note with concern that the long-overdue
senatorial, municipal and local elections prescribed by
the Constitution still have not taken place, despite the
repeated calls of Haitian political actors and members

of the Security Council that they be held without delay.
We are encouraged by recent announcements that these
elections will take place this fall, but those words must
now be turned into action and lead to voters casting
their ballots at the polling stations.

The promulgation of the electoral law in December
2013 was an important step towards the holding of the
elections. We commend Haiti's political actors for the
consensual solutions they have reached through the
recently concluded inter-Haitian dialogue. We also
recognize and appreciate the efforts of MINUSTAH in
providing electoral assistance and logistical support for
those elections. We note the importance ofstrengthening
the status and capacity of Haitian institutions to take on
an increasing role in the future.

It is also important to continue to improve human
rights protection in Haiti. Canada commends the
Haitian Office of the Ombudsperson for becoming
accredited as a national human rights institution in
December 2013. That was an important step forward for
Haitian-led efforts to protect and promote human rights
in the country, and Canada is proud to have supported
the Office over the past few years. We also welcome the
submission of several reports on Haiti's implementation
of its obligations under human rights conventions as
important steps towards accountability in this domain.

There is still much more to be done, however, as
generalized weaknesses in institutions of the justice
sector remain a concern and undermine human rights
protection. A large number of Haitians - up to
70 per cent of the prison population, according to some
sources - face prolonged pre-trial detention in terrible
conditions. It is time for this issue to be addressed.
Continued international engagement and the ongoing
institution-strengthening efforts of the Haitian
authorities are crucial to improving the current situation
in an effective and sustainable way.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, Canada wishes to state that it
continues to appreciate and support the important work
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
For 10 years, MINUSTAH has worked to improve
security conditions and contribute to lasting stability
in Haiti, and it has made considerable progress. Canada
notes MINUSTAH's forward planning on the post-2016
presence of the United Nations in Haiti. As we consider
the possibilities for the future, it is important that such
decisions be based on the situation on the ground,
and in particular the capacity of the Haitian State to
deliver security to its population. We should also avoid

reduction scenarios that would jeopardize the results
we have achieved to date.

We also commend the mission's efforts towards the
reform and development the Haitian National Police,
an organization that has demonstrated increasing
capacity in recent months. We are extremely pleased
that the first group of Haitian police commissioners
has completed its training, and that the training of a
second group is now under way. This is an important
milestone and the result of considerable work by
Haitian authorities to develop curriculum and recruit
and train professors, among other activities. Canada is
proud to have provided considerable support to these
efforts, and we encourage the Haitian Government to
ensure the sustainability of these achievements. We
urge the Haitian Government to continue this work and
to further build upon it by tackling weaknesses in the
justice sector so that the rule of law can be delivered
to all Haitian citizens. This is critical for Haiti's future
and I can assure you, Madam President, that Canada
will continue to support Haiti in that regard.

