Mr. Feltman: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in the
Lake Chad Basin region.

Attacks by Boko Haram continue, mainly in north-
eastern Nigeria and southern Niger, and to a lesser
extent in northern Cameroon and the Lac region of
Chad. Terrorists persist in targeting innocent civilians,
often using young children. Despite commendable
regional efforts, the group continues to threaten
regional stability, as illustrated by the 3 June attack on
a military base in Bosso town, south-eastern Niger.

Lake Chad Basin countries face a serious
humanitarian crisis. Significant numbers of refugees
and internally displaced people add pressure on host
communities that are already food-insecure. The
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Stephen O'Brien, will brief the Council on the
humanitarian challenges.

The United Nations has received reports of an
increase in the number of incidents of sexual and
gender-based Violence among the displaced. In Nigeria,
the Protection Working Group, comprising the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the Nigerian National Human Rights
Commission, reports rape and sexual abuse in almost
half of the 26 sites covered.

In Cameroon, allegations of human rights abuses
committed by security forces persist, especially against
youth belonging to Muslim communities in the north.
Vigilante groups going after suspected suicide bombers
have injured innocent civilians.

To protect human rights, the States concerned must
ensure accountability for serious violations by national
forces and that the use of force is in full compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. States must adopt measures to protect civilians
and respect due process when dealing with persons
arrested for Boko Haram-related charges. Children
used by Boko Haram should be treated as victims and
dealt with in accordance with international standards
for juvenile justice. We welcome the establishment ofa
human rights desk by the Nigerian army to investigate
allegations of human rights violations committed by its
forces, and we encourage other affected countries to
institute similar mechanisms.

The Boko Haram crisis has devastated the region's
economy. Economic growth has dropped sharply with
the decline in the price of oil and other commodities.
Decreasing resources affect States' ability to deliver
basic social services and to pay the salaries of security
forces and civil servants.

Insecurity has disrupted trade routes between Chad
and Nigeria, interrupting the supply of basic goods
and resulting in price hikes. Youth unemployment is
at a worrisome high, providing a recruitment ground
for Boko Haram. We urge that military operations
be complemented with development interventions,
including to address the effects of climate change.

We commend the Lake Chad Basin countries'
efforts to combat Boko Haram. The regional offensive
involving Chadian, Cameroonian, Nigerien and
Nigerian troops operating under the Multinational Joint
Task Force (MNJTF) has recaptured 80 per cent of the
areas once under Boko Haram control, freed thousands
of captives and prevented terrorist attacks.

I returned yesterday after visiting a number of
Central and West African countries. As part of my tour,
I met with President Idriss Deby Itno in N'Djamena and
visited MNJTF headquarters. MNJTF's main challenge
remains a severe lack of funding. The 1 February
African Union donor conference aimed to mobilize
$750 million, of which only $250 million was pledged;
even less was disbursed. The success of MNJTF
operations also depends on timely and actionable
intelligence as well as specialized counter-terrorism
skills and equipment, given the evolving tactics of
Boko Haram.

So far, the Lake Chad Basin countries have borne
the financial responsibility of combating Boko Haram
despite their own economic crises. As President Deby
Itno explained to me with frustration, they have been
forced to divert national spending away from basic
services to security. Lake Chad Basin leaders have
expressed their growing impatience over delays by
international partners to support the MNJTF financially.

I commend the United Kingdom for its financial
support to the MNJTF andwelcome the European Union's
intention to commit funds for the operationalization of
the force. I urge the international community to support
the MNJTF through the mobilization of the required
political, logistical and financial support.

The United Nations supports national and regional
efforts to prevent and combat terrorism and to ensure
that the perpetrators of terrorism are brought to justice.
However, counter-terrorist operations must abide by
the rule of law and international human rights norms.
MNJTF commanders reassured me that every effort
was being made to protect human rights, including
by the deployment of dedicated personnel to monitor
human rights issues.

Further to the Council's request to extend the
Integrated Assistance on Countering Terrorism (I-ACT)
initiative to the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel region, the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) is working closely with the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to develop
the G-5 Sahel I-ACT In this regard, CTITF, accompanied
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, will meet G-5 representatives from
30 August to 1 September in Nouakchott to produce the
outline of a capacity-building framework for counter-
terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism,
including concrete regional projects.

The Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
will also visit the Lake Chad Basin countries in
October, accompanied by the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and for
West Africa and the Sahel, CTED, CTITF and the
Special Representative of the African Union for
Counter-Terrorism Cooperation. In Central Africa, the
United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism supports
the efforts of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa to implement the Central Africa counter-
terrorism strategy. It Will meet with partners in the fall
to discuss specific projects.

A military approach, while essential, will not bring
an end to the Boko Haram threat. Affected countries
must tackle not only the humanitarian consequences,
but also the root causes that contributed to the
emergence of the group, including the social, economic
and political grievances of marginalized communities.
The Special Representatives for Central Africa and
for West Africa and the Sahel continue to encourage
regional interlocutors to address the Boko Haram crisis
holistically and beyond an exclusively security-oriented
lens. Lake Chad Basin countries need our support so
that military operations are followed by stabilization
measures and the restoration of State authority.

The Second Regional Security Summit for the
Lake Chad Basin, held on 14 May in Abuja, reaffirmed
the need to address the root causes. Among a number
of noteworthy recommendations, the Summit
encouraged affected countries to utilize the services
of community and religious leaders to discourage
impressionable youth from being radicalized and to
lead deradicalization programmes. The Summit took
note of the negative consequences of climate change,
affecteing the livelihoods of those who depend on Lake
Chad, in particular young people. The Summit urged
the concerned countries and partners to support the
restoration of Lake Chad as part ofa strategy to combat
Boko Haram.

The United Nations stands ready to support the
Lake Chad Basin countries in addressing both the
consequences and the root causes of Boko Haram. We
encourage the leaders of the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic Community
of West African States to hold their long-planned
joint Ministerial Summit to adopt a common regional
strategy to address the crisis. The Security Council's
support would help underscore the urgency of the
matter.

