Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to express my deep gratitude to
Mr. Guehenno for his detailed briefing on the latest
developments in Timor-Leste. I also commend the
efforts of the Secretary-General and thank him for the
information provided in his report.

I also thank Mr. Santos, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste to the United Nations,
for his statement, as well as our South African
colleague for the critical role his country has played
and for its efforts to draw up a draft resolution on
extending the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

The report of the Secretary-General refers to
progress made in terms of security in Timor-Leste,
although the situation remains tenuous, as evidenced
by the attacks on the President and the Prime Minister.
The attacks sought to harm its immediate victims and
the country as a whole, which had only just begun to
restore calm and stability following last year's
elections. Libya therefore reiterates its firm
condemnation of the attacks on the President and Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste. We pray to God for President
Ramos-Horta's speedy recovery.

My country shares the Secretary-General's View
that the national police force of Timor-Leste requires
further support in training and capacity-development if
it is to fully shoulder its responsibilities for restoring
order, which is under ongoing threat. The Timorese
authorities need to develop a comprehensive approach
to reforming the security sector in cooperation with
UNMIT. That issue is of the highest priority and
requires their full attention. We hope that the measures
recently taken by the Government in that area, to
which Mr. Guehenno referred, will strengthen security
and mark a positive step in that direction.
The Parliament and Government of Timor-Leste
worked to ensure the success of last year's elections
and the establishment of democratic institutions. While
duty-bound to commend those efforts, we remain
concerned about the remaining differences because
there has been no cooperation between the heads of the
political parties, preventing the establishment of an
agreed approach to such pending matters as the issue of
internally displaced persons and the petitioners of the
Timorese armed forces, among others. We therefore
call on all Timorese parties to find common ground for
launching a dialogue and reconciling so as to overcome
the aforementioned differences. I would also like to
welcome Mr. Guehenno's observation that the reaction
of all parties and political groups to those deplorable
attacks was in full respect for State institutions and for
the constitution.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/26)
referred to several issues that must be addressed:
poverty, continuing unemployment and socio-economic
problems. There is also a need to improve coordination
among security institutions, strengthen the legal
framework and operational capacities and exert full
control over all forces on the ground. We therefore call
on the United Nations and UNMIT to cooperate with
local authorities in order to achieve those goals.

We very much appreciate the observations
contained in the Secretary-General's report. We, of
course, agree with him that efforts must be intensified
in order to bolster dialogue, restore calm, ease
tensions, bring about national reconciliation,
strengthen national institutions and achieve national
reconciliation. We also endorse his recommendation
that UNMIT's mandate be extended for a further
12 months.

Last but not least, we commend the efforts of
Mr. Atul Khare and UNMIT to build up Timor-Leste's
national political, economic and security institutions.

