Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate. We also wish to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his briefing. We
also wish to welcome the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Iraq.

Iraqi provincial elections were successfully
completed at the end of last month. That is a major
milestone in the Iraqi peace and reconstruction process,
and it is conducive to expanding the representativeness
and inclusiveness of the Iraqi political process. It
marks another significant step towards having Iraqis
govern Iraq.

China wishes to congratulate the people and the
Government of Iraq, and we appreciate the assistance
of United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) in the electoral preparations. We hope that
the Iraqi leaders in the various parties will seize the
current positive momentum, put their national interest
above all else and continue to promote impartial, open
and inclusive dialogue so that the national
reconciliation process can move steadily along the
track of peace.

The improvement in the Iraqi security situation is
encouraging. However, objectively speaking, the
overall Iraqi situation still includes multiple challenges
that do not make us overly optimistic. We welcome the
strengthening of the capacity of the Iraqi security
forces and we hope that the Iraqi security forces'
capacity-building will be accelerated so that they can
fully take over responsibility for the security of their
country.

To consolidate the progress achieved by Iraq in
the political and security fields, it is necessary to speed
up the economic recovery and reconstruction process.
We appeal to the international community to continue
to help Iraq in its reconstruction and development,
honour aid commitments and promote engagement
with Iraq under the framework of the International
Compact for Iraq. We encourage Iraq to expand its
cooperation with neighbouring countries and give
greater play to the role of mechanisms such as the
meetings of Foreign Ministers of neighbouring
countries.

Under the leadership of Mr. De Mistura, and
pursuant to Security Council mandates, UNAMI has
made good progress in promoting national dialogue
and reconciliation and in the areas of electoral
assistance, regional cooperation, humanitarian
assistance and development and reconstruction. China
highly appreciates its efforts in this regard.

We support a continued major role for the United
Nations in the Iraqi political and reconstruction
process, for which the international community should
create an enabling environment. We trust that the Iraqi
Government and the other parties concerned will
honour their commitments in good faith and effectively
ensure the safety and security of UNAMI personnel.
