Mr. Apakan (Turkey): The excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons pose a complex set of risks and
threats to the security of States and their citizens. This
is particularly the case in Central Africa. We therefore
welcome the initiative taken by Gabonese presidency
to have an open discussion on this issue today.

I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, as well as
Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma, for their comprehensive and
insightful presentations.

It is estimated that 90 per cent of civilian
casualties in modern conflicts around the world are
caused by small arms. The Great Lakes region of
Africa has been the most tragic example of that. In
1994, more than 800,000 people were murdered in
Rwanda, mostly with small arms, including machetes.
An estimated 300,000 civilians have also lost their
lives the same way in Burundi. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the death toll used to average
2,600 per day. The instances of tribal and ethnic
Violence in Southern Sudan, which seem to be on the
rise, and general lack of security in the triangle
between Chad, the Central African Republic and
Southern Sudan are also fuelled by the overabundance
of small arms and light weapons.

The availability of small arms and light weapons
also results in protracted armed conflicts, which are
among the greatest obstacles to human development
and a major cause of mass poverty, as such conflicts
decimate economies and dislocate societies. For
instance, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the
civil war has resulted in 4 million deaths that can be
attributed to malnutrition and disease.

In addition, the proliferation of these weapons
makes the peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts of
the international community in various parts of Central
Africa not only more difficult, but also highly
dangerous. There is also a well documented
relationship between the illicit trade in small arms and
terrorism and other acts of organized crime.

It is of course the responsibility of every State to
protect its citizens from the danger posed by the illicit
trafficking and unauthorized use of arms and weapons.
However, the transboundary nature and the magnitude
of the threat warrants strong cooperation and
coordination among States, as well as a
multidimensional approach that deals with the problem
at the local, national, regional and international levels
simultaneously. In this context, we welcome regional
initiatives that address this problem, such as the
establishment of a subregional register of small arms in
Central Africa.

Furthermore, not all States have the necessary
capabilities to deal with this problem. Therefore,
capacity-building emerges as an important component
of the struggle in this field. In Central Africa in
particular, we should expand foreign aid programmes
that seek to eradicate the illicit arms trade in the
subregion and do our utmost to help strengthen the
capacities of States and indigenous organizations, such
as the Economic Community of Central African States.
In addition to bilateral aid programmes, United Nations
offices also have an essential role to play in the
coordination and implementation of relevant
programmes, together with local authorities.

Turkey favours a comprehensive approach in
dealing with this problem and thus remains committed
to the effective implementation and further
strengthening of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. We also support the elaboration of more
effective international norms and standards. Within this
framework, we support the conclusion of an arms trade
treaty, which should halt unregulated and uncontrolled
trade in conventional arms worldwide and establish
common standards for their global trade.
Moreover, reinforcing border and customs
controls, as well as controls on brokering, licensed
production and end use of small arms and light
weapons, is indispensable for the prevention of illicit
arms trade. Upholding existing arms embargoes and
export bans, improving the security and management
of stockpiles of arms and ammunition, and further
promoting disarmament within the context of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes would also contribute to these efforts.

Finally, transparency and information-sharing
would certainly help promote consistency in the
implementation of agreed multilateral standards. We
therefore attach importance to the fulfilment by United
Nations Member States of their reporting requirements
within the United Nations on their small arms
activities.

In conclusion, illicit arms trafficking continues to
pose a significant threat to international peace and
security, which can be tackled only through our
collective efforts. The Central African region, in
particular, presents a prime example of this grim
reality. I hope and believe that our meeting today and
the draft presidential statement, which we fully
support, will re-energize our endeavours in the right
direction. For its part, Turkey is certainly committed to
contributing to all relevant efforts.

