Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (Rwanda) for their
exhaustive briefings.

We welcome the efforts of the heads of both
international Tribunals to fulfil the completion
strategies for their work as soon as possible without
undermining the requirements of due process. We also
welcome the preparations to ensure the transition to the
Residual Mechanism, in accordance with resolution
1966 (2010). We reaffirm the importance of the
Tribunals' reports (S/2011/316 and S/2011/317) with
respect to the transfer of a number of cases to national
courts, which could facilitate the Tribunals' work and
help to strengthen the capacities of national legal
systems and to disseminate the culture of
accountability for those responsible for war crimes and
genocide.

We also understand that some difficulties are not
under the control of the heads of the two Tribunals and
will have a negative impact on the completion of trials
on schedule. One particular problem is the departure of
professionals to pursue more stable positions. We call
on all parties concerned to cooperate with a view to
finding an appropriate solution allowing the conclusion
of the final phase of trials as soon as possible, in
implementation of resolutions 1954 (2010) and 1955
(2010).

We welcome the cooperation of most States, in
particular those of the former Yugoslavia and the
neighbours of Rwanda, with both Tribunals. We call on
those States to strengthen their cooperation in order to
ensure that the Tribunals can carry out their functions.
These States play a very important role in locating,
arresting and transferring fugitives to the Tribunals, as
well as in providing information and evidence in order
to shed light on the cases and ensure that justice is
done, and in facilitating greater access to witnesses and
improved witness protection.

We welcome the arrest of Ratko Mladie on
26 May in Serbia and his transfer to The Hague so that
he may be brought before the ICTY. We also welcome
the arrest of Bernard Munyagishari in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Justice will certainly be done,
albeit late. We welcome the efforts of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, chaired by
Portugal, and the constructive role played by the Office
of Legal Affairs in contributing to the success of the
Tribunals' work and its transition to the Residual
Mechanism.

We recall the importance of the international
Tribunals in putting an end to the culture of impunity
and ensuring accountability for criminals and the rule
of law at the international and national levels. We must
ensure the success of the Tribunals in achieving their
goals in order to render justice to the victims, which
will deter criminals and protect civilians in the future,
not only in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, but
throughout the world.

