I am writing to you, Mr. President, on the occasion of this week's Security Council meeting on the Middle East. As you know, the European Union (EU) remains firmly committed to a negotiated and viable two-State solution that takes into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and respects the international parameters and all relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). As a member of the Middle East Quartet, the European Union has spared no effort to revive a process leading to direct and meaningful negotiations between the parties. In recent days, I have had open, friendly and constructive conversations with a number of senior Israeli interlocutors, including Alternate Prime Minister Benny Gantz and Foreign Minister Gabi Ashkenazi. In addition, I am in close contact with the Palestinian leadership and with other key Arab representatives and, together with EU Foreign Ministers, I also held a useful discussion on the Middle East peace process with United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. In these discussions, I emphasized the EU's opposition to any unilateral steps by the parties, in particular the possible annexation by Israel of any parts of the West Bank. I am firmly convinced that such steps would endanger the continuous efforts of the Security Council and the wider international community to achieve the vision of a region where two States - Israel and Palestine - live side by side within secure and recognized borders. In March this year, at the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the EU delivered a statement to that effect, noting clearly that "any annexation would constitute a serious violation of international law". Indeed, a core legal provision of international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, is that the acquisition of territory by force is prohibited. Importantly, unilateral annexation would cause real damage to the prospects for a viable two-State solution. It would also likely cause major difficulties in terms of regional stability and make it more difficult to normalize the relations between Israel and the Arab States in the future. Unilateral annexation would inevitably have legal consequences for the international community's relations with Israel. In that regard, it is already clear that the EU has responsibilities under international and EU law, including the obligation - as set out by the Security Council - to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. The unilateral annexation of any parts of the West Bank would create further legal and practical problems in that regard. The EU and its member States have repeatedly reiterated their fundamental commitment to Israel's security, including with regard to the vital threats it faces in the region. This is not something on which we will compromise. I am also convinced that only a negotiated and viable two-State solution will bring long-lasting security and peace to both the Israeli and the Palestinian people. Resolving the conflict is in the fundamental interest of the EU. This can be achieved only through a comprehensive peace agreement, based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle of land for peace, the Quartet road map, the agreements previously reached by the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative. We should take advantage of the new momentum to revive the process. Let me assure the Security Council that I, as the EU representative of the Middle East Quartet, will continue to engage with both parties, with the other members of the Quartet and with the wider international community in support of a negotiated two- State solution based on the international parameters described above, which ensures equal rights for all.
