Mrs. Chartsuwan (Thailand): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and
my own country, Thailand.

ASEAN wishes to congratulate Senegal on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to express its appreciation to that country for
organizing today's ministerial-level open debate on
the topic of peacekeeping operations and asymmetrical
threats. We thank the briefers for their respective
insightful and informative presentations.

As a region that currently contributes almost 5,000
men and women to 12 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, ASEAN attaches great importance to the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
The phenomenon of asymmetrical threats is indeed
not a new one. However, as rightly pointed out in the
concept note (S/2016/927, annex), the recent trend
in the increasing frequency and magnitude of such
attacks directed against United Nations peacekeepers
is most worrying. Nowhere is that more apparent than
in the cases of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
which have sustained a high number of casualties. We
strongly condemn all attacks directed against United
Nations personnel.

ASEAN emphasizes the role of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as the
appropriate forum for considering and deciding on
key policy matters pertaining to United Nations
peacekeeping. The Special Committee has continuously
underlined the importance of regular and meaningful
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries. We consider this open debate as part of such
cooperation, and we encourage the Security Council
to take due note of the views expressed by Member
States today. As our contribution to the debate, we wish
to draw the attention of the Council to the following
points.

First, ASEAN reaffirms its long-standing position
that peacekeeping missions must uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as the basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping. Despite the changing context of
peacekeeping, those principles remain indispensable
for the success of all peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, there is a clear convergence of opinion
that United Nations peacekeeping missions should
not engage in counter-terrorism activities. At the
same time, however, we cannot ignore the fact that
asymmetrical threats are now part of the operational
reality in which many peacekeeping missions operate.
We therefore have to prepare for the worst by providing
our peacekeepers with the best possible training and
capabilities, including evolving technologies, so as
to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers
and strengthen their ability to effectively fulfil their
mandates. That requires the collective efforts of the
Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries. We also call upon host countries to bring to
justice the perpetrators of attacks against peacekeepers.

Thirdly, military operations can address the
symptoms of terrorism. However, the use of force
alone will not and cannot stop the spread of terrorism.
ASEAN reiterates the need for a comprehensive
approach to the fight against terrorism. We therefore
support an integrated and balanced implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Peacekeeping missions, where mandated to do so, can
significantly contribute to pillar III of the Strategy,
namely, building States' capacity to prevent and combat
terrorism through programmatic support in the areas of
the rule of law and security.

Looking at the broader context, asymmetrical
threats are one of many manifestations of modern-day
challenges facing peacekeeping operations. We hope
that this open debate will constitute part of an ongoing
dialogue that is critical to improving and strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping through better mission
planning and mandate review. On our part at the
regional level, ASEAN Member States have worked on
uniting our peacekeeping operations and capabilities,
including through the ASEAN Peacekeeping
Centres Network, which serves as a platform for
information-sharing, capacity-building and exchanging
views on new challenges. We therefore remain steadfast
in our commitment to working closely with the United
Nations and its partners towards this end.

