Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Over the past
several months, we have seen both positive and
negative developments with regard to Palestine. The
Palestinian Authority has ratified more than a dozen
major international treaties and conventions, including
the Geneva Conventions, the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, and the United Nations
Convention the Law of the Sea. What is more, the
United Nations has accepted Palestinian ratification
of those treaties. Palestine is poised to become a
member of the International Criminal Court in April.
Sweden recognized Palestine. And the British, Irish,
Spanish and French Parliaments voted for Palestinian
statehood. That has created a compelling case for
Palestine's integration as a fully independent State into
the international community.

Those developments are writing on the wall. Yet,
surprisingly, the Security Council failed to adopt a
draft resolution (S/20l4/916) that merely asked for the
endorsement of universally parameters: the recognition
of Palestinian statehood, Israeli withdrawal to the 1967
borders, a Palestinian capital in Jerusalem, a three-year
deadline to end the occupation of the West Bank and
the lifting of the siege of Gaza. The draft resolution,
regrettably, foundered on dictates of realpolitik.
Otherwise, there was strong justification for its
adoption.

The absence of engagement between the Palestinian
Authority and Israel, the constant state of fear and
animosity between the Palestinians and the Israelis and
the ongoing violations of the Palestinians' rights do not
constitute a state of limbo, but rather a very precarious
and perilous situation. Violence and conflict can erupt
at any moment. The Secretary-General, speaking
at an informal meeting of the General Assembly on
8 January said, "We must not resign ourselves to any
further worsening of the conflict between Israelis and
Palestinians".

Diplomatic efforts have become tenuous and do
not seem to promise either re-engagement between
the parties nor a solution to the conflict. The efforts
being made by United States Secretary of State John
Kerry, the one track that offered some hope, seems to
have lost momentum. Diplomacy must be re-energized
and intensified. Some members of the Council said
in December last year that they might reconsider the
issue of Palestine in 2015. The Palestinian Authority is
considering bringing the parameters draft resolution to
the Council once more. We would encourage Council
members to work on such a draft resolution, which could
pave the way to a clearly marked pathway to peace. It
would put the Council back at the helm of maintaining
peace and security in the Middle East.

Our fresh push towards peace is urgently needed.
Some steps that would help are these: Israel should
immediately release the withheld tax revenues;
the blockade of Gaza should be lifted; pledges for
the reconstruction of Gaza should be honoured by
contributors and donors; and international efforts to
resume the peace process based on internationally
agreed parameters should be re-initiated.

No matter what we say, Palestine and Israel have
a symbiotic relationship. They will have to coexist
for generations to come within the same geographical
neighbourhood. Therefore, the only path to a viable and
sustainable peace is the establishment of the State of
Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, and the evacuation of all Arab
lands by Israel, including the Syrian Golan.
In the four years ofthe conflict, the past year was the
deadliest in Syria. This progressive deterioration must
be halted. We fully support the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura's efforts to arrange
localized ceasefires and initiate a political process.
Last year saw the destruction of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme, which demonstrated what could
be accomplished when the Council was united. Our
experience of the past four years shows that there are
no shortcuts to peace in Syria, that military means
and killing sprees will not produce a solution and that
intense and results-oriented diplomatic engagement
was the only option we have for pursuing and delivering
peace.

In the past year, the civil war in Syria and a fragile
peace in Iraq have produced an even bigger monster: the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The world
was caught unaware. Now the poisonous philosophy of
that hydra-headed monster is spreading to other parts of
the world. Pakistan unequivocally condemns terrorism
perpetrated by ISIL against States and individuals and
rejects the notion of the so-called caliphate by ISIL.
Pakistan is fully implementing resolutions 2170 (2014)
and 2178 (2014) in letter and spirit. We must work
together to stop the tide to save our global civilization.

Finally, I would like to say that I participated as
a Council member in the debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.6894) in late 2012. The atmosphere was
gloomy and one of bewilderment, self-flagellation and
helplessness. Two years down the road, as I prepare
to leave my post, nothing has changed. Palestine was
an issue 100 years ago. It is still a vexing issue that
keeps the entire international community hostage. This
historic impasse must be broken through enlightened
and resolute diplomacy.

