Mr. Gopinathan (India): It is an honour for us to
see you, Sir, presiding over the Council's deliberations
today. We would like to congratulate Benin once again
on its assuming the presidency of the Council for this
month.

In the interest of keeping within the time limit, I
shall limit my oral remarks, but the full text will be
circulated to delegations.

We welcome this opportunity to participate in the
Council's consideration of the issue of children and
armed conflict. Children have become increasingly
involved in conflicts, both as targets of violence and as
combatants. During the past few years, more than
500,000 children, recruited in 87 countries, with
approximately 300,000 actively participating in
combat, have been involved in conflict in some form.
Most often, it is not possible to make a distinction
between a forced and a voluntary child soldier. The
more vulnerable people are, the easier the process of
recruitment becomes. Whereas some children join
armed groups for food or in order to survive or to
avenge atrocities in their communities, others are
physically abducted by armed groups for war. Enticed
by promises of food, shelter and security and
sometimes plied with drugs, child soldiers are at times
led to commit atrocities against other armed groups
and civilian populations, sometimes even against their
own communities.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
children and armed conflict (S/2005/72). The report
makes a significant attempt to address an important
issue. Before I comment on some specific aspects of
the report, a few general points made in the past by
India on this issue need reiteration.

The first point relates to salience. How useful is it
to have a thematic debate in the Security Council on
subjects such as the present one? It is true that a large
number of children are victims of armed conflicts, but
it is also true that malaria and AIDS kill more children
than conflicts do. However, we do not deal separately
in the Council with children and malaria or children
and AIDS, or request reports from the Secretary-
General on those subjects. A sense of balance and
perspective should be retained in order to make sure
that too narrow a focus does not blot out the larger
picture of what has sometimes been called the soft
challenges to international peace and security.

The report has identified the Security Council as
by far the most important international "destination for
action". The report has also offered targeted sanctions
as the universal remedy in cases of insufficient or no
progress. However, the Council can impose sanctions
under Article 41 of the Charter only if it has
established, under Article 39, that there is a sufficient
danger to international peace and security to justify
them. Only States are parties to conventions; non-State
actors are not bound by them. More important, most
armed groups obey no laws, national or international.
In some cases of internal conflict, non-State actors or
rival political groupings may make offers to adhere to
such instruments precisely to gain legitimacy or a
political locus standi. Further, can a violation by a
State of the provisions of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child be construed as a threat to international
peace and security?

The fifth report of the Secretary-General shows
that, in the years since this issue has drawn the
attention of Member States, the overall progress made
in addressing the circumstances of children in
situations of armed conflict has not been particularly
satisfactory, although there have been pockets of
success. It can be seen from this report and from
previous reports submitted to the Security Council that
success has been achieved where the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has himself
engaged in or has been involved in obtaining a
commitment for the release and demobilization of child
soldiers.

Of the four key components that encompass the
Secretary-General's concept of the "era of application",
the element of establishing a monitoring, reporting and
compliance mechanism is, in our view, the least
practical. The nature of situations of conflict -
particularly in Africa - is such that the models of
monitoring, reporting and compliance provided by the
Secretary-General are impractical and would therefore
be ineffective.

A body of standards for monitoring, including
instruments that do not command universal adherence
or acceptance, cannot be imposed on Member States. A
Member State that is otherwise committed to the norms
and commitments on the promotion and protection of
the rights of children would be right to maintain that it
would not be bound by any instrument to which it is
not a party.

The use of children in armed conflict has been
aggravated by the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons worldwide. These weapons are inexpensive,
durable, small, lightweight, easy to maintain and small
enough for children to handle. Illegal arms trafficking
and poor monitoring of the legal trade make it easy for
children to gain access to such weapons. We are
disappointed to note that the report does not call for the
adoption of more legally binding commitments by
Member States, such as those on the marking and
tracing of small arms and light weapons and on
preventing the sale of such arms to non-State actors or
groups.

It cannot be denied that, in many conflict
situations, the most vulnerable members of the
population - particularly women and children - are
targeted with impunity. While no leniency should be
shown for crimes perpetrated on innocent children, we
need to see in perspective the fact that many children
responsible for reprehensible crimes have often been
manipulated by unscrupulous adults to take part in
armed conflicts.

We support the principle, enunciated in paragraph
108 of the report, that any action by United Nations
entities and international non-governmental
organizations at the country level should be designed
to support and complement the protection and
rehabilitation roles of national authorities and should
never supplant them. However, we believe that that
principle remains valid not only in the context of
taking necessary action based on monitoring reports,
but also in designing the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms themselves.

While we appreciate the substantive work
undertaken to present the report, we would draw
attention to a fundamental and critical issue that,
although it is at the heart of this debate, has not, in our
View, received adequate consideration, thereby
undermining the proposals that have been made in this
report. We believe that the situation of children and
armed conflict has not seen appreciable amelioration
because, in such situations, sometimes one and
sometimes both parties are non-State actors. States can
be expected - and can be counted upon - to abide by
the obligations assumed by them under international
legal instruments to which they are parties. The
Secretary-General's monitoring proposals are
applicable primarily to States. The Secretary-General's
report has not made any suggestions on how non-State
actors are to be held accountable. Until that aspect is
addressed, the proposals that Member States consider
will have limited value, as all parties to an armed
conflict - not only States - need to have
accountability.

The concerns raised here are aimed at finding an
effective means of dealing with an important problem.
Any breakdown of peace and security, and the conflicts
that ensue, have a tragic impact on children. However,
we feel that we ought to make decisions and act in
ways that will lead to effective results. We should bear
in mind the need to obtain the most efficient and
optimal results, as the resources dedicated to any of
these mandates are finite and inelastic, especially in an
era of zero nominal growth in most United Nations
budget lines. We should strive for increasing
efficiency, cost-effectiveness and impact as we deal
with this important question of protecting children
from the impact of armed conflict.

