Mr. Thalassines (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank your delegation, Sir, for having organized
this open debate of the Security Council on an issue
of such importance to the global maritime community
and for international security. Panama expresses its
great concern at the growing insecurity that piracy
continues to cause along navigation routes. We note
with satisfaction the work that has been carried out by
the Security Council over the past few years, but we
see it as only the beginning of the development of more
effective policies and measures to contain and eradicate
this scourge.

Panama affirms that effectively combating piracy
requires an adequate legal framework. In that regard,
we acknowledge the framework set out by the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which addresses the crime ofpiracy in its articles 100 to
107, which are consistent with Panamanian legislation.

To reduce the risks of piracy, it will be important
to develop and implement best management
practices - that is, the application of self-protection
measures for ships - aimed at optimizing safety in
navigation, contributing to the reduction of pirate
attacks through an information system and coordination
of movements with military forces in the area, and the
application of self-protection measures developed to
help ships fight off such attacks. The implementation in
our country of a long-range identification and tracking
system has become a very useful instrument for
countering the scourge, as it has allowed for real-time
monitoring of ships in high-risk zones that are not
showing any movement, enabling us to communicate
immediately with seafarers and air and naval forces.

I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Panamanian Maritime Authority adopted resolution No.
106-13-DGMM. on 8 March 2012, which established an
accreditation procedure for security companies offering
armed personnel services on board Panamanian-
registered ships, based on the guidelines issued by the
Organization to ensure that security company personnel
have the necessary qualifications and certification.

As one of the leading flag States of the world, we
believe that the decision to use force and firearms on
board falls exclusively to captains and seafarers, who
must at all time maintain total control of the vessel.
We therefore suggest that this matter be regulated
separately, with clear international guidelines that would
allow countries to establish the necessary parameters to
regulate the use of force and weapons on board, and
to ensure that there is appropriate coordination with
security companies.
My country urges all States to combine efforts
and work together to combat piracy, to which ships
sailing under the Panamanian flag have fallen victim;
to strengthen the necessary international cooperation;
and to enhance the financial and technical assistance
needed to resolve the insecurity that currently affects
all ships passing through high-risk waters and threatens
maritime trade in general.

