The President: I thank Ms. Nasiwa for her briefing.

I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South
Sudan, on developments in the Committee since the
outgoing briefing of my predecessor on 8 December
2017 (see S/PV.8127). I intend to focus on the
recommendations set out in the final report ofthe Panel
of Experts (see S/2018/292), which was submitted to the
Committee on 14 March and published as a document
of the Council on 12 April, and which was discussed by
the Committee members on 11 April. I will also provide
a brief overview of developments in the Committee
since the start of the year to date, as well as what is
expected in the weeks ahead.

I will not repeat in detail the findings of the final
report, given that it was transmitted to the members
of the Council and is now published as an official
document. Let me only remind Council members that
the Panel of Experts has presented its findings with
regard to the political and security situation in South
Sudan; violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law; obstruction of humanitarian and
peacekeeping missions; arms procurement and the
implementation of the sanctions measures in South
Sudan. Based on those findings, the Panel made three
recommendations in its final report. Consistent with
the Panel's conclusion that the patterns of the conflict
reported to the Council earlier have persisted, those
recommendations may be familiar to Council members
as well.

First, in an appeal to the international community
to apply more pressure on the parties, and while
underscoring that without that the situation is likely
only to deteriorate, with enormous humanitarian and
regional security implications, the Panel reiterated its
recommendation from its first report, of August 2015
(see S/2015/656), that the Security Council impose
an arms embargo on South Sudan. Given that this
recommendation was addressed to the Council, the
Committee took note of it, but did not take any action
on it.

Secondly, while underlining that impunity
continued to prevail in the country, the Panel renewed
its recommendation addressed to the Committee to
consider designating additional individuals and entities.
The Panel reiterated that there had been no sanctions
listings since the designation of six individuals on
1 July 2015, and that it had submitted to the Committee
specific statements of cases on a number ofindividuals
responsible for, or complicit in, actions and policies
described in paragraph 9 of resolution 2290 (2016),
including those responsible for the conditions that have

resulted in the unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The
Committee took note of that recommendation, as it did
last year.

Finally, in response to the Panel's third
recommendation, the Committee agreed to send letters
to the members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, reiterating the importance ofthose States'
obligation to enforce the asset freeze established under
resolution 2206 (2015) and to specifically request that
the bank accounts and assets of designated individuals
Marial Chanuong Yol Mangok and Gabriel Jok Riak to
be frozen.

I would now like to provide a brief overview of the
Committee's work since my predecessor's briefing to
the Council last December.
On 11 April, following the consideration of the
Panel's final report, the Committee was briefed
by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter. As also reflected
in the press release issued pursuant to the meeting, the
Committee received the alarming update that grave
violations against children had increased considerably
over the course of last year, as compared to the previous
two years. The United Nations had verified over 1,000
incidents of all six grave violations against children
identified by resolution 1261 (1999), on children and
armed conflict, affecting close to 1,400 children in
South Sudan. In particular, the recruitment and use of
children, by all parties to the conflict, was described
as endemic. Children were not just used on an ad hoc
basis to temporarily boost military capacities of parties
to the conflict or to provide services. Instead, it was
determined that the children of South Sudan were
being used to fuel the war and abused in a systematic
and sustained manner, which enabled war efforts
to continue.

During the meeting held on 11 April, I reminded
the Committee of my intention to conduct the first
visit in my capacity as Chair of the Committee in
mid-June. Earlier, I had informally discussed it with
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan and
received a positive response. As agreed by Committee
members, I will visit South Sudan and other countries
in the region - Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda - to
gain a first-hand account of the implementation of the
sanctions measures in place regarding South Sudan.
Additionally, as part of the second trip on behalf of the
Committee since its establishment in 2015, the country
visits will provide an opportunity to strengthen dialogue
and engagement with the States concerned with regard
to the implementation of the sanctions regime. I intend
to brief the 2206 Committee on my meetings and
observations upon my return to New York.

In the lead-up to my visit, the Committee will hold
its first open briefing on 31 May with States of the
region and all interested Member States to hear views
concerning the Panel's final report and the overall
implementation of sanctions measures concerning
South Sudan. Beyond regular Committee meetings,
I intend to hold "informal informals" for interested
members of the Committee at the Permanent Mission
of Poland, such as the gathering this past Friday with
a representative of a non-governmental organization
dealing with South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

