Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Six
months have elapsed since the Middle East was once
again brutally thrust into the spotlight, struck by the
endemic violence to which it seems doomed, following
the unanimously condemned act of provocation by the
man who ordered the Sabra and Shatila massacres, who
led the disastrous campaign in Lebanon and who
irony of ironies - is now presiding over his country's
fate.

 

That act of provocation, which triggered the
tragedy that the Palestinian population is currently
experiencing on a daily basis, clearly aimed to
sabotage the peace process and to destroy, once and for
all, any chance of a just and lasting settlement of the
Palestinian question.

Today, it seems to everyone - most of all to the
protagonists themselves - that the peace process
is a thing of the past, and, given the changes that have
taken place in Israel and the subsequent intensification
of repressive measures against the population of the
occupied territories, it appears unlikely to resume any
time soon.

Indeed, not a day goes by without innocent young
Palestinians being struck down - innocents who are
armed only with their stubborn faith in an imminent
victory against heavily armed soldiers who are
determined to use force without any hesitation or
restraint.

Every day, with untold brutality, this repression
strikes a population that is already hard-hit and on the
verge of suffocation, subjected as it is to summary
executions; arbitrary arrests; the destruction of houses,
roads and infrastructure; collective punishments;
curfews; and the blockade of towns such as Ramallah,
Tulkarem, Qalquilya, Bethlehem and Hebron.

The damage that has been caused by this all-out
war waged by Israel against the Palestinian people is
considerable. Hundreds are dead and thousands injured.
The standard of living has dropped dramatically, since
almost a million Palestinians - or a third of the
population - have fallen below the threshold of
absolute poverty since last September. Hundreds of
schools have been closed because they can no longer
operate, and there is a serious dearth of food and
medication in many Palestinian towns, which are cut
off from the rest of the world, and humanitarian
assistance and basic emergency services can no longer
reach them.

Furthermore, in flagrant violation of its
obligations and in spite of the repeated appeals of the
international community, Israel is continuing to
withhold from the Palestinian Authority hundreds of
millions of dollars in tax revenue that the Authority is
owed.

In the light of this tragic situation, and given
Israel's unrelenting attitude towards a defenceless
population, the Palestinian Authority, backed by the
Non-Aligned Movement, asked the Security Council
several months ago to take steps to ensure the
protection of that population and to put an end to the
repression to which it is subject.

In spite of the great flexibility shown by the
representatives of Arab States and non-aligned
countries during the negotiations on the draft
resolution, the Security Council chose last December
not to act but to let the situation on the ground
deteriorate, possibly until the point of no return.

The peace negotiations that were then under way
between Palestinians and Israelis, under the auspices of
the United States - which certain members of the
Council said that they did not want to jeopardize
through an untimely intervention by the United Nations
in the field, in order to justify their opposition to the
deployment of unarmed observers - have since then
failed utterly, as have, because of the intransigence of
the Israeli authorities, all of the efforts aimed at
restoring calm and security.

The Council has taken an unacceptably passive
stance vis-a-vis a Member State that for decades has
been occupying with total impunity the territory of
neighbouring States; which holds under its control an
entire people, who are denied their most basic rights;
and which refuses to implement the resolutions of the
very Organization that created it and to fulfil its
international obligations. How then can we not talk
about a double standard and not condemn this
injustice?
At this particularly difficult juncture, which could
worsen further because of the repression, the
intimidation and the systematic use of force, which
seems to be the new course of action for the current
Israeli administration, there is still time for the Security
Council to assume its responsibility and fully to
discharge its role and mandate vis-a-vis the Palestinian
people and in respect of international legality.

First, it must urgently put an end to the policy of
repression and of the systematic use of force, and in
particular the use of real bullets against Palestinian
demonstrators. It must also decide to promptly deploy
United Nations observers in the Palestinian territories
and in Jerusalem in order to protect the civilian
population. It must also demand that Israel withdraw
its forces from Palestinian towns and localities where
they are deployed and put an end to the blockade of
these towns. Lastly, it must order Israel, as the
administering Power, to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the ensure the security and protection
of Palestinian civilians.

These are demands of Algeria, which, like other
Arab countries, believes in a just and lasting solution to
the conflict in the Middle East based on the principle of
land for peace agreed upon in Madrid. This means the
total withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Arab
territories occupied in 1967 and the reinstatement of
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people,

including their right to the establishment of an
independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital.

I am convinced that these are also the
expectations of the international community as a
whole, which the Council must take into account and
satisfy as early as possible.

