Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Given that this is my first meeting under your
presidency, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and
wish you every success during the month of October.
We welcome the presence in the Chamber today of
Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, to discuss this important issue, and
we thank Mr. Jean Arnault, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Colombia and Head of the
United Nations Mission in Colombia, for his detailed
briefing and his assessments.

The report of the Secretary-General presented
today (S/2018/874) reflects the situation on the ground
reasonably objectively and therefore leaves a twofold
impression. On the one hand, during the year that
the Verification Mission has been operational there
have been significant changes for the better. The
rebel movement has been transformed into a political
party, there have been parliamentary and presidential
elections and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has
been launched. It will be important to consolidate
and develop all of those achievements. On the other
hand, in the past three months, starting right when the
previous report (S/2018/723) came out, the direction
that the situation has taken has aroused a certain
degree of concern. The report shows a lack of progress
in areas that are important to ensuring stability,
such as civilians' security and the implementation
of reintegration programmes. There is still a great
deal of work to be done to create the conditions that
will enable the population to have stable and legal
incomes. And there are also problems with Parliament's
representativeness. Two of the parliamentary seats that
the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun was
guaranteed under the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace are
still unoccupied.

Urgent action is also needed to investigate and
prevent murders and attacks on the civilian population,
which now includes former rebels. Partly as a result of
the fact that those problems are still unresolved, many
ex-combatants are taking up arms again for their own
security. Around 10 per cent of the combatants who
acceded to the peace agreement have already returned
to the rebel ranks. If anyone thinks that number is
insignificant, I should point out that among them are
five former high-ranking members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo, and that does not include field commanders.
The National Liberation Army is also closely following
this situation.

We have already said that the only thing that can
halt this trend is additional efforts on the part of the
Government to meet its commitments under the peace
agreement. We realize that some ofthe delay in resolving
the issue is linked to the period of transition to a new
administration. In that context, we are pleased to note
the Secretary-General's very positive assessment of the
commitment of Colombia's new President, Mr. Ivan
Duque Marquez, to the ex-combatants' socioeconomic,
political and legal reintegration, which represents
three key elements of the peace agreement. It was
the agreement and its central element, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, that made it possible for the
Secretary-General and the Security Council, whose
own authority is invested in the business of ensuring
peace in Colombia, to support the peace process. The
peace agreement is therefore the only international
legal foundation for a settlement, and we hope that
all of those who signed up to it will maintain their
commitment to it. We are grateful to the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, under the leadership
of Mr. Arnault, for monitoring the implementation of
the agreement, and we supported the Council's adoption
in September (see S/PV.8351) of resolution 2435 (2018),
which extended the Mission's mandate for another year.

Here in the Security Council it has frequently been
emphasized that the normalization of the situation
in Colombia is an example of effective cooperation
between the United Nations and a host country. It is the
sense of national responsibility and the desire to find
politically sustainable solutions shown by Colombians
that have made peace in their country possible. For
our part, we will continue to support the people and
the Government of Colombia in the work of building a
stable peace and post-conflict development.

