Mr. Martinez Flores (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of El Salvador would like
to reiterate its firm support for all measures adopted at
the United Nations to combat international terrorism.
Such measures should be implemented in accordance
with the principles of the Charter, international law and
international agreements and conventions on the
matter.

We small countries share the concern of the
international community, for we understand that the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery threatens our
sovereignty as well as international peace and
security- as proliferation turns our countries into
illicit transit channels for such materials.

We are fully convinced that combating terrorism
must take place in the context of a legal framework
that conveys the necessary legitimacy upon
Governments as they seek to achieve the goals of that
effort. But we also believe that it is of the utmost
importance to strengthen international cooperation, as
that is a key element in ensuring greater effectiveness
and efficiency for preventive efforts.

Our commitment to the fight against international
terrorism has guided our efforts at the domestic,
bilateral, subregional, regional and international levels.
We have reinstated our national security council,
which, among other things, provides advice to our
country's President and assesses the situation with a
view to determining the steps to be taken to prevent,
suppress and control terrorist acts and related crimes.
07-24825
Our inter-agency counter-terrorism group is
responsible for formulating, implementing and
managing technical efforts to combat terrorism. The
group carries out its work in four specialized areas,
namely, security, financial matters, border control and
legal affairs. Its mandate is therefore fully in line with
the provisions of paragraph 5 of resolution 1673
(2006). Among its other responsibilities, the group has
prepared the reports that the Government of
El Salvador has presented to international
organizations in connection with its compliance with
resolutions, mandates and international instruments to
which we are party as part of the fight against
terrorism.

The group also drafted the special law on terrorist
acts, which my country's legislative assembly has
already adopted. The law includes provisions relating
to the prevention, investigation, punishment and
eradication of crimes associated with terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations, including the financing of
terrorism and related activities. The legislation
empowers the competent legal authorities to take the
necessary steps to freeze assets and funds of, and
financial transactions by, persons and organizations
identified by the Security Council in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter of the Organization. The
terrorism law also contains a chapter on the financing
of terrorism as a separate crime, and in that context
includes a regulation relating to measures to control
financing, such as the freezing of assets regardless of
their provenance.

With regard to non-profit organizations, a special
regulation has been considered that is aimed at better
monitoring the assets of such organizations, averting
the possibility of their being used to commit crimes,
especially the crime of financing terrorism.

Other measures we are continuing to implement
include ongoing vehicle checks on international roads,
migration controls and inspections at hotels, land
terminals and other locations frequented by foreigners.
The armed forces of El Salvador, with the support of
the national police, have also put in place better
controls with respect to the smuggling of goods and
narcotic drugs into or through our territory.

El Salvador has submitted the relevant report in
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004).
The Government of El Salvador will continue to
take all necessary administrative and legal measures,

and we are prepared to strengthen international
cooperation in various fields to enhance the
effectiveness of the fight against terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We hope that we will soon
reach agreement on a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, and in that respect we offer our
full cooperation.

