Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
Allow me, first of all, to thank Mr. Abou Moussa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), as well as His Excellency Ambassador
Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union on Lord's Resistance
Army Issues.

For several years now, the countries of the Central
African subregion, with substantial support from the
international community, have been untiring in their
effort to rebuild a regional architecture for peace and
security. Such a strategy has certainly not yet produced
the expected results; but it has made it possible to
ensure stability in several of the region's States. In
that regard, my country welcomes the atmosphere of
calm that currently prevails in most of the countries
concerned, and we welcome the efforts made by their
Governments, the various United Nations missions and
all partners to achieve that outcome.

The current peaceful trend we see in various
countries of the region should not, however, lead us
to cease to express our great concern at the ongoing
fighting in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular in North Kivu. That situation
poses a great threat to the stability of the entire region.
The fighting, which is pitting the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo against the so-called
M-23 Movement, is significantly undermining all the
efforts made in recent years to bring lasting stability
to that part of the country. This is also at the heart of
the worrying situation concerning the deterioration
in relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda. Given that especially troubling
situation, Togo urges both countries to avoid any action
that could lead to a direct confrontation. We also call on
them to resume a genuine and frank dialogue without
delay, with a View to safeguarding regional peace and
security.

My country believes that one of the ways to
decisively address the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to carry out security sector
reform, including a disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration programme
(DDRRR). Both security sector reform and DDRRR
are essential to the consolidation of peace and security.

The countries of Central Africa, but also those of
West Africa, today face such new threats to security
as piracy at sea, armed robbery along the shores of the
Gulf of Guinea and trafficking in small arms as well
as other sophisticated weapons. Those cross-cutting
threats to security are a source of great concern. The
require us to mobilize in a major way, respond robustly
and carry out close cooperation among concerned
countries of the region.

Togo is pleased that the Security Council has
responded quickly to this situation by adopting various
resolutions, including resolution 2039 (2012), which
was adopted on 29 February. The commitment of the
leaders of West and Central Africa to combat this
scourge should be reflected in the decisions they take
at the regional summit devoted to piracy at sea. My
country welcomes UNOCA's initiatives in this regard
and urges it to provide further assistance to the States of
the region in order to ensure the success of the summit.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), in addition
to being an armed group responsible for the worst of
atrocities, especially against women and children, who
are routinely kidnapped and forced to commit atrocities,
as well as girls, who are used as sexual slaves, is also
a serious threat to the peace and stability of various
countries in Central and Eastern Africa, in particular
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan, among
others.

Although, thanks to the concerted efforts of the
Governments concerned and by the international
community, there was a decrease in 2011 in the nuisance
posed by this terrorist group, it is nevertheless still the
case that it remains active in various areas, including in
Orientale province in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where many deadly attacks by this group have
been recorded in recent months.

This climate of insecurity is only serving to worsen
the humanitarian problems being experienced by the
region. In that regard, I would refer to the existence of
the 445,000 persons displaced as a result of the LRA's
activities who are facing hunger and malnutrition. We
encourage the countries of the region to work to ensure
security for humanitarian organizations in order that
they can come to the aid of those hundreds of thousands
of displaced people.

We welcome the resolute determination of
affected countries to join their efforts in order to more
effectively combat the LRA. The strengthening of the
early-warning system should help make it possible to
exchange information and act in a concerted manner.

We also welcome the recent arrest of senior LRA
leader Caesar Acellam Otto by Ugandan armed forces
in the Central African Republic. This is unquestionably
a significant gain in pursing LRA fighters. While Togo
agrees that amnesty for a given number of the LRA
fighters could contribute to resolving the issue, we
nevertheless believe that the group's senior leaders and
all those accused of serious crimes should answer for
their actions before the law.

Moreover, we welcome the resolute response by the
African Union in combating the LRA. On 24 March,
the Union put in place a military force of 5,000 in Juba,
the capital of South Sudan, whose mission is to put a
definite end to the group's activities, including tracking
and intercepting it's leader, Joseph Kony, wanted by the
law at the international level for his outrages against
children in Central Africa.

Joint efforts by the African Union and UNOCA,
with the support of regional and international actors,
as part of a regional strategy to combat the LRA,
will certainly help to more effectively address the
menace posed by this group. In that regard, we would
like to thank organizations and countries such as the
European Union and the United States, as well as all
partners and donors, who are currently providing major
logistical and financial support to combat the LRA. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to launch
an urgent appeal for greater efforts on the part of the
international community in overcoming the security
and humanitarian challenges posed by the LRA for
several years now.

In conclusion, Togo strongly supports the draft
presidential statement that will most likely be adopted
at the end of this meeting.
