Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I wish to thank the
delegation of France, this month's President of the
Security Council, for holding today's open debate on
children and armed conflict. There can be nothing more
important and more urgent than holding discussions
about, and providing solutions for, the problem of
children in armed conflicts. No child should fight a
war, and no child should suffer from war. Anyone who
recruits children to fight in conflicts should receive the
harshest punishment under the law.

The Maldives takes note of the very active role that
the Council has played on the issue. In particular, we
recognize the crucial role that the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict can play in protecting the
rights of children. Yet, on a daily basis, we witness that
boys and girls are being tortured, imprisoned, starved,
and sexually abused and killed in conflict situations.
In some parts of the world, their homes and schools
are destroyed and, in some instances, schools are used
for military purposes, thereby depriving thousands of
children of access to education.

The Council, in particular the Working Group,
should remain most objective in collecting and analysing
information about situations involving children in armed
conflicts. It should also remain firm in taking action
to bring an end to the vile activity of using children
as soldiers or even as human shields in conflicts. One
important way in which the Council can accelerate its
efforts towards such an outcome could be to cultivate
values of respect for children. Working with UNICEF
and the United Nations Development Programme, the
Council can encourage national Governments to take
strong action to promote such values at the levels of the
individual and society.

In the Maldives, protecting the rights of the child
is among the top priority issues for the Government
of President Abdulla Yameen Abdul Gayoom. Our
actions are guided by the belief that children have a
God-given right to be loved, cared for and protected
from violence, abuse, neglect and maltreatment. The
Maldives has undertaken a number of legislative
measures, as well as policy initiatives, to strengthen the
child-protection system.

In recent months, the Maldives has established a
child-protection database, which has strengthened
referral mechanisms between the Ministry of Gender
and Family and the Maldives police service for the
easy exchange of information and, more importantly,
to generate real-time disaggregated data. In addition,
the Ministry of Education has launched an information
system to closely monitor school attendance, which
also ensures that every child is enrolled in accordance
with the Government's no-child-left-behind policy. To
further encourage the reporting of incidents of violence,
the Government established a child-help line, which
is a 24-hour toll-free centre, with a mobile reporting
application, through which reports or complaints can be
made anonymously. That should help to remove barriers
hindering a child from seeking protection, despite our
unique geography with a population dispersed across
188 islands. We have also established family- and
children-services centres in each of the 19 atolls of the
Maldives, which will further help to provide the urgent
care needed by any victim.

As the Council is well aware, children and youth
have become constant targets for recruitment into
conflicts by violent extremist groups. The preferred
instrument used for such recruitment is social media.
Protecting children from social media assaults is
another priority area in which my Government is
taking strong measures. That is an area in which the
Council can work more closely with the relevant United
Nations agencies so as to enable Member States to
design and implement policies that can protect children
from cyberviolence.

Protecting the right of children to live free
of violence, abuse or conflict means protecting
tomorrow - our shared future. The Maldives stands
ready to play its part and to enable the Council to help
shape the future of our children and their children
through our shared solutions.

