Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien for
his briefing.

Last Friday, 19 August, saw the commemoration
of World Humanitarian Day. My delegation therefore
wishes to acknowledge the tireless effort and personal
sacrifice of every one of the thousands of humanitarian
workers throughout the world who daily put their lives
at risk to help those most in need of their help. Today,
130 million people around the world are in need of such
assistance, including several million in Syria alone.
Those are terrible statistics that mask personal tragedies.
Sometimes, however, there are exceptions. The case of
the Syrian child Aylan Kurdi, who washed up on the
coast off Turkey while trying to escape with his family
the horror of the Syrian conflict shocked the world last
year. Just a few days ago, pictures of little 5-year-old
Omran Daqneesh seated in an ambulance in Aleppo
while waiting for his wounds to be treated shook us
once again. Those images leave us wondering if his
expression denotes indifference to the horror to which
he has become accustomed or if, while he is still in a
state of shock, his face reflects his wondering why since
birth his life has been marked only by war and death.
That latest incident also makes us reflect on the
important and courageous task that doctors and other
health personnel carry out in order to save lives such
that of this little boy - in times when exercising such
a noble profession or being present in a hospital in
Syria is now synonymous with becoming the target of
attacks and aerial bombing, when the special protection
afforded to them under international law should be an
indication to the contrary. How can we explain that
only days ago four babies died as a result of the latest
attacks? What is the limit to so much injustice?

It is for those reasons that Uruguay most
enthusiastically welcomed the recommendations of the
Secretary-General with regard to the implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016) and strongly condemns the
attacks perpetrated against medical facilities and
personnel in Syria, irrespective of who is responsible.

The two cases I just mentioned represent only
a mere microcosm of the catastrophe that the Syrian
people have experienced for over five years. Its
enormous impact and immediate symbolism should
make us reflect on the responsibility, which weighs
heavily on our shoulders, to find solutions to put an
immediate end to the war, which undoubtedly is the
worst humanitarian disaster of the twenty-first century.

In July, the Nooreldin al-Zenki armed opposition
group decapitated a Palestinian boy in a barbaric act
that we duly condemned. The following day, the same
group issued a communique acknowledging that some
of its members had been responsible for such an act of
savagery act and that an internal disciplinary committee
would investigate the facts. Is that the accountability
and justice that we demand?

Uruguay believes that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
proceeded correctly last Thursday, when he sent a
clear message of discontent when he suspended the
meeting of the humanitarian access working group on
of the International Syria Support Group and urged
all the parties to accept weekly 48-hour humanitarian
pauses, as repeatedly called for by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Regrettably,
the convoys are still awaiting authorization to enter.
To quote Mr. De Mistura, in the month of August "not
one single humanitarian convoy in one month has
reached any of the besieged areas". What we see and
hear of are only pitched battles, offensives, counter-
offensives, rockets, barrel bombs, mortars, cannons,
napalm, chlorine gas, snipers, aerial bombing attacks
and suicide attacks. This is a clear failure on the part of
the international community - and in particular of the
Council, which has not been able provide the necessary
support to humanitarian agencies to implement the
proposed humanitarian pauses despite the fact that the
majority of us who are here today have supported that
initiative.

We reiterate our firm support for the requested
truce and renew our call on those directly involved
in the conflict or have an influence on the parties to
act responsibly in order to allow immediate access to
humanitarian aid, which is of such vital importance
to the survival of thousands of people trapped by
fighting in Aleppo and other areas. That also requires
new understanding to relaunch and strengthen the
cessation of hostilities throughout Syria to significantly
reduce the levels of violence and create a climate more
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian aid and the
resumption of the political process.

Lastly, Uruguay would like to reiterate once again
the urgency of resuming talks between the parties that
could lead to a political transition. We are convinced
that that is the only way to achieve a lasting solution
to the conflict in accordance with the provisions of
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016). In that regard,
we once again express our full support for the Special
Envoy in his efforts to convene the parties as soon as
possible for a new round of talks.

Time is running out. We cannot allow the Syrian
people, overwhelmed by so many years of suffering,
to believe that the United Nations and the Security
Council have completely abandoned them.

