Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to join previous speakers in
thanking the Chairmen of the three Security Council
Committees and in expressing appreciation not only for
their extensive briefings but also for the efforts that
they have made along with their fellow members of the
Committees and their subsidiary bodies.

These briefings have shown that positive and
near-common efforts continue to be made by the three
Committees under review. Cooperation has also
continued among the Committees, as was made clear in
the joint statement that we heard earlier. Programming,
structural and procedural improvements to the working
methods have also continued to move ahead. A
comprehensive review of the implementation of
Security Council resolutions is also under way.
National capacity building assistance has continued,
especially for developing countries. Special efforts
have also been made to promote transparency and
respect for human rights. We call for the strengthening
of those initiatives, which merit our full appreciation.

However, we would like to reiterate that such
initiatives will be incomplete unless they are enshrined
within the sound and comprehensive context that has
been unanimously approved, namely, the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The time
has come to complement our efforts to combat and
prevent terrorism. It is also time for the United Nations
and it various organs to address seriously another very
important dimension of the Strategy, that is, the root
causes of terrorism.

I do not believe that there is any controversy
about the fact that occupying peoples lands, offending
their cultures and civilizations and denying them their
legitimate right to resist occupation provide fertile
ground for acts of violence. Such issues cannot be
marginalized by continuing to follow an approach of
double standards, leveling accusations and adopting
temporary palliative measures. Nevertheless, all we can
do today is to evaluate the efforts of the three
Committees. In that regard, I shall keep my remarks
brief.

We welcome the conclusion by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, chaired by Ambassador Ranko
Vilovic, with the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED), which is chaired by
Mr. Mike Smith, of the Preliminary Implementation
Assessments of States' implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). We hope that pending cases will be
completed next year. We also look forward to receiving
the annual review of the implementation of the
resolution before the end of this year. We commend the
visits undertaken by the Committee to several States,
including Libya. My country would like to place on
record its appreciation for CTED and for its expertise
and efforts to improve its counter-terrorism activities. I
would like to reiterate my country's readiness to
cooperate with CTED and other relevant international
bodies and efforts.

We would also like to welcome the progress that
has been made in the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), under your wise
chairmanship, Mr. President. We also welcome the
review that has been carried out of the names listed on
the consolidated list. The Chairman spoke about the
challenges facing the completion of that process, as
well as about arriving at a sanctions list that cannot be
challenged through the legal system. There are still
names of persons who are long dead on the list. There
are also names whose listing is no longer appropriate,
including persons who have not been positively
identified. That truly hinders the ability of States to
implement sanctions. It can also lead to arbitrary
implementation merely by virtue of the suspicion
associated with a given name. We stress the need for
the speedy conclusion of that process and for the
inclusion of sufficient identifying primary information
for the de-listing of any names for which there are no
credible grounds for inclusion on the list.

We welcomed the adoption of resolution 1730
(2006), as well as the establishment of a focal point to
receive requests for de-listing. However, we believe
that this important step still calls for further
complementary measures to set forth transparent and
procedurally fair standards. We also encourage the
Committee to continue to grant exemptions pursuant to
resolution 1452 (2002), so as to steer clear of the
abhorrent concept of collective punishment and to
avoid harsh sanctions that are not based on the
principles of international law and justice and have an
impact on families. Moreover, we stress the need for
the Committee to review sanctions that hinder the
speedy granting of exemptions. In particular, we urge it
to review the use of suspensions to obstruct requests
for exemption.

Finally, we would like to pay tribute to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We thank Ambassador Urbina for the progress
made thus far, especially with regard to the
non-proliferation obligations imposed on all States.
Many States, including Libya, have provided the
information required under the resolution. We continue
to urge all States to do the same. We fully understand
the grave danger posed to international peace and
security by all sorts of weapons of mass destruction.
We regret to note that the current mechanisms are
insufficient and not universal, for their provisions have
not been incorporated into national legislation.

We once again reiterate that we renounce
weapons of mass destruction. We believe that the total
elimination of such weapons continues to be the best
way to prevent them from falling into the hands of
non-State actors. We also believe that the two
objectives of disarmament and non-proliferation
require sustainable and irreversible progress.

In conclusion, my country, which has suffered the
tragedies of international terrorism, continues to
support the work of the three Committees and their
subsidiary bodies, including any effort that contributes
to our collective goal of eliminating the causes and
manifestations of terrorism so that we can live in a
world where there is genuine security and safety for all
peoples.

