We would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for presenting the eighty-third monthly report (S/2020/871, annex) of the Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on the implementation of Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). The Syrian chemical dossier has been on the agenda of the Security Council for seven years. We have discussed it mostly in closed format. But upon our request, the Security Council meeting on this topic today is open to the general audience. We did this because we believe that the Council has nothing to hide from the world, and nor has Syria. Everyone who is interested deserves an opportunity to form a judgment on how this issue is discussed in the Security Council. It is difficult to address every aspect of the Syrian chemical dossier in one statement. Suffice it to say that this is one of the most politicized items the Security Council is currently dealing with. However, let me recall some basic facts. In 2014, Syria's chemical weapons programme was shut down, all its chemical weapons stockpiles eliminated and its production facilities destroyed. Damascus has no capacity, intent or, most importantly, clear or explicable reason to use chemical weapons. Their use would provide no benefits on the battlefield, but would instead put Syria ina vulnerable position, as can be seen in the retaliation and the accusations levelled at it every time allegations of their use have been made. The Syrian Arab Republic is fully cooperating with the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat and Declaration Assessment Team, as well as with all investigative missions on the ground. No undeclared chemical weapons stockpiles have been uncovered by the OPCW in the course of numerous intrusive inspections since October 2013. So far, no one has been able to prove the opposite. Nevertheless, throughout the years, Western countries have continued to accuse the Syrian Government of using chemical weapons, basing their allegations ona number of doubtful, handpicked incidents, with a total disregard for evidence of fact manipulation and of the staging of those incidents. Let me cite some of those here. One of the early reports of the OPCW fact- finding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM), which accused the Syrian Government of the use of chemical weapons in Sarmin on 16 March 2015, reflected an absolutely unrealistic scenario. It suggested that a barrel bomb with chlorine, allegedly dropped from a military helicopter, fell through a ventilation shaft into a residential building. It was presumed that the diameter of the barrel fully matched the diameter of the shaft. That contradicts the laws of physics, ballistics and common sense. Even the authors of the report admitted that it was improbable. However, the blame was placed on Damascus. I turn now to the 7 April 2017 incident in Khan Shaykhun, in which it is alleged that the Syrian Government used sarin. Accusations were made that an uncontrolled aerial bomb was dropped by a Syrian military plane on the target at no less than 5 kilometres distance. However, ballistic analysis, including by independent experts, showed that this is not only technically impossible, but also runs counter to the basic laws of physics. In order to reach the target, the plane would have had to get much closer, which would have rendered it visible for external observation. Besides, the crater left after the alleged bombing resembled a static explosion on the ground rather than an aerial bomb. The alleged use of sarin in that case was highly questionable, as video footage by the White Helmets, widely circulated by the Western media, featured a so-called rescue team without the necessary protective equipment to handle a sarin attack. There were other numerous inconsistencies, which were fully ignored by the then Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). Another bone-chilling story about the crimes of the Syrian "regime" - to use the preferred Western terminology - comes from an incident in Douma on 7 April 2018, when a video of the White Helmets providing first aid to victims of exposure to toxic substances was released. Our military experts, together with Syrian colleagues, managed to find the Syrians captured on that notorious footage. It turned out that these Syrians were not poisoned; rather, they had involuntarily become involved in a staged provocation set up by the White Helmets. The 13 people in question, including a boy named Hassan Diab, confessed as much during a special briefing at OPCW headquarters on 26 April 2018. Subsequently, the White Helmets' ill-fated video footage suddenly disappeared, just the way the memorable photos of allegedly poisoned children from Khan Shaykhun had done a year before. The Western narrative on the Douma incident was that the attack was carried out by air-dropped cylinders containing chlorine, which penetrated the roof and entered apartments where people were living. However, further expert investigation of traces found on the cylinders and the scale of the damage showed that they were manually placed at targeted locations rather than dropped by helicopter. In January 2020, we dedicated a special Arria Formula meeting to elucidating the incident and presenting extensive evidence of the staged nature of the episode. The original investigation was marked by deliberate flaws of ballistic, toxicology and chemical analysis, manipulation of the alleged victims, distortion of the conclusions of the FFM team and harassment of experts who had come to alternative conclusions. We have still not received any response from the OPCW Technical Secretariat on these multiple examples of malpractice. Initially, Russia, just like other responsible States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), was hopeful that the investigation of all these incidents would be unbiased. However, it became obvious to us very soon that the investigative mechanisms, namely, the FFM and the JIM, had failed to duly fulfil their mandates. By disregarding the so-called chain of custody, which requires that evidence be collected on site and exclusively by the OPCW specialists, the investigative mechanisms have conducted their investigations in clear violation of the CWC. Instead, they have used information provided by dubious sources, including the notorious White Helmets. The gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in their reports, as well as their bias, have been widely criticized not only by Member States, but also by independent and reputable experts and scientists. Our experts have produced national reports on all of the foregoing episodes, including the recent report of the so-called Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) on chemical episodes in Latamneh. We have called for a professional dialogue on the IIT's findings, including on the aforementioned episodes - a dialogue among experts who would be able to understand the validity of conclusions made. But we have been regularly denied such a dialogue. Our Western partners are not interested in one because it will reveal the false nature of the FFM, JIM and IIT conclusions. All they needed was sanctioned proof of the Syrian Government's guilt, and they got one. At the same time, the evidence of the use of chemical weapons on Syrian territory by non-State actors, including terrorist groups, has been deliberately neglected. Since 2013, the Syrian Arab Republic has sent more than 200 letters to the United Nations Secretariat about terrorist activities undertaken to prepare and carry out acts of chemical terrorism. No follow-up measures have been taken with regard to this information. Russia has repeatedly called on the OPCW Technical Secretariat to adjust its flawed working methodology. We were interested in having an unbiased and fully accountable investigative body at our disposal, not a political tool to back somebody's geopolitical adventures. However, these calls have been met with no response, so there was no other way out for us but to withhold support for the extension of the JIM mandate. Then, in violation of the CWC, our Western colleagues illegally created the so-called OPCW IIT, which was devised to be a useful tool for implicating the Syrian Government and serves no other purpose than to whitewash the true misdeeds, justify the aggression against Syria by three members of the Security Council in April 2017 and April 2018, and continue a maximum-pressure policy against Syria. The chemical dossier is used as one of many levers to delegitimize the Syrian Government and justify meddling and military intervention. The recent report of the IIT clearly testifies to this. The Russian position on it is explicit in the document we circulated in the Security Council and General Assembly in June. The IIT's gaps, inconsistencies, discrepancies and inherent bias logically follow on the illegitimacy of the IIT itself, coupled with the Technical Secretariat's managerial, infrastructural and policy flaws. As expected, instead of conducting serious investigative work, the team of so-called experts merely reduced itself to retranslating baseless accusations that are unsupported by material evidence or are outright contradictory. This seven-year-old strategy of fake evidence and manipulations culminated in July 2020, when the OPCW Executive Council adopted an anti-Syrian decision based on the unsubstantiated assumptions of IIT, which in its methodology carries the same original sin as the FFM and the JIM. That document, which was adopted by the narrow margin of one vote, clearly showed how divided the international community is on this subject and how unwilling many countries are to further assist in the crusade against Syria. The decision demands that Syria do what in theory is impossible - that it declare, within 90 days, additional chemical weapons and alleged facilities related to them, meaning those that were destroyed or confirmed to never have existed. We are not so naive as to fail to see that this is a trap with no backdoor. These demands cannot be met either in theory or in practice, which is why they were put to us. They set a precondition for further steps that the masterminds planned to take after the expiration of these 90 days. As a founding member of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, we are deeply concerned to see that OPCW - a once respectable organization - has become a tool in a geopolitical game. We call on the Technical Secretariat to adjust its working methods and ethics, abandon malpractice and double standards, and duly fulfil its mandate. In this regard, we insist, at the request of Damascus, that the Technical Secretariat stop delaying the investigations of the incidents, and in particular those that took place in Aleppo on 24 November 2018. It is surprising and unfortunate that the current report does not have a single reference to this issue. We also insist on the prompt and proper investigation of the recently reported mysterious evaporation of samples containing phosphorus trichloride collected by the Declaration Assessment Team at its twenty-second round of consultations in Damascus in October 2019. It is appalling that this could happen in a certified OPCW laboratory, and it raises a lot of questions. The Technical Secretariat noticed the evaporation problem as early as February 2020; however, it decided to keep the problem secret until the samples had become irreversibly damaged. We continue to expect a substantive clarification by the Technical Secretariat on the issue surrounding the Douma report and, more crucially, on the steps the Director-General intends to take to address the acts of malpractice that were revealed in this context. With this statement, we are beginning to roll out a series of instructive lessons on the Syrian chemical dossier. More are to follow. We already know perfectly well the narrative that our Western colleagues will use today - that the conclusions of the IIT, the FFM and the JIM are unquestionable and that the OPCW Technical Secretariat is beyond reproach. We regret to state that this narrative can no longer be used and that it is our Western colleagues alone who have drawn this conclusion. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia I am already long accustomed to the fact that my friend, the German Ambassador, uses the Security Council platform to engage in a bilateral dialogue with me personally. In his statement today, I think he mentioned Russia 10 times more than he mentioned Syria. He bombards me with rhetorical questions that he believes make me petrified and speechless. I am supposed to answer all of them in a row, but I will try to answer at least one that he posed. I believe that when meeting with President Al-Assad in Damascus, Foreign Minister Lavrov discussed a few things with the Syrian leader, in particular the constricting sanctions that Germany and its allies have imposed on Syria. I do not exclude the possibility that he raised the issue of the Syrian chemical dossier or that he cited the cheating, manipulation and insinuation that Germany and other Western countries have foisted upon the country in this matter. I myself have a few questions, if not a declarative statement, for the German Ambassador. We had few illusions that certain countries would raise the situation with Alexei Navalny today, despite the fact that it is completely irrelevant to the topic of discussion at hand. Today, we are witnessing in person another attempt at imposing a narrative. This is nothing new; we have seen it before, when it was tested on the case of Sergei Skripal. Incidentally, we are still awaiting answers to pending questions in that case. With regard to the Alexei Navalny case, everything we have said has been crystal clear. We are the party most interested in knowing what happened, but even a first-year law student understands that any investigation should be preceded by the gathering of evidence and by the development of facts based on the available evidence. In this case, there is a remarkable lack of evidence. Our law enforcement authorities do not have grounds to open an investigation. Our doctors - who, by the way, saved Alexei Navalny - found no chemical-weapon substances in their analyses. While the German laboratory claims it did find chemical substances, Germany has provided us with no evidence that would allow us to conclude that the crime of attempted poisoning was committed, thereby justifying the start of an investigation. On 27 August, in accordance with the legal assistance agreement between Russia and Germany, we officially submitted a request for such assistance through the Russian Prosecutor-General's Office. For more than a week, our German partners did not respond. We then heard conflicting information about whether the request was being considered; what decision will be taken and when it will be taken remains unclear. I will not speak of the tone in which this lack of clarity was expressed or of the accusations that followed. I would like to stress that our request is fully legitimate and natural under the circumstances and that it should be honoured in accordance with the agreement between our countries. Moreover, the request serves the exact purpose our German colleagues - and now many others - are invoking, namely, to establish the truth by investigating an alleged crime. A few days ago, we were told that the samples had been analysed in a Bundeswehr institute. However, the Germans would not share any of their information with us, since that could enable Russia to learn how much the Bundeswehr knows about chemical substances. We then heard that the results were classified. How should we interpret this? What do you think, Mr. President? At the same time, the German side shared its findings with its allies, and now we hear not only appeals for explanations and to conduct an investigation, but also demands that we confess and plead guilty. The allegation is not just simply immoral and implausible, but it also goes against the rule of law that the German's claim to champion. If they demand explanations, then let us put the facts on the table and compare notes. Why should we trust allegations that are not corroborated by evidence, even if they are, as the German Ambassador says, beyond a reasonable doubt? As of yet, we have received nothing that would allow our relevant authorities to conduct their own de jure investigation, although they did start a de facto investigation, what we call "pre-investigation procedures". I would also like to recall that according to article VII, paragraph 2 of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), "Tejach State Party shall cooperate with other States Parties and afford the appropriate form of legal assistance". If our partners are so committed to the CWC, why do they fail to comply with that provision? A group of prominent Russian doctors proposed to their German colleagues to jointly discuss the available data on Alexei Navalny's health. But, yet again, this was rejected. We are seeing a paradoxical situation. We ask our German partners to cooperate, but how can we proceed if the German side refuses to cooperate, which prevents the Russian law enforcement agencies from engaging the necessary procedural mechanisms for starting an investigation? This whole incident cannot but raise questions about whether some foul play is being staged. We will listen carefully to the statements that follow to see what measures are being proposed, discussed or implemented. This leads to an unavoidable rhetorical question the ancient Romans posed in such situations: Cui bono? For whose benefit was the thing done? Here is the answer: Cui prodest scelus is fecit. The one who benefits is the one who did it. Third statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia I listened to my German colleague carefully. He was trying to frame the situation as a matter of international significance. He 1s trying to portray it as having nothing to do with bilateral relations between Germany and Russia. However, I do not think this is the case. Indeed, the Russian Ambassador was at the German Ministry for Foreign Affairs. He was subject to an oral demarche. He received none of the materials, data or evidence that we had requested. I would therefore like to cite the statement issued by the Russian Foreign Ministry yesterday, 9 September. This statement specifies that the German Ambassador in Moscow was called to the Russian Ministry for Foreign Affairs, where he was reminded that the Russian Federation asked for data from Germany on 27 August, including Mr. Navalny's biodata and the results of the expert analysis - none of which it had received - so that it could study them in a comprehensive manner and verify the German laboratory's findings. At the end of the statement, in relation to Russian-German bilateral relations, it says - in Russian, so I will have to translate it: "If these materials are not provided by the German side, this will be regarded by the Russian side as a refusal by the Federal Government of Germany to establish the truth in the context of an objective investigation, and all its former and current actions in relation to Alexei Navalny will be seen as a blatant hostile provocation against Russia, which would definitely undermine Russian-German relations and international relations as a whole."
