Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to join in the expressions of
gratitude to the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreements in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling, for his
detailed briefing on the situation in that country. Peru
congratulates him on his appointment and wishes him
every success in his mission.

I would also like to welcome the presence with us
this morning of the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Adnan
Terzic.

Recent events in Bosnia and Herzegovina show
that that country is continuing to build on the important
progress achieved since the signing of the Peace
Agreements. The progressive transfer of the powers of
the Office of the High Representative to the sovereign
democratic institutions of the country is a clear sign of
the progress achieved, including towards the building
ofa State based on the rule of law.

However, many challenges lie ahead. As we note
from the report (S/2006/75), 40 items have yet to be
completed, although in most cases their finalization is
projected for this year. The international community -
particularly the European Union, through the major
role being played in this new phase by its Special
Representative - must therefore do the best it can, as
it has done to date, to complete the outstanding tasks
and to consolidate the transition in a framework of
stability and peace.

We are optimistic about the efforts that the main
political forces of the country have been making with a
View to implementing constitutional reform. Likewise,
the agreement to move forward with police
restructuring is positive for the process in general.

One aspect that Peru considers critical for the
stability of the entire region is the consolidation of the
judicial institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We must recall that a central task in the
conclusion strategy of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia is the transfer of certain defendants
to the competent national jurisdictions. The Tribunal
recently confirmed the transfer of four new defendants
to Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it is necessary to
continue strengthening the judicial institutional
capacity of that country so that it may duly prosecute
the defendants. In that context, we note with
satisfaction the convening, in Brussels in March, of a
second conference of donors to finance the needs of the
judicial institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Furthermore, the full cooperation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia has yet to be achieved. We note a
significant improvement in the level of cooperation in
the period covered by the last report of the Special
Representative, and we welcome the fact that only four
fugitives remain at large of the 18 who are linked to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note with concern,
however, that it is those suspected of the most serious
violations of international humanitarian law -
Mr. Karadzic and Mr. Mladic - who remain at large.
That situation should be remedied as soon as possible.

Finally, my delegation agrees with the High
Representative and the Prime Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that economic development is a crucial
variable in the national reconciliation of that country.
Without an economy capable of creating conditions for
sustainable growth, the necessary stability will not be
established to entrench the political reforms and to
build solid democratic institutions. We therefore note
with satisfaction that the gross national product of that
country grew by 6 per cent in 2004 and by 5.7 per cent
in 2005. We expect such growth to provide benefits to
the population and, above all, to serve to further reduce
the high unemployment rate there. We are optimistic
that this will be so and that the culmination this year of
the outstanding economic reforms will represent a
further advance towards the final objective.

