Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): As always, today's debate
carries with it a very interesting sense of timing and
history and, of course, of the important, essential
aspects of the United Nations and its contribution - as
well as that of the rest of the world - in Afghanistan.
We are as ever grateful to Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his lucid statement, and many thanks are also due to
Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for the broad
coverage of his excellent and wide-ranging briefing on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The eye-opener from Mr. Yuri Fedotov
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) should be recognized before the malaise he
describes wins regional support.

We must take cognizance of Mr. Ladsous's
statement concerning the challenges of the mandate
UNAMA must implement. The accountants wielding
knives must be controlled, and the Mission must have
resources adequate to the achievement of its goals. We
must therefore ensure that any substantial reduction in
the UNAMA budget will not affect the core objectives
of the United Nations in Afghanistan. I cannot
overemphasize this issue, which is the core of the
matter at the moment. As Afghan institutions come of
age, UNAMA too should continue to adapt to emerging
trends and realities.

The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2012/462)
and those preceding it provide useful updates on
the situation in Afghanistan. As was said earlier,
the Secretary-General has struck a note of cautious
optimism, specifically concerning the areas of security
transition, human development and the growth of
Afghan institutions. We agree with him wholeheartedly.
Nonetheless, while demonstrating confidence in
Afghan transition efforts, the Secretary-General has
rightly urged the donor community to refrain from
unrealistic demands that ignore constraints on capacity.
We believe that long-term engagement on the part of the
international community is essential to Afghanistan's
stability and economic development. In that context,
deliberations at the forthcoming Tokyo conference
will be important. We commend the Government of
Japan for hosting the conference and look forward to its
successful outcome.

The Secretary-General also reports progress in
transitioning security responsibilities to the Afghan
National Security Forces. Pakistan greatly values that
progress, which it sees as a guarantee of sustained
stability in Afghanistan, as evidenced - which the
Council will be pleased to know - by my President's
announcement at the NATO Summit in Chicago of
Pakistan's financial contribution to the Afghan National
Security Forces.

Besides helping to build the capacity of the Afghan
National Security Forces, Pakistan has sought closer
engagement with Afghanistan and its international
partners on all security-related issues. Our leading
participation in the seven confidence-building measures
on 14 June in Istanbul manifests our commitment. We
have done so by maintaining a robust presence of our
forces along the international border. Our deployment
of troops and paramilitaries in the border region far
exceeds the number of international troops in the
whole of Afghanistan, and has come at a considerable
economic, political and human cost. Our ongoing
intelligence and military cooperation with Afghanistan
and our international counterparts is progressing
smoothly, and recently the improvements in military
cooperation have for once been acknowledged by all
players.

Pakistan's narrative on Afghan security issues
is untainted by polemics. Provocations perpetrated
through actions on the ground and through rhetoric
have not undermined our restraint. A recent example
was the 24 June attack on a Pakistani border post in
which 17 security personnel lost their lives. The matter
is being taken up with Afghanistan at the highest level
for a bilateral matter.

The latest attack took place where there is
apparently a sizeable Afghan National Security Forces
and international presence. It is a grave incident that
unfortunately is not unprecedented. But our response to
such attacks is always to go through official channels.
Unlike others, we neither play the blame game nor
conduct diplomacy through media. Such restraint,
however, should not be taken for granted. Preventing
a recurrence of such incidents is absolutely imperative,
and safe havens for such people in Afghanistan must be
eliminated.

The Secretary-General's report enumerates many
challenges to the Afghan peace and reconciliation
process. He has characterized progress on reconciliation
as slow and uneven. The long-term solution to the
challenges in Afghanistan lies in a sustainable
reconciliation process. The policy must be transparent,
not a covert one that panders to the vagaries of domestic
politics. The sustainability of that process can be
ensured only if all stakeholders not only believe in it
themselves but also share the goal of reconciliation. The
process must not be complicated by inexplicable caveats
and conditions. The idea of coerced reconciliation flies
in the face of the obvious lessons of Afghan history:
that Afghan leadership, ownership of and willing
participation in all such matters is absolutely essential.

For our part, we are and will remain committed to
an Afghan-led and -owned reconciliation process. So
far, unfortunately, we see no panacea for delivering
peace in Afghanistan, and the current handling of the
war there may perhaps be placing any such expectations
outside the realm of possibility for the moment.

Despite the best efforts of the world community
and the United Nations, Pakistan is still host - and,
unfortunately, hostage - to the largest single population
of Afghan refugees. In doing so - despite the lack
of acknowledgment or funding and an abundance of
unjustified, unfair hyperbole - we remain a major
contributor, easing the humanitarian burden on
Afghanistan at significant economic, social and security
costs to the already overburdened people of Pakistan.

We therefore attach great importance to the outcome
of the international conference held in Geneva last
month. The solution strategy agreed on at the conference
should be underpinned by a strong commitment of
sustained support from the international community.
We must look beyond scapegoating and look forward
to those commitments coming to fruition. Meanwhile,
Pakistan is hurting. I would suggest stepping up to the
plate and bearing what must be borne.

To return to Mr. Fedotov: the policy of treating
any production of narcotics with kid gloves must be
abandoned. A policy has been in place that aims to
avoid antagonizing farmers and that has meant that
military and police forces would no longer participate
in the eradication of poppy fields. This was stated in a
recent article in the Washington Post, and, of course,
dilated upon pretty seriously by the adviser Mr. Vali
Nasr in his book The Rise ofIslamic Capitalism: Why
the New Muslim Middle Class is the Key to Defeating
Extremism.

However, we welcome the Afghanistan country
programme for 2012-14 launched by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime last month. The
programme's judicious implementation should be
finely honed to help address the narcotics problem, as
highlighted in the Afghan Opium Survey of December
2011 and UNODC's Opium Risk Assessment of April
2012. We are rightly warned by the UNAMA report that
the financial impact of the departure of the international
forces might enhance the attraction towards narcotics.
The warning calls for the world to acknowledge that
and to do something about it now by initiating effective
prevention measures.

Even though my friend Ambassador Tanin did not
mention Pakistan in his statement - many others have
not done so either, and I do not know whether to thank
him - Pakistan remains steadfast.

I will conclude by reiterating our commitment to
a peaceful and stable Afghanistan. It is to our own
benefit. We have vital stakes in that, as stated by
Pakistan's Foreign Minister during the recently held
Heart of Asia ministerial conference on the theme "For
Pakistan, Kabul is the most important capital of the
world."

Meanwhile, it would be inappropriate for me
not to welcome the recent policy statement of the
International Security Assistance Force on reducing
civilian casualties caused by air strikes. I pray that that
also applies to other parties.

Our Afghan brethren in Pakistan have suffered for
far too long. We hope and pray for an early end to such
a plight so that our two peoples can embark on a joint
quest for progress and development, integrated with the
rest of a rising Asia and the world.

