Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Since the tragedy
of 12 January, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has focused on three main
objectives: supporting and facilitating relief operations,
ensuring law and order and security, and - given its
enormous losses in personnel and infrastructure -
restoring the Mission's capacities.

I should like to begin by referring to the
Mission's capacities. MINUSTAH, as members of the
Council are aware, has lost 91 staff members, including
the head of Mission. Over the past five weeks, we have
not only replaced our deceased colleagues, but also
deployed additional personnel and resources. More
than 300 officers have been dispatched to reinforce the
Mission.

As everyone knows, military operations have
continued, in particular led by the Brazilian and other
contingents deployed to MINUSTAH and to our police
forces. Thanks to the timely decision of the Security
Council to increase authorized troop numbers, we are
currently strengthening those military and police
capabilities. We intend to deploy more than 1,500
troops and up to 500 additional police officers by the
second week of March, and they should be operational
in April. Of course, I wish to thank the many Member
States that have offered troops and police to
MINUSTAH in recent weeks. Those reinforcements are
crucial at this very critical time.

A flexible approach to resource management
allowed MINUSTAH to react immediately to the
unprecedented challenges raised by the earthquake. In
the coming weeks, we shall ask Member States for
additional resources, initially on the basis of a
preliminary study, before we submit a new, detailed
budget.

In the days that followed the earthquake,
MINUSTAH redirected its efforts and, to the extent
10-24612
possible, supported the delivery and distribution of
humanitarian assistance. Since then, in close
cooperation with the United States and Canadian
military on the ground, we have guaranteed security
and provided logistical support to the humanitarian
effort. This has been a true challenge, but I am
convinced that the mechanisms we have established to
coordinate the international presence in that area and
its support of the Haitian authorities have considerably
improved the situation.

Our United States and Canadian bilateral partners
will gradually reduce their presence, although it is
important that those reductions and withdrawals
correspond to benchmarks and transfers scheduled
jointly with MINUSTAH. I was very pleased to receive
confirmation in Washington, DC. yesterday that the
United States shared that view.

Allow me to say a few words about the security
situation and the rule of law as a whole. Following the
earthquake, one of MINUSTAH's main priorities was
to restore law and order in the affected zones and the
capacities of the Haitian National Police (HNP). To
that end, more than 70 per cent of the MINUSTAH
police were redeployed in the affected zones. Like all
Government institutions, the HNP was several
impacted by the earthquake. Some 40 per cent of its
facilities and equipment is no longer operational.
While the vast majority of officers have resumed their
duties, the HNP's intervention capacity is severely
limited by the loss of vehicles, communications
systems and essential databases. Nevertheless, since
the earthquake the HNP has proved to be very effective
and has contributed significantly to restoring the
general calm that has prevailed in the affected zones.

The judicial apparatus has also been affected. The
Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the Palace of
Justice, the Court of Cassation and the trial courthouse
have been destroyed. Several judges have been killed.
Apart from the small number of particularly urgent
cases, the judicial process has been largely suspended
in the zones affected by the earthquake. Of the
country's 17 prisons, eight have been totally or
partially destroyed, and nearly 5,000 detainees -
60 per cent of the prison population ~ have escaped.
Several hundred of these fugitives are considered to be
particularly dangerous. Some 80 per cent of those who
have escaped were in provisional custody.
10-24612

Today, the security situation remains stable, but
potentially fragile. The deterioration in living
conditions has led to an increase in such crimes as
robbery, mugging and looting. Of course, we fear a
resumption of gang violence, despite the fact that it has
hitherto been limited largely to internal power
struggles, as those who escaped seek to regain control
of their former turfs. The HNP and MINUSTAH are
following the situation very closely.

Despite the relative stability, we are aware that
the current calm is extremely precarious. If are unable
to meet humanitarian imperatives - in particular the
need for shelter before the rainy season - Haitians
will become increasingly frustrated, opening the door
to possible political manipulation. We must critically
address this potential source of instability in the weeks
and months to come. Security will also depend on our
ability to help the police, judicial and penal systems
not only to recover the resources that were at their
disposal before the earthquake, but also to increase
them, inter alia, by training new officers.

(spoke in English)

Just as important as the physical security of Haiti
and its people is the question of political stability, the
lack of which has often caused Violent tensions in the
past. The legislative elections planned for the end of
March have now been postponed by President Pre'val.
They may be held later this year or even in 2011.
While this decision has been broadly supported by all
political forces, it raises very significant constitutional
questions about the period following 10 May, when the
mandates of the members of the lower house and of a
large number of senators expire. Ensuring full
legislative capacity beyond 10 May is a key challenge
that will need to be resolved quickly.

There have also been calls to replace the current
Government, for example with a goavernement de salnt
public that would include members of the opposition.
Others have emphasized the need to restructure the
Government and form a new Cabinet that can deal with
the complex challenges ahead. Some parties have
accused the Government of political favouritism in the
distribution of aid.

At the same time, there has been no shortage of
ideas on how to move forward. Several political parties
and electoral platforms have engaged in consultations
on critical issues ranging from governance, elections
and constitutional reform to decentralization. The
5

Prime Minister himself has advocated fundamental
changes, including decentralization of the Government
and greater focus on the regions. A number of high-
profile private sector leaders are actively involved in
the humanitarian response and see the current situation
as an opportunity to steer reconstruction efforts
towards a modernization of the State architecture by
initiating critical socio-economic reforms.

It is of the utmost urgency that such discussions
now be channelled into an executive-led dialogue on
the political way forward. Otherwise, spoilers may take
advantage of the fluid and fragile political situation to
spark instability. President Preval, in recent weeks, has
rightly focused on the relief activities, and his
leadership is now required more than ever. It is now
more important than ever for the Government to
engage all political forces in substantive discussions on
key governance issues, to work constructively with the
private sector, and to enhance its communication and
outreach efforts to the Haitian public. The Government
of Haiti is fully aware of this and of the need to reach
broad political consensus before the 31 March donors'
conference, and the United Nations stands ready to
support such an effort by the Government.

There is no doubt that the earthquake has
fundamentally changed the context in which
MINUSTAH is operating. And there is no doubt that
this will have - as in fact it has already had -
implications for the role of MINUSTAH and the
broader United Nations. The damage to Haiti's
legislative, administrative, socio-economic,
educational and cultural centres has been
unprecedented. The Government of Haiti has lost much
of its infrastructure and a large number of its civil
servants, with devastating consequences for its ability
to deliver basic services and to deal with the
emergency at hand.

That Haiti needs assistance - lots of it e is of
course very clear. However, much less clear right now
is exactly what kind of assistance is required and how
such assistance should best be delivered. The post-
disaster needs assessment - which was launched, as
John Holmes said, on 18 February - should address
much of this. It is a very important process which is led
by the Haitian Government and supported by the
United Nations, the Inter-American Development
Bank, the World Bank and the European Commission,
and will provide a crucial basis for the 31 March
donors' conference. The outcomes of the post-disaster
6
needs assessment and the discussions at the New York
conference will provide a much better basis to plan for
MINUSTAH'S future and that of the broader United
Nations engagement.

Yesterday, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mulet attended a meeting of
development ministers of the European Union on Haiti.
Among the topics discussed were the important issue
of shelter and the issue of division of labour among
donors, which would help to lessen the burden of
coordination on the Haitian Government. This issue
will undoubtedly be taken up at the New York
conference.

To conclude, I would like to recall that the
earthquake hit Haiti at the moment when the country
was, for the first time in nearly five decades, making
significant strides toward stabilization and governance.
With the support of MINUSTAH, Haiti had organized
successful presidential and parliamentary elections,
established an unprecedented level of security, and set
strategies in motion for economic reconstruction and
development that contributed to two years of
successive economic growth. Planning for
comprehensive constitutional and administrative
reform was very much under way. Haiti finally had a
national vision and a road map for sustainable peace
and development.

The earthquake has, of course, caused
unprecedented destruction and suffering, but it has not
destroyed that vision. The international community and
the United Nations must come together behind the
Government of Haiti and align their interventions and
long-term plans with a national Vision for
reconstruction. This will require a sustainable level of
support, in terms of both resources and technical
assistance. In doing so, we need to empower the
Government and not supplant it.

I count on the Council's support to ensure that
MINUSTAH will continue to have the means required
to help Haiti through this challenge.

