Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join the Secretary-General and others in
expressing the United Kingdom's deep concern for the
people of Haiti, as well as for the United Nations staff
who remain unaccounted for, including peacekeeping
troops. The world's thoughts are with Haiti in the wake
of this devastating earthquake. My Prime Minister has
sent a message of sympathy and support to President
Preval. The United Kingdom is responding with
emergency rescue aid and equipment, and a team is en
route to assess the short- and longer-term humanitarian
needs. We stand ready to provide whatever further
support is needed to help the people of Haiti recover
from this tragic event.

I thank you, Sir, for convening today's debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and all
of the representatives of regional organizations for
their briefings this morning. It has been a valuable
opportunity to hear about the deliberations at the
Secretary-General's retreat earlier this week.

As we have heard this morning, the United
Nations and regional organizations share many
common goals. Close cooperation between them can
maximize impact, including in some of the most
challenging political and security environments in the
world today. The Security Council should retain its
pre-eminence in matters pertaining to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Council's
cooperation with regional organizations is already
good, but in our view there is much more that we can
do together in areas such as preventive diplomacy,
mediation and conflict resolution. I would like to
highlight five issues today.

The first is about the European Union (EU),
which is already making a major contribution to peace
and security around the world. The European Union
currently deploys over 3,000 military and over 4,000
civilian personnel in crisis management operations
ranging from the Balkans, to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to the Gulf of Aden. It is also, as
Ambassador Serrano pointed out earlier, working with
the United Nations in eight major crisis theatres. In
2009, the European Union provided over €400 million
in funding for stabilization activities and crisis
management missions. The changes introduced by the
Lisbon Treaty to the EU's external representation will
further enhance its international contribution.

Secondly, NATO commands the United Nations-
mandated 70,000-strong International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), which is helping the Afghan
Government bring security to the region. We must
build on the NATO-United Nations memorandum of
understanding of 2008 and further enhance cooperation
between ISAF and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. The United Nations should be
ready to accept NATO's assistance. NATO should be
ready to provide it in areas such as security sector
reform, as well as military assistance where necessary.
NATO brings unrivalled political-military expertise
and military capabilities.

Thirdly, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is of vital
strategic importance. We have strongly supported the
Secretary-General's efforts and those of the African
Union to enhance that partnership. Much of the
discussion so far has focused on peacekeeping, but in
our view it should broaden out to include the scope for
joint action to prevent conflict and focus more on
peacebuilding. We look forward to further advice from
the Secretary-General and to the ongoing work of the
AU-United Nations Task Force.

Fourthly, Somalia is an important example of the
African Union and the United Nations working
together, particularly in support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which continues to
play a crucial role in allowing space for the
Transitional Federal Government to become more
effective and broaden its political base. The EU is also
contributing significantly in Somalia, leading the Anti-
Piracy Task Force and providing €35.5 million of
funding for AMISOM.

Lastly, Afghanistan will be a key test for these
international partnerships, particularly in the coming
period. As I said in the Council last week, we hope that
the London Conference on 28 January will reinvigorate
international engagement in support of the Afghan
Government. The United Nations, NATO, the EU, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other regional organizations will all have important
roles to play.

The founding fathers of the United Nations
showed great foresight when, in Chapter VIII of the
Charter, they highlighted the role to be played by
regional organizations. But I suspect that even they
would be a little bewildered today by the scale and
variety of cooperation. Our responsibility in the
Council is to set the strategic direction for that
cooperation, focusing our efforts on the biggest
challenges, which include Afghanistan and Somalia,
but also looking to the future and to a more cohesive
view of international cooperation, covering the full
conflict cycle.

In conclusion, we support the draft presidential
statement that the delegation of China has put together.

