The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative
of Uruguay.

Uruguay thanks the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Raisedon
Zenenga, and the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
Head of the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, for their comprehensive and detailed briefings.

Uruguay applauds the results of the London
Conference on Somalia, held on 11 May, which resulted
in a security pact and a new alliance for Somalia, in
support of the Somalia national development plan,
establishing an ambitious programme of Somali-led
State reform, with the support of the international
community over coming years. Uruguay considers it
essential to maintain the forward momentum towards
positive change in the reconciliation of Somalia. We
reaffirm our support for its sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity, so that it can
become a democratic, stable and prosperous Somalia.

However, there are many challenges ahead. The
threat of piracy remains. Greater progress must be
made in the areas of democratization, human rights
and the rule of law. Corruption must be addressed,
and efforts must be made to reduce poverty and boost
economic recovery.

Despite the continued efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), AMISOM
and the Somali security forces, Al-Shabaab remains a
strong threat. As the Secretary-General indicates in his
latest report (S/2017/408), Al- Shabaab has demonstrated
the ability to resist and adapt, maintaining a united core
despite internal disputes and rifts. Uruguay expresses
particular concern for the group's readiness to use
violence to hamper reliefefforts directed at civilians and
humanitarian workers, including the United Nations.

Uruguay believes that one of the main priorities
is to strengthen the Somali national security forces
and improve their capacity to work with AMISOM. in
the fight against Al-Shabaab. Somali security sector
reform, as well as the reform of the campaign to defeat
Al-Shabaab, are a matter of urgency, especially in
the light of the AMISOM. plan to start its transition
in Somalia in October 2018. Uruguay recognizes the
contribution being made by AMISOM. in Somalia, and
highlights how important it is that the African Union
continue to participate in the transition to a safe and
stable Somalia.

My country also believes it is urgent to address
the serious humanitarian situation in Somalia caused
by the ongoing drought and risk of famine. That has
been exacerbated by years of conflict and insecurity,
and has the potential to derail political progress and the
legitimacy offederal and State institutions. Coordinated
efforts must be intensified to meet immediate needs
and strengthen resilience in future.

Uruguay also believes it is essential to ensure
forward movement in the constitutional review process
and to conclude the establishment of the federal State,
with the support of UNSOM. If well managed, the
constitutional review process will promote national
unity, address the root causes of conflict and instability,
and offer a significant opportunity for the reconciliation
ofthe Somali people. Uruguay emphasizes in particular
the need to protect civilian populations, especially
children, women and older persons, and encourages the
Federal Government of Somalia to seek mediation and
stability, especially in areas where access to supplies
and humanitarian aid is vital.

Although all death sentences rendered against
children in the State Puntland have been revoked,
it is still very worrying that the death penalties have
been commuted into lengthy prison terms. Uruguay
urges the authorities of Puntland to comply with their
commitments to revoke the penalties, facilitate the
release of the children and to continue to work with
the United Nations on their reintegration. Uruguay
also requests the authorities of Puntland to revoke all
death sentences against children rendered by civil and
military tribunals and to, with the support of the United
Nations, urgently develop a juvenile justice system in
accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, as established by the Secretary-General in his
latest report.

Uruguay is also alarmed by the cases of sexual
violence, internally displaced women and girls, and
members of minority clans, which are particularly
vulnerable. It is essential to improve the legal
framework, human-rights protection systems and the
capacity and legitimacy of institutions to help combat
impunity, improve accountability for human rights
violations and encourage reconciliation. Uruguay calls
for the respect of the highest international human rights
standards to address abuses and the excessive use of
force against the civilian population.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

