The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of June 2009, I should
like to take this opportunity to thank and pay tribute,
on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Vitaly
Churkin, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, and to the Russian presidency for the
successful manner in which they presided over the
Security Council in the month of May 2009.

I also wish to recognize the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Ivo Sanader, Prime Minister of Croatia.
I extend a warm welcome to the Prime Minister.

Statement by the President

The President: Before we move on to the item
on our agenda, allow me to say a few words in my
national capacity.

As members of the Security Council know, this is
the first public meeting of the Council under Turkey's
presidency. I am delighted to be here with you today.
When Turkey decided to run for a seat on the Council,
some five years ago, we did so with a clear vision of
the United Nations and of our possible role in the
Council. Indeed, we see the United Nations as the
principal embodiment of international legitimacy, and
the Security Council as the primary organ responsible
for maintaining global peace and security.

Turkey has been a responsible member of the
international community, deeply committed to
upholding the ideals and principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. Indeed, as a founding Member
of the United Nations, active involvement in the
policies and programmes of the Organization
constitutes one of the main pillars of our foreign
policy. This is why we thought our membership in the
Council could help amplify the constructive role we try
to play in our region and beyond. We also hoped that
our insight into the rather complex issues that the
Council is grappling with, especially those of our
region, might bring added value to the work of this
body.

In retrospect, the five months since we assumed
Council membership have vindicated our vision. We
have benefited greatly from our deliberations on a wide
area of issues and have tried to translate them into

positive inputs for our policies and initiatives. Now,
looking ahead, we are even more hopeful that our
active engagement with the members of the Council
and the entire United Nations membership will
continue to contribute to peace and stability in the
world.
I am confident that the busy programme of work
for June, which reflects almost the entire agenda of the
Council, will be a step in this direction. As the
President of the Council for this month, we will
certainly do our share.

In this vein, I am particularly pleased to start our
presidency with this meeting on the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda. The contribution of those two Tribunals to
international criminal justice and, consequently, to
reconciliation, stability and peace in the affected
countries is most commendable. As a country that is
deeply committed to the rule of law and as a firm
believer in the mutually reinforcing relationship
between peace and justice, Turkey greatly values the
important work carried out by those Tribunals.
Combating impunity and providing justice to the
victims of violations of international humanitarian law
are a priority for us.

However, the fulfilment of those objectives is not
and cannot be limited to the lifespan of the Tribunals in
the case of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Thus,
as we near the closure of the two Tribunals, we have to
ensure that the culture of impunity will never resurface
and that the necessary mechanisms to that end are
firmly in place.

Since we will be dealing with this issue shortly in
more depth, let me stop here. Without further ado,
allow me to proceed with our formal agenda.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994

Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991 addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2009/252)

Letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994
and 31 December 1994 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/247)


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya,
Rwanda and Serbia, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its

provisional rules of procedure to Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda; Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/2009/252, which contains the
text of a letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/2009/247, which contains the text of a
letter dated 14 May 2009 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.


