Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The choice
of the theme of securing borders against illicit cross-
border trafficking is of great interest to Member States,
especially those of us in the West Africa subregion,
because that issue goes to the heart of the matter
discussed by the Security Council last February with
regard to our region. My country would therefore like
very much to thank the United States for having
proposed this subject to be considered by the Council.

The quality and speed of means of transport, the
development of information and communications
technologies, as well as the policies promoting the
formation of groups in the subregion, have today
facilitated the free movement of persons and goods
across borders, thereby creating enormous difficulties
in controlling borders. Thanks to the ease of inter-State
transport and the loosening of border controls, we have
seen the flourishing of all kinds of illicit trafficking.
That is due to the fact that borders, especially in
developing countries, generally remain quite porous
and those countries do not have modern means for
controlling their borders. Insufficiently controlled
borders give rise to an environment in which we see a
proliferation of spontaneous contextual practices that
have no legal status within those States.

For those reasons, borders have become
completely lawless spaces in some of our countries,
where all types of activities flourish, including
trafficking in weapons, drugs and natural resources, as
well as trafficking in human beings, illegal migration,
illicit trafficking in goods, corruption, money-
laundering and terrorist activities - all of which can
jeopardize the peace, security and the stability of
States.

It is therefore no exaggeration to say that border
zones obey a logic that goes well beyond the
sovereignty of States. Criminal groups moving across
borders are well equipped and quick to adapt to new
situations or relocate their operations in order to avoid
detection. They can take over entire regions of a
country where Governments lack the technical means
needed to counter such groups. They make substantial
profits from their activities, which often flourish to the
detriment of vulnerable persons, such as the victims of
human trafficking, migrants and child soldiers.

The activities of such groups have led to an
increased feeling of insecurity, felt by other countries
as well, and they raise the issue of the management of
borders and the subsequent matter of relations with
neighbouring States.

International legal instruments, such as the 2003
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its related protocols, on the
trafficking of persons and the illicit trafficking of
migrants, the United Nations Programme of Action on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption, have all sought to address the need
to counter those new threats to peace and security.

Nevertheless, the threat posed by factors linked to
securing our borders and combating illicit movements
is greater than ever, even greater than when those legal
instruments came into effect. This is why the quest for
appropriate responses to new transnational threats
should be a priority for the international community.

Securing borders and combating illicit trafficking
and cross-border movement require human, material
and financial means, which are quite significant and
often beyond the reach of many States individually.
Many States do not have an effective means of
providing surveillance and control of borders. An
overall integrated and holistic approach on the part of
the international community will make it possible to

meet the challenges and insecurity generated by illicit
border trafficking. The value added of such an
approach lies in working in a coherent way at the
global, regional and transregional levels to fight threats
that State mechanisms are unable to counter, and in
adapting our responses to challenges in the field.

The threats posed by illicit cross-border
trafficking and organized crime to their sovereignty,
stability and security have led the States of West Africa
to take measures to reduce the risks arising from our
porous borders. At the subregional level, in addition to
the four-State agreement among Benin, Ghana, Nigeria
and Togo to fight transborder crime, in 2009 my
country and Ghana signed a memorandum of
understanding between our security, law enforcement,
police, customs and immigration services to fight
transnational organized crime. Moreover, the Heads of
State and Government in the Co-Prosperity Alliance
Zone, comprised of those same four countries, also
hold regular consultations on combating the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons.

Also at the subregional level, with the help of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
we have developed a cross-cutting multilateral strategy
based on shared responsibility, called the UNODC
Regional Programme for West Africa 2010-2014.

At the national level, Togo has responded to the
issue with various measures. Among them are the
creation of our central anti-drug and anti-money-
laundering office and a national narcotics laboratory,
which help the national police and customs in their
respective duties. Moreover, our integrated national
plan includes several steps undertaken with the
technical and financial assistance of development
partners. Those have led to the establishment in
February 2011 of an integrated container control unit in
the port city of Lome, and a national financial data
centre at the Lome international airport.

Despite those initiatives, and given the weak
operational capacity of the States of the West Africa
subregion, funding and capacity-building for national
agencies are necessary and require the ongoing support
of the international community. Now is an opportune
time to express our gratitude to the United Nations,
especially the UNODC, which has consistently helped
to strengthen the capacities of national institutions.

Given the magnitude of the problem, Togo hopes
that the Secretary-General will study the issue and
propose approaches and solutions to bolster existing
mechanisms.

