Mr. Hetesy (Hungary): Let me start by thanking
the United Kingdom presidency for this opportunity
and also joining others in offering our deepest
condolences to victims, families of victims, people, and
governments of countries who have been affected by
the recent terrorist attacks.

Two months ago, our Heads of State and
Government pledged to foster peaceful, just and
inclusive societies that are free from fear and violence.
That is clearly a noble but interrelated task that
requires a lot of stakeholders. The implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) requires a fresh look at the
relationship between peace and development. Indeed,
this very issue of relationship has provoked extended
debate in the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, and the debate was partly put to
rest by an innovative suggestion to place less emphasis
on what peace and security can do for development
and to utilize a reverse approach that was more in line
with the mandate of the Group. From then, on the Open
Working Group focused on what kind of development
could promote peace and security.

That is how Goal 16 and other interrelated
elements - such as the fight against inequality
and discrimination, the principle of inclusivity,
women's empowerment and the leave-no-one-behind
principle - took shape and later commanded strong
support in Agenda 2030. Goal 16 and related goals
therefore are not about peace and security. They are
much more than that. First of all, they are cornerstones
for the full implementation of the social pillar. They are
also important drivers and enablers for the economic
and environmental pillars of sustainable development.

Agenda 2030 when implemented will ensure that
situations threatening international peace and security
arise less frequently. The Agenda will also assist in
the fight against terrorism and extremism, areas where
the Council also has to act, albeit with different tools.
Successful implementation will therefore lighten the
burden on the Council and assist it in making solutions
more robust and longstanding. This, however, does not
take away the authority of the Council. First, the onus
is squarely on the Security Council to find solutions
to conflicts so that affected countries and communities
can start their journey towards sustainable development.

Secondly, as many others have mentioned, conflicts
wipe out whatever progress is made in the field of
development. Therefore, the Council must put much
more emphasis on prevention.

The need for interaction can be best understood by
taking a quick look at the current refugee/migration
crisis. Until we put an end to the conflicts, we will have
no solution for the refugee crisis. Here, the Council has
a special responsibility to find and enforce political
solutions. Inaction by the Council cannot be substituted
by the compassion of others or rectified by addressing
the humanitarian consequences. While the Council
must do the firefighting, only sustainable development
is capable of taking care of the root causes that led or
contributed to the conflict.

Moving away from conflicts, human mobility has
all kinds of other causes. The current migration trends
are symptoms of underlying causes such as economic
hardship, environmental degradation, food and water
scarcity, and so on. In essence, these are different forms
of unsustainability, be it economic, environmental or
social. In these cases, the implementation of Agenda
2030 is the primary solution, while the Council has
an important supportive role to play. Agenda 2030
does not change the authority of any organ. Therefore,
there is no need to reinforce the division lines. To the
contrary, the integrated nature of threats will require
ever closer cooperation. To cement this understanding
and for changing our narrative, debates like this are
useful. However to really change our course we must
transform our words into action.

