Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset, Mr. President, to ask you
to accept the regrets of His Excellency Mr. Francois-
Xavier Ngoubeyou, Minister of State for External
Relations of Cameroon, who was unable to attend
today's important meeting. He has asked me to convey
to you his warm congratulations on your timely
initiative to organize this Security Council meeting on
the situation in Africa. He asked me also to express our
appreciation for the manner in which your country has
presided over the work of the Council during the month
of January.

We convey our appreciation also to Mrs. Louise
Frechette, Deputy Secretary-General, and to Mr. Amara
Essy, Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). Their presence here and their opening
statements reflect the international community's
profound concern about the situation in Africa, as well
as the commitment of the United Nations and of the
OAU to a common search for appropriate solutions to
the many problems facing the African continent. We
are also pleased that the President of the Economic and
Social Council is participating in today's discussion;
that principal organ of the United Nations devoted its
2001 high-level segment to the question of Africa, and
Ambassador Ivan Simonovie earlier made reference to
the Ministerial Declaration adopted there.

As we begin our interactive dialogue, I should
like to recall the comments made here by the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, on 15 December 1999:

"If meetings alone could solve Africa's problems
we would have none, but, alas, they do not, which
is why I appreciate even more, Mr. President, the
effort you have made to give this meeting a
practical and operational character, aimed at
making a difference not just in words but in
action." (S/PV408], pp. 2-3)

Those words have lost none of their relevance -
quite the contrary. I recall them because they seem to
me to chart the course of today's interactive dialogue.
Such a course will be one of action, if we want to
restore the credibility of the Security Council in the
eyes of the African people. Indeed, we hope that this
dialogue will mark the beginning of a more resolute
commitment by the Security Council in Africa, as in
other regions of the world. To that end, it would be a
good idea for us to take stock of the Council's actions
with regard to Africa and to seek together concrete
actions that we can implement together so as to meet
the expectations of our peoples and fulfil the great
hopes that they have placed in the Council and in the
United Nations.

We need no further evidence of the Security
Council's interest in African questions in particular. We
need only recall that the debates devoted to such
questions figure very largely on its agenda.
Unfortunately, the results seem inversely proportional
to our propensity to meet together to discuss Africa.
That situation led the Council to request the Secretary-
General to study ways and means by which not only
the Council, but the entire Organization, could help
Africa to be what it should always be: a good partner
for the community of nations, and a land of peace.

That is the subject of the report of the
Secretary-General in document S/1998/318, "The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa". Welcomed
unanimously by the international community, it paints
an uncompromising portrait of the situation on the
continent, identifies the sources and origins of conflict
and, above all, sets out actions to be implemented by
Africa itself and by the international community.

The solutions offered differ greatly from the
simplistic analysis of the conflicts on the continent that
results from looking through the distorting prism of
tribalism and ethnicism. The analyses and
recommendations in the report were taken up and
considered at length by the ad hoc working group of
the Security Council set up to consider that part of the
report relating to peace and security and, later, by the
Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group set up by the
General Assembly for the follow-up of the
implementation of the recommendations of the report
relating to development.

The efforts of the international community in
implementing those recommendations have not always
been equal to the requirements of the situation in
Africa. The response - slow and timid, given the risk
of the emergence of conflict and humanitarian crises in
Africa - has often been, for Africans, a source of
great frustration, particularly as they have set out,
resolutely and irreversibly, on the path towards
democracy and good governance and begun to
undertake profound economic reforms.

It was in an attempt to remedy that state of affairs
that the heads of State and Government, meeting at the
Millennium Summit, undertook to assist Africa to
establish democracy and good governance, to combat
poverty, to support regional and subregional
mechanisms for conflict prevention and to promote
political stability. They also committed themselves to
financing peacekeeping operations on the continent. I
have mentioned only those commitments that relate
most directly to the Security Council. Section VII of
the Millennium Declaration, relating to Africa,
deserves to be read in full. The Ambassador of
Colombia earlier reminded us of that fact.

The will of our heads of State is thus clear, as are
their commitments. The Security Council finds itself
challenged more than ever. Faced with our interminable
speeches, the people of Africa are likely to be
overcome by scepticism and doubt. What, then, are we
to do?

In responding to that question, my delegation will
use the working document that you, Mr. President,
provided for this meeting as a basis for some proposals
for action. Furthermore, we will do so in the context of
the provisions of the Millennium Declaration, in
particular section VII.

First, with regard to peacekeeping, the heads of
State and Government of the States Members of the
United Nations have undertaken, as I said earlier, to
fund peacekeeping operations carried out in Africa.
Under these circumstances, the people of Africa,
encouraged by those assurances, are surely entitled to
expect the Council to act more promptly and with
greater determination in Africa. That is why we
advocate adapting the mandates and financing of
peacekeeping operations deployed in Africa to the
complexity of the conflicts there.

The signing of peace accords bringing conflict to
an end in other regions of the world is always
accompanied by a financial framework to help to
control and resolve any outstanding problems or
problems of reconstruction. Why should that not be the
case in Africa? We are pleased that the Economic and
Social Council - which is concerned with the
prevention of conflict and post-conflict
reconstruction a is participating in this debate today.

As Cameroon has stressed, Africa, a partner of
the United Nations, is an organized continent with
structures able to respond to the requirements of
Articles 52 and 53 of the Charter as regards the
resolution of conflicts at the local level. This is
particularly the case with the Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa (COPAX). This is the case at
the continental level with the central Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution. It is
thus important that the operational capacities of these
organizations be strengthened. In this regard, too,
Africa, more than any other region, is entitled to expect
assistance.

Mediation efforts must be encouraged. However,
we should recall, as the Secretary-General has done,
the need to avoid the multiplication of competing
mediation initiatives, which ultimately could cancel
each other out and be counterproductive.

The United Nations willingness to contribute to
Africa's effort is clear. The number of United Nations
actions and operations for Africa is proof of this.
However, the Organization's actions are being diluted
and wasted in the absence of a clearly defined policy.
Thus, there is a need to rationalize these initiatives for
Africa and to define a vision and plan of action.

Cameroon today repeats the proposal it made
before the Council, on 15 December 1999, to have at
the level of the Secretary-General a coordination unit
for the actions of departments and offices of the
Secretariat. This would guarantee greater transparency
and consistency of the initiatives of the international
community. It would promote an integrated approach
by the Secretariat to African issues and enable a better
assessment of the implementation of the
recommendations. This kind of structure exists for
African matters at the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund.

We welcome the creation of the United Nations
Office for West Africa, which we hope will play an
important role for a coordinated and global approach to
conflict prevention in this region of Africa. We trust
that the Secretariat will create such structures in other
subregions.

For a long time the Council has discussed the
evolution of the sanctions regimes imposed on those
who threaten peace or violate peace agreements during
the resolution of a conflict. The precarious situation in
which African populations live pushes us to encourage
and support any policy of sanctions that targets the
designated officials and spares civilian populations.

Lastly, it is necessary to make the
recommendations of the Security Council on Africa
more concrete so that the continent can revive hope and
development. This implies a plan of action on the part
of the international community directed at specific
areas. In this respect, my delegation suggests that it
draw inspiration from the priority areas identified by
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs who met in
September 1998 on the initiative of the Secretary-
General in the Development Assistance Committee.

It is a question of increasing the amount of
official development assistance and improving its
quality. It is a question of forgiving the balance of the
official bilateral debt of the poorest African countries.
It is a question of increasing access to the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative; and finally
it is a question of facilitating African exports so that
the continent no longer remains on the margins of the
globalization process.

These are the few proposals that Cameroon is
putting on the table of the Council at a time when it is
meeting to establish a plan of action for cooperation in
favour of Africa, in the light of the prevailing situation
there and, above all, the commitments undertaken at
the Millennium Summit by the family of the United
Nations to respond to the special needs of Africa.

