Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me too to welcome among us the Secretary-General,
the President of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Boris
Tadie, and the President of the Republic of Kosovo,
Mr. Fatmir Sedjiu.

I would like to briefly highlight three points to
which my delegation attaches special importance. First,
apart from the incident in which a member of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) lost his life, the situation in Kosovo
has in general remained calm, including after the
declaration of independence of 17 February. In that
context, we welcome the responsible attitude of the
parties concerned.

Secondly, the international presence and its
composition are at the heart of the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2008/354) and of our
discussions today. Belgium appreciates the Secretary-
General's efforts to adapt the United Nations presence
to a reality that, as highlighted in his report, has
changed radically. The proposed reconfiguration is
necessary. More than that, it is in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999). It is fully within the purview of
the Secretary-General. We can therefore support it.
Now, it is important that this reconfiguration be
implemented rapidly so that the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo can make its contribution to
the establishment and reinforcement of the rule of law
throughout Kosovo, which is in the interest of all of
Kosovo's citizens.

For my third point, I would like to stress the
words, "throughout the whole of Kosovo". In this
context, Belgium has been reflecting on the creation of
parallel municipal authorities in majority Serb areas
and the announcement of a Serb parliament in Kosovo.
This seems to run counter to the legislative framework
defined by UNMIK and supported by the international
community.
What has already transpired clearly shows that it
is in the interests of Pristina and Belgrade to establish a
good working relationship; in that respect, the letter
from the Secretary-General addressed to the two
parties indicates the path to follow. We call upon both
parties to establish this relationship and to give it some
substance, bearing in mind their future which, need we
say, is solidly in Europe.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to once
again repeat its satisfaction with the work
accomplished by UNMIK and Special Representative
Joachim Riicker over the past few years.

