Mr. Thomson (Fiji): At the outset, the Fiji delegation
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for choosing the
subject of today's thematic debate. It is most pertinent,
given the growing number of peacekeeping mandates
issuing from the Security Council and the increasing
complexities of the tasks of peacekeeping missions.

The peacekeeping missions of today are not
the peacekeeping missions of yore. They include
mandates that fit well into traditinal peacebuilding and,
sometimes, mandates that focus on development related
to the rebuilding of national capacities in the security
sector.

Fiji has, in various forums, expressed the need
for Security Council peacekeeping mandates to be
focused on the requirements of local situations in order
to promote local solutions. That includes providing
expertise most suitable for the systems existing in the
local situation and sourcing peacekeeping expertise
from States and regions that are able to provide unified
or consistent advice, particularly in the area of building
the capacity of local institutions. While expertise from
different backgrounds can provide well-intentioned
advice, that advice can nonetheless result in local
capacities that are not uniform and may not be best
suited for the local context.

In such situations, the contributions of regional
and subregional groupings that come from similar
backgrounds to the host country can be advantageous.
What we are saying is that the United Nations
should not measure the success of contributions to
any peacekeeping mission by the number of States
contributing troops, police, corrections or other
experts, but by the efficacy ofthe contributions made in
meeting the host country's requirements. It is therefore
the Fiji delegation's View that, in examining the
principles and forms of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
one element that is often missing from the discussion
is how to encourage contributions to peacekeeping
from regions that are most suited to the situation in the
country concerned and to encourage and use collective
peacekeeping capabilities accordingly.

In the Pacific Islands region, we are taking regional
initiatives to support United Nations peacekeeping. Fiji
already has a well-established record in the service of
United Nations peacekeeping. We have recently taken
on a new challenge upon request of the United Nations,
namely, that of contributing 501 troops to the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the Golan
Heights at a critical juncture in that mission's work.

Recognizing our established tradition of
peacekeeping and the ability of our region to contribute
further, the Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG) has
recently agreed to the concept of establishing an MSG
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The MSG
is a subregional organization headquartered in Port
Vila, Vanuatu, and is comprised of Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, the Front de liberation
nationale kanak et socialiste of New Caledonia and my
own country, Fiji. The MSG's peacekeeping concept
is focused on developing collective peacekeeping
capabilities in the area of the police sector in
peacekeeping.

The United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has agreed to meet an MSG delegation
in New York to discuss United Nations support for
the development of such collective peacekeeping
capability. We look forward to the fruition of that visit
and to useful discussions while the delegation is in New
York, with a View to assisting the MSG to realize its
potential to play a positive role in the United Nations
peacekeeping community.

In addressing the principles and forms of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations for the maintenance of
international peace and security, we recognize that
the United Nations must adhere to the provisions of
the Charter that specifically prohibit any enforcement
action without the authorization of the Security Council.
Actions by regional and subregional organizations must
therefore be consistent with the mandates and authority
of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to all
those who have served in United Nations peacekeeping
operations since 1948. For their sake and for the sake
of the people in whose countries they serve, our efforts
must remain focused on optimizing United Nations
peacekeeping in response to changes in global realities.
Today's discussion is surely a further step in that
direction.

