Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): Allow me first to
thank Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs of France, and the three main
briefers at today's debate. I would also like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the presence of Mr. Borut
Pahor, President of the Republic of Slovenia, in the
Chamber today.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union
(EU). Allow me now to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.

Terrorism, including its financing, requires the
permanent attention of the international community, as
it remains a changing and evolving threat. Prevention
and suppression of the financing of terrorism
therefore requires strong cooperation in the interest of
international, regional and national peace and stability.
We welcome this open debate and the Arria Formula
meeting that France, together with Australia, Indonesia,
Peru and Tunisia, organized in January, as a clear effort
to keep this item high on our political, security and
development agendas.

Every response to terrorist acts is quickly followed
by the adaptation of means, ways and approaches on
the part of the terrorists, including the evolving use
of technology, all of which also apply to the financing
of terrorist activities. New technologies that enable
many activities in cyberspace are welcomed and
used by us all, but also offer a space for terrorists to
more effectively spread their propaganda, recruit new
members, coordinate actions, better evade surveillance
and arrange the provision, collection and distribution of
funds for their activities.

Slovenia is one of the co-sponsors of resolution
2462 (2019), adopted today, which clearly reaffirms our
obligation as Member States to prevent and suppress the
financing of terrorism and to demand accountability
for the perpetrators of terrorists acts, including those
who finance them. In addition to the resolution adopted
today, other resolutions and documents adopted within
this and other organizations clearly show the need for
every Member State to adopt and implement adequate
legislation to combat the financing of terrorism and, if
needed, to develop national plans. We need effective
partnerships with the private sector and continuous
training of the relevant stakeholders.

In the past years Slovenia adopted specific
measures in three areas - amendments to legislation,
enhanced international and national cooperation and
the education of stakeholders. At the end of 2016,
Slovenia, as a member of the European Union, adopted
the new Act on Prevention of Money Laundering and
Terrorist Financing, which introduced the EU directive
on preventing the use of the financial system for money
laundering or terrorist financing into our national
legal system.

The new law brought a new approach based on
analysis and threat assessment to the national and
international levels. It requires that national threat
assessments on money laundering and the financing of
terrorism be carried out and periodically updated. One
of the important features of the new legislation is an
obligatory review of individual transactions exceeding
€1,000 and the introduction of a register of real owners,
which is also a significant achievement in the prevention
of terrorism.

In every aspect of combating terrorism and its
financing, international and regional cooperation are
of the utmost importance. National cooperation links
have been established in Slovenia between special units
for the fight against terrorism within the Slovenian
Intelligence and Security Agency, the Ministry of the
Interior - the police - the Ministry of Defence and
the Ministry of Finance. As a result of that cooperation,
between 2010 and 2015 the Ministry of Finance
received an annual average of four reports related to
terrorist financing. There were 14 in 2016 alone, as
well as nine notifications submitted to the competent
authorities with reasonable grounds for the suspicion of
a criminal offence.

We also put strong emphasis on educational
activities. The Ministry of Finance has organized
training courses for persons in a position to prevent
terrorist financing. They learn about the types of
terrorist financing, its indicators, as well as about
the process of radicalization and relevant legislative
amendments. The courses are attended by people in
the banking sector, insurance companies, brokerage
companies and foreign-exchange offices.

With regard to regional cooperation, Slovenia
devotes special attention to the region of the Western
Balkans. Since the links between terrorism and
organized crime, through which terrorism is also
financed, are well established, Slovenia proposed the
development of one of its initiatives - the Western
Balkan Counter-terrorism Initiative - into the
Integrative Internal Security Governance framework,
an EU initiative that focuses on national security
cooperation, combating terrorism and tackling serious
and organized crime.

Slovenia welcomes all initiatives that seek to limit
the space for potential terrorist activities. Nevertheless,
we should not limit the space for humanitarian actors
in the process of implementing measures to counter the
financing ofterrorism, which must be carried out in full
respect for international law, particularly international
humanitarian law, human rights law and international
refugee law.

