Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Madam President, for organizing this
open debate, for your valuable work as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and for your personal leadership
on the issues we are discussing today. We also express
our deep appreciation to Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost
and International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda for their briefings and tireless efforts.

I make this statement on behalf of the Kingdom
of Belgium and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We
align ourselves with the statement to be made by the
representative of Norway on behalf of the informal
group of like-minded States on targeted sanctions.
In view of the time constraints, my full statement is
available on paper and will later be available on Twitter
and on the websites of our two Missions. I will limit
myself today to addressing the two key points of our
statement.

As stated before, the Netherlands and Belgium are
in favour of Security Council reform. We want to make
the Council more representative of today's geopolitical
realities and more equitable, legitimate, accountable,
effective and transparent. Even as discussions of reform
are ongoing, improvements in the working methods
of the Council should already be under way, and
therefore we welcome today's debate. I will focus on
the issues raised in the excellent concept paper before
us (S/2014/725, annex).

My first point concerns the strengthening of
due process in sanctions regimes. We thank the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Prost, for the good work she has
done in fulfilling her mandate. We welcome the reports
of her Office. These reports indicate key areas that
require further strengthening in terms of due process.
Due process is crucial to the sanctions regimes, and we
therefore should welcome five specific improvements
in that area: first, a separate and permanent Office of
the Ombudsperson; secondly, more safeguards for the
independence of the Ombudsperson; thirdly, improved
sharing of information by Member States; fourthly,
more transparency in the process of listing individuals
and entities; and fifthly, extending the mandate of
the Office of the Ombudsperson to all other sanction
regimes.

My second point concerns the follow-up of
referrals to the ICC. Sustainable peace and security
can be achieved only if perpetrators of the most
serious crimes are brought to justice. The international
community must work better together to achieve that
aim. All States and the Council have a moral duty
to cooperate in the investigation and prosecution of
those horrendous crimes. We commend the Council
for assuming its responsibility by referring situations
to the Court, as it has done with the situations in the
Sudan and in Libya. We underline that the Council has
a particular responsibility to provide political support
for its referrals of situations to the Court and for their
implementation.

I note that we are waiting for a referral of the
situation in Syria to the ICC. We stress that all States
parties are obliged to cooperate with the Court under
the Rome Statute. As to the non-State parties, the
Council has the capacity to oblige them by adopting
resolutions to cooperate with the Court. We would like
to see the Council apply that option more frequently.

Belgium and the Netherlands welcome the
constructive cooperation between the Council and the
Court over the past decade, but we would also welcome
more frequent interaction with the Court, a good
example of which was the Council's visit to the Court
in August. The active cooperation and follow-up of the
Council to enforce its own resolutions are essential.
That could be done by expanding the mandate of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
to include the Court as well. In that context, Belgium
and the Netherlands wish to recall General Assembly
resolution 68/305, in which the need for proper funding
of the International Criminal Court was underlined.

As we heard from Ms. Bensouda, the ICC is
currently coping with serious capacity constraints
and has difficulty conducting crucial investigations.
Therefore, it is worth remembering that the Relationship
Agreement between the ICC and the United Nations
envisages the Court to be reimbursed by the United
Nations for expenses incurred in connection with
Security Council referrals. We invite the United Nations
membership to reflect on that.

My third point concerns working methods.
Belgium and the Netherlands remain committed
to the improvement of the working methods of the
Council. We are grateful for the various initiatives
taken in past years by members of the Council to
improve transparency, openness and accountability.
We encourage Council members to do even more.
Improving the Council's working methods should be
an ongoing process. In that regard, let me highlight
our support for the French proposal for restraint in the
use of the veto in situations involving mass atrocities.
We commend France and Mexico for having organized
the excellent high-level meeting during the ministerial
week last month. We would like to reiterate our full
support for that important proposal.
In conclusion, let me again thank you, Madam,
for organizing this important debate. Proper follow-
up would enhance the efficiency, transparency
and interactivity of the work of the Council. It
would strengthen the effectiveness, credibility and
accountability of that lofty institution. Both Belgium
and the Netherlands stand ready to be a partner in
pursuing that important purpose.

