Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting and for your leadership
during our trip to Addis, as well as for your very
accurate and good report this morning. I also want to
thank Ethiopia for its hospitality during our trip. I also
thank Special Representative Haile Menkerios for his
briefing this morning.

Last week's mission to Addis Ababa for our eleventh
joint consultative meeting with the African Union Peace
and Security Council marked an important moment
in the ever stronger partnership between our two
organizations. We were encouraged by the constructive
discussions and by the degree of commonality in our
approaches to a number of security challenges on the
African continent. I think that you, Mr. President,
very accurately referred to them in your report this
morning. We look forward to a swift adoption of the
joint communique, and we stand ready to work very
diligently on that to get it over with as soon as possible.

The United Nations, including the Council,
cannot achieve its goals without an ever stronger
partnership with the African Union and the subregion.
We understand that when the African Union acts,
it acts on behalf of all of us. Therefore, we continue
to be a staunch supporter of an enhanced strategic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in Africa.

Last week's meeting, as well as the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in April,
only serve to reinforce this conviction. It is clear to
us that the African Union and its regional partners
are undertaking vital operations that are not only in
the interests of the African continent, but, in a world
of increasingly interconnected challenges, are in the
interests of all of us. We must now mobilize political
will and concrete support for the AU-United Nations
partnership in order for that relationship to reach its
full potential.

I want to commend the efforts of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, the African Union
Commission and the United Nations Office to the
African Union for their efforts in developing and
implementing the partnership. The current momentum
needs to be seized and built upon. That entails looking
at concrete options for more flexible, predictable and
sustainable funding of AU peace operations, including
access to assessed United Nations contributions. I bring
back a sense of urgency in resolving this issue - not
least in order to safeguard the security gains that have
been made in Somalia thanks to the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia.

The women and peace and security agenda remains
a Vital area of partnership. The recent launch of the
African Women Leaders' Network represents a positive
step. We hope that the use ofjoint United Nations-AU
visits to raise awareness on gender can be used more
frequently, and we welcome the joint visits to Nigeria
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in July. We
also support looking into joint field visits of the two
Councils, as was suggested during our trip.

Finally, we welcome the positive developments
with regard to United Nations-AU cooperation on
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law in peace support operations. We
would welcome more attention to that issue in the next
report of the Secretary-General.
