The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I would like to thank the United States delegation
for having prepared resolution 2209 (2015), on the use
of chlorine gas as a weapon of war in the conflict in
Syria. France co-sponsored and voted in favor of this
important resolution for several reasons. First of all, a
year and a half after the adoption resolution 2118 (2013),
the Security Council could not remain silent in the face
of the horror and the unacceptable character of the
attacks using chemical weapons that have continued in
Syria in 2014. Today's resolution therefore sends a very
strong and clear message against the use of chemical
toxins as a weapon of war in Syria, by any party.

The various investigations of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that
have confirmed that chlorine gas has been used as a
weapon of war in Syria, along with troubling details
on the systematic presence of helicopters during these
attacks, are profoundly worrisome. We know that only
the Al-Assad regime has such capacities. It is indeed a
tragic irony that it is just as the removal and destruction
of almost all of the chemical weapons stockpiles having
been declared by Syria is being completed that a toxic
material not specifically banned by the Convention on
Chemical Weapons has been used against the civilian
population.

Secondly, through resolution 2209 (2015), the
Security Council supports the important work under way
in The Hague by OPCW experts aiming to shed light on
the allegations on the use of chemical toxic substances
in Syria. However, the allegations are continuing and
we should maintain a high level of vigilance to events
in Syria and urge the Syrian authorities to cooperate
fully with the inquiry.

Finally, we hope that the adoption of resolution
2209 (2015) by the Security Council will send a clear
message of deterrence on the ground to all the parties
to the Syrian conflict. The Security Council cannot
and will not stand idly by in the face of violations
of resolution 2118 (2013). It commits through this
resolution to taking the necessary steps under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations against any
party that continues to violate this ban and to continue
to seek to bring to Justice all those responsible for such
crimes. As we commemorate the hundredth anniversary
of the tragic battle of Ypres, where my country, Europe
and the world discovered the horror of chemical war,
we have a duty to reassert that never again shall such
weapons be used.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative the Russian Federation has
requested take the floor to make a further statement.

