Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by welcoming President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
to the Security Council. His participation and statement
in the meeting today underscore the commitment that
the leadership of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) has shown towards the stabilization of the
situation in Somalia. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga for his insightful briefing.

Clearly, the political process in Somalia has
entered a decisive phase towards ending the transition
in August. Against this backdrop, today's debate should
help the Council to take stock of the progress made so
far in the implementation of the road map, identify the
challenges, and decide on the ways and means to
address those challenges.

During the past year, significant progress has
been made by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the TFG and allied forces in the security
sector. Though Al-Shabaab has carried out some
spectacular terrorist attacks, security gains have by and
large been sustained in Mogadishu. This has facilitated
the revival of economic activities. The relocation of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
Mogadishu in January this year was an important
milestone in this regard. Security forces, led by
AMISOM. and assisted by Kenyan and Ethiopian troops,
have also recovered several areas from Al-Shabaab in
southern and central Somalia. In this connection,
strengthening AMISOM. with more predictable and
sustainable resources, in accordance with resolution
2036 (2012), should facilitate further gains against
Al-Shabaab.

Al-Shabaab, however, remains a potent force and,
with its recent affiliation with Al-Qaida continues to
pose a serious threat to peace and security in Somalia
and the larger region. The recent attacks in Mogadishu
and southern Somalia confirm its capability. It is
therefore necessary to expedite stabilization and
reconciliation in the liberated areas and to restrict
sources of Al-Shabaab's revenue and weapons. All
parties should strictly implement the ban on the trade
in charcoal, in accordance with resolution 2036 (2012).
We have noted that the TFG has set up district security
committees as part of its outreach efforts in the liberated
areas. We think that adoption of a national security and
stabilization plan will facilitate stabilization and
reconciliation in these areas and should be expedited.

Given the fragile security situation, our continued
support to AMISOM. remains critical, in addition to the
capacity-building of Somali security forces. We have
noted the progress made towards the full deployment
of AMISOM's mandated strength and its deployment
plans. We commend the troop-contributing countries
for their commitments in that regard and we hope that
the Council will further expand its support for AMISOM
in accordance with the recommendations of the African
Union (AU). India, on its part, made an uncaveated
contribution of $2 million in 2011 to the AU and
United Nations Trust Funds for AMISOM, and will
make another contribution of $1 million this year.

The gains on the security front need to be
matched by the progress on the political track. We hope
that the Transitional Federal Institutions and other
Somali stakeholders will fully cooperate and
implement the decisions of the first and second
Garoowe Consultative Constitutional Conferences in a
time-bound manner. In that regard, we have taken note
of efforts that are being made in Mogadishu and the
regions and hope that those efforts are as broad-based
as possible to ensure inclusivity in the process by
taking into consideration the traditional social structure
and accommodating existing regional authorities into
the federal system.
The problem of piracy and hostage-taking off the
coast of Somalia remains a matter of serious concern
for India. In spite of counter-piracy measures, the
number of attempted pirate attacks increased by 65 per
cent in 2011. Pirates are currently holding 16 ships and
nearly 300 hostages. We would therefore like to
reiterate the need for the international community to
adopt a comprehensive counter-piracy strategy that
also addresses the inhuman conditions in which pirates
hold hostages.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, as we
approach the end of transition in Somalia, the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, should remain vigilant of forces that have the
potential to undermine the process. The international
community should also remain engaged with Somali
stakeholders and provide assistance in political,
security and humanitarian spheres, as required by the
post-transition Somali authorities. As noted by the
Secretary General, the investment of the international
community will be fundamental to the long-term
recovery and development of Somalia. In that regard,
we welcome the conference scheduled to be held in
Istanbul later this month and hope that it will build on
the gains of the London Conference held in February.

India, for its part, will continue to partner with all
stakeholders for the stabilization of the situation in
Somalia. India will also continue to extend its support
for the capacity-building of Somali national institutions
through human resources development. We recently
increased the number of scholarships for Somali
students and experts. We will also continue our
cooperation in the information technology sector in
Somalia.

We hope that, with our collective efforts, the
people of Somalia will be able to turn a new page in
their history in August and achieve sustainable peace
and enduring stability in the country.

