Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): At the
outset, I wish to offer my Government's condolences
for yesterday's earthquake in the Turkish city of Van.
Our thoughts are with the victims and their families.
My Government stands ready to support the
Government of Turkey in any way that it can.

I wish also to express my Government's sincere
condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and its
people following the passing of His Royal Highness
Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud.

This is a moment of huge opportunity for the
people of the Middle East to build more open, free and
prosperous societies. Yesterday, Tunisians cast their
votes in the first ever democratic elections to appoint
an Assembly to draft the country's new constitution. At
the same time, the new Libyan authorities declared
liberation from 42 years of ruthless dictatorship. For
Tunisia, Libya and, indeed, Egypt, the road ahead will
be difficult, but the change under way in those
countries, as well as more broadly in the region, has
shown that demands for political and economic
freedom will spread more widely and by themselves,
not because Western nations advocate them, but
because they are the natural aspirations of people
everywhere. We shall continue to work in partnership
with those forging a new future for their countries.

The courage and determination of the Tunisian,
Libya and Egyptian peoples and the changes taking
place in their nations serve both as an inspiration to the
rest of region and a warning to the dictatorships that
continue to brutally crush the legitimate aspirations of
their peoples. The lesson of the last nine months has
been that regimes that use violence to oppress their
peoples instead of responding to their legitimate
demands will not survive. We are therefore deeply
disappointed that, owing to the use of the veto by two
members, the Security Council was incapable earlier
this month of appropriately censuring the Syrian
regime, which continues to kill, brutalize and torture
its people at the same rate that it has been doing for the
past seven months.

There is no sign of the reforms that Assad has
been promising, nor any remorse for the tactics that
have been used by the regime, which may amount to
crimes against humanity. It is a worrying state of
affairs when Iran's leadership, a regime that has itself
crushed the rights of the people, is able to voice a
greater sense of condemnation than this Council. It is
time that members of the Security Council assume their
responsibilities and take the strong collective action
that is required if there is to be any hope of deterring
the Syrian regime from its violent course.

In contrast, we are pleased at the unanimous
adoption on 21 October of resolution 2014 (2011) on
Yemen. President Saleh must now heed the calls of the
Council and the wider international community. He
must cease the bloodshed and the human rights
violations and immediately sign the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative that will set into motion a transition
of power.

The changes taking place across the Middle East
are bringing into sharp focus the unfulfilled aspirations
of the Palestinian people. They must realize their goal
of an independent, viable State of Palestine, just as
others in the region are demanding, and in some cases
securing, their legitimate rights. At this critical and
sensitive juncture for the region and the Middle East
peace process, progress in securing a democratic
peaceful State of Palestine living side by side with
Israel in peace and security is urgent and essential.

Speaking on behalf of the United Kingdom, as a
friend of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, I wish to
make three points. First, the Quartet statement of
23 September set out a time frame for negotiations to
be concluded over the coming 12 months on the basis
of the well-known parameters - two States, based on
the 1967 borders, with mutually agreed land swaps;
security arrangements that protect Palestinian
sovereignty whilst also providing sufficient
reassurance to Israel; Jerusalem as the capital of both
States; and a just, fair and agreed solution for refugees.
It is time now for both parties to fully commit to direct
negotiations within this framework and to make the
bold compromises required to realize the goal we all
want to see. We fully support the efforts of the Quartet
envoys to restart talks, including through the important
meetings with the parties in Jerusalem on 26 October.

Secondly, settlement activity must stop. We
condemn the recent Israeli decisions to expand
construction in the settlements of Mordot Gilo and
Givat Hamatos. If implemented, those constructions
would further erode the viability of a future Palestinian
State. The proposed constructions in Givat Hamatos
would cut the geographic contiguity between East
Jerusalem and Bethlehem.

Settlement construction, including in East
Jerusalem, is an obstacle to peace and erodes the space
for meaningful negotiations on final status issues,
including the status of Jerusalem. It undermines trust
and is illegal under international law. It should stop.
The Israeli Government should abandon its
construction plans, and the time has come for the
Israeli Government to stop merely talking about its
readiness to resume negotiations and instead take the
action necessary to inspire the confidence that will
bring about meaningful negotiations.

Thirdly, we welcome the release of Israeli soldier
Gilad Shalit. His long captivity and the lack of access
by the Red Cross were unjustifiable. There must now
be a sustainable and complete end to violence
emanating from Gaza. There must also be an easing of
restrictions on the flow of goods and personnel in and
out of Gaza. The status quo only breeds resentment,
radicalism and violence. An improved Gazan economy
is both essential to the people of Gaza and in Israel's
long-term security interests.

There is no time to waste in making progress
towards peace. Without it, history demonstrates that the
most likely outcome is backsliding towards violence.
The leaders of both sides must demonstrate the
leadership required to ensure the outcome that both
their peoples want.

