Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Allow me to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts. What the terrorist attacks we
are witnessing all too frequently in various parts of the
world indicate is that terrorism and violent extremism
are indeed a common peace and security threat to all
of us, and they require our common and collective
response.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend the
Secretary-General for the initiative that he has taken
to mobilize international action in countering terrorism
and violent extremism, and I wish to join others
in expressing appreciation to him for his briefing
this morning.

There is no lack of formal commitment to the
fight against terrorism because we all profess to be
so committed. What has been seriously lacking is, of
course, coordinated and effective action at all levels.
And yet, the nature of the threat we face has evolved
and expanded over the past decade. Terrorists groups
and their affiliates have established better coordination
among themselves than we Member States have
managed to do. They have also become much more
adept in effectively utilizing the Internet and social
media to spread their extremist ideology and recruit
foreign fighters. The issue of foreign fighters has a long
history and there were times when countries such as
mine had difficulty being understood when we called
for vigilance.

It is impossible to counter the growing threat posed
by these terrorists and extremists without forging
practical cooperation and coordination, including
in the sharing of intelligence, the enhancement of
border security, the establishment of mechanisms for
cooperation and the exchange of valuable experiences
between and among our Member States. Nevertheless,
we have to admit that the hypocrisy and double standard
manifest in our approach so far has been undermining
our efforts to respond to the threat posed by terrorism
in an effective, coherent and coordinated manner.

I am glad that the concept note (S/2016/306, annex)
has rightly recognized this challenge and I cannot
agree more on the need to avoid these shortcomings
if we really want to achieve a tangible impact on
the ground. What all this means is that we should
thoroughly reflect on our counter-terrorism efforts, and
I hope that the review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in June will shed more light on the challenges
encountered in its implementation and make appropriate
recommendations on the way forward.

Finally, let me reiterate Ethiopia's strong
commitment to combating the scourge of terrorism and
its firm determination to forge effective regional and
international cooperation in this regard. Ethiopia finds
itselfin one ofthe most volatile regions ofAfrica, which is
facing increasing levels of terrorism and radicalization.
The situation has been further compounded recently by
the impact of the Yemeni conflict and some Al-Shabaab
elements pledging allegiance to the Islamic State.

This has made it absolutely necessary for us
to have effective mechanisms for joint security
cooperation, and that is why States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have
agreed to establish a regional security cooperation
framework and a platform for regular security dialogue
and coordination to address common security threats
and challenges. It is only through such cooperation and
coordination that our counter-terrorism efforts will
have a meaningful impact, and we believe the United
Nations could contribute a lot by supporting these
regional mechanisms and building their capacity.

Let me conclude my remarks by expressing hope
that we will move from rhetoric to action in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. This is indeed
what the situation demands, and we should all rise up
to the challenge.

