Mr. Sumaida'ie (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to commend your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Brazil,
for his able stewardship last month.

I am pleased to present once again the Iraqi
Government's view of the events of the past quarter,
complementing the other reports that have been
presented quarterly before this Council. The purpose of
this open briefing is to review the events of the past
three months, but today, perhaps I might be allowed to
take a somewhat longer view. Given recent
developments, it is particularly appropriate to take
stock of the road we Iraqis have traversed.

We have just marked the two-year anniversary of
the fall of the previous regime in Iraq. Prior to 2003,
Iraq was still ruled by a brutal tyrant, whose regime
seemed permanently entrenched. It assumed and
maintained power against the will of the people of Iraq
over a period of 35 years. Iraqis suffered depredations
that are inconceivable to a rational mind and certainly
above my power to describe. That suffering has been
communicated by short words and phrases, such as
Halabja, Anfal, mass graves, each one encapsulating
horrendous suffering and injustice. Our political and
legal institutions were in tatters, and an entire nation
was traumatized, brutalized and reduced to being an
extension of a single man. Iraq had sunk into darkness
and despair.

After the fall of the tyrant and the pillars of his
regime, the institutions of Government began slowly to
be rehabilitated and re-established by Iraqis. First came
the formation of the Governing Council, followed
closely by the appointment of the first set of ministers.
In concluding the 15 November Agreement, the Iraqi
Governing Council undertook to craft a fundamental
law to establish the principles upon which the new
Iraqi State is to be founded and to yield authority to a
sovereign Government. Iraqis met that obligation, and
the Governing Council voluntarily relinquished power
and dissolved itself as the Iraqi Interim Government
reasserted Iraq's sovereignty. The Interim Government
committed itself to extinguishing its own mandate by
holding elections by 31 January 2005. Once again,
Iraqis met the deadline they set for themselves and
elections were held on time, despite difficulties and
dangers in much of the country. The Interim
Government has since tendered its resignation, and
Iraqis are set for the second peaceful and orderly
transfer of power in 10 months.

Since the elections, the political process has
continued to unfold in Iraq. The results of the elections
and the two-thirds rule stipulated by the transitional
law required the prevailing parties to engage in
political accommodation to form a new national unity
Government. The Presidency Council has now been
elected and the Prime Minister named. That
consultative process, debate and accommodation have,
perhaps, never occurred in Iraq's history. The incoming
Iraqi Transitional Government will soon start the
process of preparing to write a permanent constitution
and complete the building of fully legitimate
institutions of State. We expect to conclude the process
by the end of the year, at which time elections will be
held for the first Government operating under a
permanent constitution. It has truly been a remarkable
two years.

The journey has not been easy, nor would it have
been possible without outside help. We faced and still
face the vicious reaction of determined and well-
resourced foes bent on derailing our project, but now
that Iraqis have had their first taste of freedom they
will not be denied it. Notwithstanding the challenges
we have faced, we have fulfilled every undertaking we
made to ourselves and others.

We have also taken, and are about to undertake,
steps to be re-integrated into the world system. We
expect, for instance, to seek membership of the World
Trade Organization in the coming year. Our relations
with our neighbours have on the whole been
normalized and are improving. The new Iraq wants to
become a source of stability and an engine for growth
in the region, and harbours no hostile intent against
anyone. We look forward to the establishment of
friendly and cooperative relations with our neighbours
as we address regional issues of significance to all.

Iraq's relations with countries outside the region
have also evolved favourably. Many countries that
expressed reservations about the decision to remove
the previous regime by military force have risen to the
challenge of assisting us in our efforts to rebuild. Most
significantly, I must recall the decision taken in the
Paris Club to forgive 80 per cent of the debts
accumulated by Iraq's previous rulers. Many countries
have offered a wide array of assistance, financial and
otherwise.

As Iraq advances on the road to freedom and
normality against the implacable though weakening
resistance of terrorists and other forces of reaction, and
as it reintegrates itself into the community of nations,
two factors remain vital.

First, the continued resolute support of the
international community is absolutely essential, and
that support, I am pleased to say, has been
forthcoming. We are grateful for all the support and
good will that we have received from many countries
and from the United Nations.

Secondly and equally importantly, we need now
to be relieved from the shackles and burdens placed
upon Iraq during the previous regime in order to
contain it. Those onerous obligations were intended to
keep the old rogue regime in check, and limiting the
harm it did to its people and to the world at large. The
new Iraq, however, far from needing to be restrained,
needs to be encouraged and supported. It needs to be
allowed to bandage its wounds and to rebuild in peace.
It is now time for the Security Council to revisit its
pre-April 2003 resolutions on Iraq and to dismantle the
relevant legal, bureaucratic and other structures that
have outlived their relevance. In that respect, time is an
important factor. We must not be kept waiting month
after month and year after year to do what everyone
knows will have to be done eventually. Iraq is a
fledgling democracy committed to the rule of law, both
internationally and domestically. As such, it has the
legitimate right to expect to be treated like any other
Member State.

I wish to acknowledge the considerable assistance
we have received from the United Nations on many
fronts and, in particular, to commend the energetic
efforts of Ambassador Ashraf Qazi, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. His energy,
his dedication and his sympathy with the legitimate
aspirations and ambitions of our people have earned
him the trust of many. His valuable contribution
represents the best that the United Nations can offer in
post-conflict situations.

In situations where the United Nations has been
entrusted with the management of Iraqi funds, it is very
much in the interest of the United Nations to be open
and transparent and to recall at all times that its
obligations with respect to such funds are fiduciary. We
expect to have full access to information on all Iraqi
accounts. That way, we will be able to assure our
people that their interests have been safeguarded, and
to proceed, with the Council's help, to close all
outstanding files in an orderly fashion.

By the time the Council meets again to consider
the next report of the Secretary-General on Iraq, we
will have moved further forward towards progress and
freedom. In this arduous but exhilarating journey, we
want the Council to accompany us, with its collective
will, encouraging us, supporting us and removing
obstacles from our path. For without that, one difficult
journey would be not merely difficult but close to
impossible.

