Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Let me
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and to tell you that we are
very much looking forward to working with you during this
very important month.

I also ask the German delegation to convey our best
wishes to Ambassador Graf zu Rantzau for his fine work
and to wish him good luck.

It is now 275 days - three-quarters of a year - since
we extended limited sanctions relief to the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) for its stated
commitment to seal its border with Bosnia and to sever
official contacts with Pale. In that time, the Mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia -
whose continued dedication and effectiveness we
salute - has reported some improvement in the
effectiveness of the border closure and in cooperation by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities. These
reports, however, have also continued to point out a
number of shortcomings in Belgrade's willingness fully to
implement its decision to isolate the Bosnian Serbs. It is
those shortcomings that made my Government unwilling
to accept an extension of 100 days and to insist on 75
days.

It should be recalled that the goal of extending
limited sanctions relief to Belgrade is to increase the
pressure on the Pale Serbs to accept a settlement of their
conflict with the Government of Bosnia based on the
Contact Group plan. My Government continues to believe
that an effectively enforced closure of the border between
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the territory now
controlled by the Bosnian Serbs would help achieve that
goal.

But this Council will have to remain vigilant if the
limited suspension of sanctions is to achieve its purpose
and thereby remain justified. Therefore, my Government
is disturbed by indications of increasing military
cooperation between the Belgrade authorities and the Pale
Serbs. Specifically, there are indications that the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
rounding up draft-age Bosnian Serb males and returning
them to Bosnia, providing financial assistance and
equipment to the Bosnian Serb army, and cooperating
with Bosnian Serb air defence systems.

If these reports about assistance to the Bosnian Serbs
are accurate, they would violate Belgrade's commitment
to isolate Pale. Taken together, they raise serious doubts
which, if not adequately clarified by Belgrade, would
seriously weaken the case for continuing the limited
suspension of sanctions. In our view, such violations
would undermine the Council's key objective of
persuading the Pale Serbs that there is no reasonable
alternative to a negotiated solution. They would also
weaken our joint efforts to limit and contain the conflict
in advance of a negotiated solution.

I also want to add a note of growing concern over
reports of increased military support by Belgrade for the
Croatian Serbs.

Between now and 18 September my Government
will continue to pay close attention to these and other
issues related to Belgrade's commitment to implement the

 

border closure. We hope that the Mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY),
within its own resources and employing resources that
might be made available, will do the same.

