Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me to begin by
thanking you for having convened this meeting and
offering us the opportunity to participate in the
deliberations of the Security Council today to discuss
developments in the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian issue, and assess the
repercussions of Israel's invasion of the Gaza Strip and
its continued aggression against Lebanon.

In the absence of a clear response by the Security
Council to the Israeli acts of aggression and escalation
of the situation in Lebanon and Gaza, and in view of
the regional and international consequences related to
this issue, as well as the Security Council's failure to
act decisively vis-a-vis that situation - Israel
continues its aggression against the Lebanese and
Palestinian peoples. Israel is deliberately destroying
the infrastructure of Lebanon and Gaza, in order to
impose the fait accompli policy and achieve objectives
and interests that are broader than what Israel claims to
be the goal of its military campaign - the release of
the Israeli soldiers. The goal is actually to destroy
Lebanon and Gaza and impose the logic of force in the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

Despite the good offices and the positive
proposals of the Secretary-General and his team, as
well as other international parties, to find a solution to
the conflict, Israel continues with a stark, defiant
attitude, to reject the repeated appeals of the
international community, target civilians, destroy vital
services and infrastructure and impose collective
punishment on the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples
while holding them under siege. Moreover, it denies
international relief organizations access to the sick and
wounded, as well as to the hundreds of thousands of
displaced and disaster-stricken families. The report
submitted today by Mr. Egeland stresses the need to
provide access to humanitarian assistance in Lebanon
in order to avoid an imminent humanitarian crisis.

Therefore, we urge the Security Council to adopt
a resolution calling for a comprehensive and immediate
ceasefire and a halt to all military operations, to pave
the way for negotiations and diplomatic consultations.
Israel's destruction of Lebanon will have grave
repercussions in the region that will not serve any
interests but only exacerbate extremism and lead to a
further deterioration of the situation. We believe that
Israel may have agendas and objectives that exceed
those it claims to have.

It is clear that the current situation is a tragic
reflection of the failure and total collapse of the peace
process and relevant committees aimed at finding a
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Against the backdrop of this grave and
deteriorating situation, the Council of Ministers of the
League of Arab States met on 15 July 2006 to address
the situation. It condemned the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon and decided to call upon the
international community, and, particularly, the Security
Council, to assume its responsibilities and act
immediately in order to call on Israel to put a complete
stop to its military operations. In addition, it urged all
parties to respect the principles and provisions of
international law and international humanitarian law,
implement the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 on
the protection of civilians in time of war, de-escalate
the situation, put an end to the spiral of violence, and
seek a settlement through dialogue and negotiation.
The Council of Ministers stressed the fact that the
continuation of the current situation poses a grave
threat to regional and international peace and security.
Therefore, it is imperative that a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict be
achieved, in accordance with the terms of reference of
the peace process and the relevant United Nations
resolutions - given the fact that occupation is the root
cause of all the violence and tension in the region.

The Council of Ministers of the League of Arab
States reiterated the Arab position, as expressed in the
Arab peace initiative of the fourteenth Arab League
Summit, held in Beirut in 2002, and decided to call
upon the Security Council to convene a high-level
meeting to consider the Arab-Israeli dispute in an
innovative and comprehensive manner, given the
halting of the political process and the failure of all
other efforts to resume the peace process. It entrusted
the presidency of the Council, the Chairmanship of the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Secretary-General with
the coordination of efforts for that purpose.

The Middle East stands at a historic crossroads
today. Thus it is incumbent upon the Security Council
to fully assume its responsibilities and discharge its
mandate to address the issue of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, with a view to preserving the Council's
credibility and enabling us to achieve fair,
comprehensive and lasting solutions, and be able to
implement them, in such a way to ensure lasting peace
and security in the region.

