Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June and for your wise leadership during your tenure.
We would also like express our wish that the host
country win the World Cup in a few days' time. I would
also like to acknowledge and welcome the presence
of Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.

On Tuesday, 26 June we heard the sad news that
Lieutenant Commander Ashraf Siddiqui, a Bangladeshi
peacekeeping officer protecting a humanitarian
convoy in Yei area, had been killed. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to express our
heartfelt condolences to the family of the officer, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh and the
United Nations family at large. The Government of the
Republic of South Sudan will cooperate with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan to see to it that those
who committed this crime are identified and brought
to account.

Last month, the Security Council adopted resolution
2418 (2018), which, at the time, we thought unwise and
premature because the peace negotiations led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
were in progress and that peace process should be given
every chance to succeed. We stated last month that
there was light at the end of the peace tunnel.

Today we are happy to report that the light is much
brighter than it was last month. We are delighted to
report to the Security Council that there was positive
news from Khartoum yesterday, namely, that the
warring parties - not a just bilateral arrangement
between Salva Kiir and Rick Machar, but all the
warring parties in South Sudan - had signed a peace
declaration in which they have all pledged to work
together to bring peace to the people of South Sudan.
While the document signed is a framework for peace,
we are hopeful and very optimistic that a final peace
agreement will be concluded in the very near future.
At this juncture, I would like to announce that, in the
next few hours, President Salva Kiir will decree a
comprehensive ceasefire all over South Sudan.

In the meantime, we would like to appeal to the
Council and, through it, to other international actors
and entities concerned with the situation in South
Sudan to give the IGAD peace process currently and
earnestly under way in Khartoum their full support.
The Security Council must be seen as fully supporting
the peace process for South Sudan, not just eager to
dole out blame and punishment whenever there is a
setback in the process of peacemaking.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the IGAD
leaders and the members of the Security Council for
going the extra mile to give peace a chance in South
Sudan. Their patience and perseverance will soon be
duly rewarded by an agreement that will be acceptable
and implementable.

