The President: Members of the Security Council will
recall that the date and agenda for this meeting were agreed
upon by members of the Council in its prior consultations.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Africa

Report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa (S/1998/318)

Invitation to His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore,
President of Burkina Faso and current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I request the
Chief of Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Blaise
Compaore, President of Burkina Faso and current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Blaise Compaore, President of Burkina Faso and
current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, was escorted to a seat at the Council table.

Invitation to Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity


The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I invite
His Excellency Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, took a seat at the Council table.

Representation by and welcome to Foreign Ministers


The President: I am pleased to acknowledge that, at
this meeting of the Security Council, Bahrain, Brazil,
China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon, the Gambia, Japan,
Kenya, Portugal, Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America are represented by their Ministers for Foreign
Affairs. I welcome their presence at the Council table.
I should also like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of other Ministers for Foreign Affairs in the
Council Chamber today. Their presence is an affirmation
of the importance of the subject matter to be addressed at
this meeting. The spirit of cooperation demonstrated by
all those present here, which has made this meeting
possible, is greatly appreciated by all of us.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is today holding its second
ministerial meeting on Africa. Members of the Security
Council have before them document S/1998/318, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, which was submitted
pursuant to the request of the Council at its first
ministerial meeting on Africa.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/876, which contains the
text of a letter dated 18 September 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Austria to the United
Nations, transmitting a letter of the same date from the
Vice-Chancellor and Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Austria, in his capacity as President of the Council of
Ministers of the European Union, addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

I should like to recall that the Secretary-General
formally presented his report at a meeting of the Council
on 16 April 1998, at which numerous delegations spoke.
At its 3886th meeting, held on 28 May 1998, the Council
adopted resolution 1170 (1998), by which, inter alia, it
decided to establish an ad hoc Working Group to review
all the recommendations in the report related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. The
ad hoc Working Group was asked to submit specific
proposals for concrete action for consideration by the
Council by September 1998.

I should like to recall also that on the basis of
recommendations made by the ad hoc working group, the
Security Council recently adopted two resolutions and a
presidential statement. Resolution 1196 (1998) of 16
September 1998 concerned strengthening the effectiveness
of arms embargoes imposed by the Council; resolution
 

1197 (1998) of 18 September 1998 dealt with strengthening
the coordination between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the areas of conflict
prevention and maintenance of peace; and presidential
statement S/PRST/ 1998/28 of 16 September 1998 dealt with
strengthening Africa's peacekeeping capacity.

It is my privilege to call now on the President of
Burkina Faso and current Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity. His Excellency, Mr. Blaise Compaore. I
welcome His Excellency and invite him to make his
statement.


