Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jean
Arnault for his important and detailed briefing today.
We warmly welcome Foreign Minister Trujillo Garcia
and the other Colombian guests.

The historic peace accord that ended half a century
of fighting in Colombia brings us together today. The
United States welcomes the unanimous renewal of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia last
month. We join the Security Council in our enthusiastic
support for peace in Colombia, but the success of the
peace process is, in turn, dependent upon other areas
of progress. Nevertheless, we believe that this is truly a
time of rebirth for Colombia. President Duque Marquez
said it well when he introduced himself to the General
Assembly a couple of weeks ago (see A/73/PV.8),
identifying himself as a member of a new generation of
Colombians committed to uniting his country around
common goals.
The continuing success of peace in Colombia is
caught up in the achievement of those goals. One of the
goals mentioned by the President is economic and social
growth based on democratic institutions - and, indeed,
the Colombian Government is extending governance,
justice and economic opportunity throughout the
country. It is providing security infrastructure and
public services to the rural regions that were most
affected by the war. That work is critical to the
peace process.

Expanding equal justice in Colombia means
ensuring accountability for serious crimes committed
during the years of armed conflict. It also means doing
more to investigate and prosecute the killing of human
rights defenders. We are encouraged by the early
efforts of President Duque Marquez to protect social
leaders and others who are vulnerable in Colombia
today. The literal silencing of those important voices
undermines the peace process. Another goal that will
help determine the success of peace in Colombia is
doubling down on the fight against drug trafficking and
the criminality and corruption that flow from it. The
news in that regard is good, but progress is incomplete.

When President Trump put out the Global Call to
Action on the World Drug Problem, during a high-level
week event, Colombia was one of the first countries
to answer the Call. Our Colombian friends stand
shoulder to shoulder with us in fighting the epidemic
of addiction that afflicts us all, and we understand
what a difficult fight it is. The United States is working
to reduce the demand for illicit drugs. Colombia is
working hard to reduce the supply, but they must do
more. Cocaine production surged last year, a trend that
must be reversed if we are going to achieve our joint
goal of cutting coca cultivation and cocaine production
in Colombia in half by the end of 2023.

Finally, the future ofthe peace process in Colombia
depends on that country's ability to continue to deal
with the massive influx of desperate Venezuelans.
In his speech to the General Assembly, President
Duque Marquez said the crisis was a question of self-
determination of the Venezuelan people. We could not
agree more. The Maduro Moros regime has robbed
the Venezuelan people of control over their lives
and their future. The people of Colombia and their
Government have responded with great generosity
to the approximately 1 million Venezuelans who
seek food, medicine and shelter in their country. The
United States has helped with nearly $55 million in
humanitarian aid, but real relief for both the Venezuelan
and the Colombian peoples will not come until after the
Maduro regime. That day cannot come soon enough.

The United States stands with President Duque
Marquez and all Colombians as they seek to build
a more peaceful future. Colombia has emerged as a
strong democratic partner for the United States, a
partner in building a freer and more democratic western
hemisphere. We are excited to witness the birth of a new
Colombia, and we are committed to helping it achieve a
peaceful and prosperous future.

