Mrs. Adeng (South Sudan): We would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Our delegation is ready to cooperate and
work with you during your tenure. We would also like
to welcome and recognize the presence of the Under-
Secretary-General for Peace Operations and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa.

We wish also to welcome the members of the
Council back from their recent field visit. That visit
to South Sudan shows their support for the people of
South Sudan and for the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution ofthe Conflict in South Sudan, to whose full
implementation my Government is fully committed.

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan, we would like to welcome the briefing
and the recommendations of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Abyei. We want to urge that the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
presence extend beyond the current areas of operations
in the Abyei box in order to allow for the return of the
civilian population to their homes. That objective will
not be achieved if the troop ceiling is reduced.

We are hopeful that the new Government of
the Republic of the Sudan, which has expressed its
commitment to resolving any outstanding issues related
to the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement, will work
together with my Government to finalize the status of
Abyei. We also welcome the Secretary-General's call for
the appointment of a civilian deputy head of Mission,
which would enhance the ongoing efforts of the local
chiefs and the people of Abyei towards reconciliation
and development.

My Government would like to bring to the attention
of the Council, in regard to visa issuance, the fact that
article 34 of the two status-of-forces agreements signed
by the United Nations - with the Sudan on 1 October
2012 and with South Sudan on 12 November 2012,
respectively - states that either South Sudan or the
Sudan can issue visas. My Government stands ready
to facilitate and issue entry visas for those who need to
enter Abyei.

We would also like to recognize the tireless efforts
of the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, the United Nations, the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel and the Sudan in the
positive collaboration they have demonstrated for the
support of UNISFA and the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) mandates.
We assure the Council that our Government and the
Government ofthe Sudan have been fully engaged in the
implementation of the mandate. For our Government,
Abyei has been a priority and we appreciate the efforts
and contributions of the regional and international

communities. We strongly believe that the continuous
support for UNISFA and the JBVMM. will allow for
more progress to be achieved on the benchmarks.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan is
committed to working closely with the Security Council
to implement this mandate.

The meeting rose at11.30 mm.
