Mr. Qazi: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for affording me this opportunity to present
the report of the Secretary-General, along with my
comments, and to listen to each member's words of
wisdom and support. We have taken serious note of
them. These comments will be of enormous help to the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
as it goes about fulfilling its mandate in the next phase
of the situation in Iraq.

As has been noted, Iraq has been going through a
very critical period. What is most critical about it is the
level of violence, which is making it difficult for the
initiatives that have been announced, launched and,
indeed, implemented, to achieve success and the goals
they have set for themselves. Therefore, one of the
very first priorities must be to find a way to reduce the
debilitating level of violence, which has resulted in a
human cost that is among the very worst to be found in
the world.

I would like in particular to thank the
Government of Iraq for all its support for the UNAMI
mission, without which we could not have possibly
operated in Iraq. I would also like to thank the
Multinational Force-Iraq for all the support they have
provided us. I take note of the fact that a lot is expected
from UNAMI in promoting national dialogue and
helping the International Compact to move forward
towards the achievement of its objectives. We shall
certainly do that to the best of our abilities.

There was a comment about the need for us to
have sufficient staff in order to fulfil all those
obligations to Iraq. In that connection, I might just
mention that, while we are gratified to note the
appreciation and the call for an even more active role
by UNAMI, we have to take into account the security
situation, which has not been improving. Indeed, it has
been deteriorating. Currently the number of our people
in Iraq has actually decreased, rather than increased.
We hope the security environment will improve to
allow us to put an end to the decrease in our
personnel - because we have to put the security of our
personnel above all considerations. If we work together
collectively in support of the efforts of the Government
22

of Iraq, I am sure that those efforts will result in
reversing the deteriorating trend in the security
situation, enabling UNAMI to deploy the number of
people necessary in Iraq itself to assist the Government
of Iraq in the achievement of its objectives. When our
people are relocated, they are not relocated out of
UNAMI; they are relocated in the vicinity, in particular
in Amman and in Kuwait. Thus, we are always there,
and will be there, to assist the Government and the
people of Iraq. But, because of the security situation, at
times it is not possible to have the numbers that we
would like to have.

With those words, once again, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, and all the other members of
the Security Council, as well as the Government of
Iraq and Ambassador Al Bayati for his kind words of
encouragement.

