Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation actively supported
Serbia's initiative to convene an urgent Security
Council meeting on the deteriorating situation in
Kosovo. It has come about because of the explosion in
northern Mitrovica on 2 July during a peaceful
demonstration by local Serbs. As is well known, owing
to that terrorist act, one person died and 11 were
injured. We condemn that crime with the utmost
resolve. We extend our condolences to the bereaved
families and friends of the deceased and to all those
who were injured.

In his statement before the Security Council
today, the President of Serbia, Mr. Tadie, spelled out

10-43 669
Serbia's accurate assessment of the events and the
situation in the province as a whole. We share that
View. As recently as May this year, during the
Council's discussion (see S/PV6314) of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/169) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
we drew the international community's attention to the
fact that the situation in the province was far from
stable and that it was of particular concern.

Above all, our concerns were related to the
Pristina authorities' insistence on somehow
implementing the so-called strategy for northern
Kosovo in brazen breach of resolution 1244 (1999),
which remains the main international legal platform for
a Kosovo settlement. Like our Serbian colleagues, we
warned that any unilateral steps in that direction could
undermine the very complex national situation in the
province in the midst of growing discontent with the
socio-economic situation and a high level of crime and
corruption. Regrettably, such warnings were not
heeded.

On 2 July, despite the protest of the local Serbian
population, the Kosovo authorities, with the support of
some representatives of the international community,
including the Special Representative of the European
Union and the so-called international civilian
representative, Mr. F eith, there was an attempt to open
a branch of the provisional institutions of Kosovo in
northern Mitrovica. That was an act of brazen
provocation aimed at undermining stability in the areas
of the province populated by Serbs.

We have received information that plans are
under way for other similar destabilizing steps. All
necessary measures should be taken to prevent such
provocation. We believe that those who should be
brought to justice must include not only the
perpetrators of those barbaric crimes, but also those
who in fact provoked them through their obstinate and
cavalier actions seeking to promote the strategy for
northern Kosovo. We are awaiting information from
the head of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) on how the investigation will be
conducted.

The incident in northern Mitrovica clearly
showed that, despite the Security Council's mandate
concerning the reconfiguration of UNMIK, EULEX is
increasingly departing from the status-neutral
principle, which undermines the standing of that
international presence. We again call on EULEX to
comply with the principles of resolution 1244 (1999)
and to act in a balanced way, mindful of the interests of
both sides, under the central coordinating role of
UNMIK. We call on Brussels to monitor that closely
and to rectify the actions of its representative,
Mr. Feith. It is high time for EULEX and UNMIK, as
well as those capitals that have influence over Pristina,
to engage in serious clarifications with the Pristina
authorities. Today's provocative statement by
Mr. Hyseni merely reaffirms and confirms that need.

The complex and often explosive situation in
Kosovo confirms the need to preserve the Security
Council's leading role in a Kosovo settlement. We
consider any deviation from that principle
unacceptable lest the fragile situation in the province
descend into widespread destabilization. The events to
which I have referred underscore the need for
continued political efforts to help develop a legally
correct and fair resolution of the Kosovo issue in line
with resolution 1244 (1999). Russia will continue to
work towards that.

