Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting her
eighth report on Libya to the Security Council. We
welcome the ongoing investigation by the Office of the
Prosecutor, and its efforts aimed at implementing the
memorandum of understanding concluded last year. We
stress the importance of the Office of the Prosecutor
continuing to exercise its jurisdiction over all alleged
war crimes, crimes against humanity, or any acts of
genocide committed within the territory of Libya since
15 February 2011. We take good note of the Prosecutor's
message that the overall environment is clearly not
conducive to closing the impunity gap. It is a worrying
development indeed.

The International Criminal Court is an important
partner for the Libyan authorities in ensuring
accountability. We recall that, in accordance with the
decision of the Appeals Chamber taken on 21 May,
Libya has an obligation to surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the ICC. The obligation to surrender to
the Court individuals against whom arrest warrants
have been issued must be respected.

In relation to the case of Abdullah Al-Senussi,
against whom the proceedings before the ICC have been
concluded, we hope that, in spite of the deteriorating
security situation in the country, domestic proceedings
in Libya can be assured, and we will be listening
carefully to what the Court has to say on that matter.

We would welcome further regular contacts
between the Court and the Libyan authorities on
cooperation and burden-sharing. It is essential to assist
the Libyan authorities in strengthening the country's
judicial system and capacity-building and in ensuring
the impartiality of the judiciary. Strengthening the
rule of law and improving the criminal justice are core
elements of rebuilding State authority in the midst of
the current turmoil.

Lithuania remains concerned about the pervasive
human rights abuses and criminality, including
assassinations, abductions of civilians, torture and
murder, as well as attacks on civilian infrastructure.
The report presented by the Prosecutor notes that
while fewer than 7,000 detainees have been held by
the judicial police, only 10 per cent of them have been
tried. Furthermore, a significant number of detainees,
including civilians, remain in the hands of various
armed groups, outside the control or influence of
the State. As stressed by the Secretary-General this
past September, the handover of all detainees to the
effective control of the State is a prerequisite for the
establishment of the rule of law in the country.

Let me also briefly refer to the situation of the
Tawerghans. We take note of the fact that the parliament
in Tobruk discussed the return of internally displaced
persons, including Tawerghan refugees, and that a
relevant draft decree is in the making, as indicated in
the report. We underline that investigations into related
abuses must continue, and express our support for the
work of the Office of Prosecutor in that respect. We
encourage the Government of Libya to take further
measures to address the situation. Ensuring the safe
return and protection of the Tawerghans should be seen
as an important element of national reconciliation.

Lithuania believes that the Security Council should
continue to monitor the events and situations referred
to the Court, as well as the potential obstacles that
the Court may encounter in conducting its work. We
reaffirm our call for an investigation of all crimes
against humanity and serious violations of human
rights that may have been committed in Libya.
Finding democratic means to resolve past tensions
and injustices is essential for the country's transition
and recovery. The international community should also
extend all necessary assistance to Libyan authorities
for strengthening rule of law and justice institutions
which are essential for the country to return to a path
of reconciliation and for restoring trust and cohesion of
the complex social fabric in the country.

I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support and commitment to the International Criminal
Court and the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
and to reiterate that the United Nations has to ensure
proper resources for the investigations in the situations
referred to the Court by the Security Council. Making
referrals without considering how they are financed
could jeopardize the effectiveness of the activities of
the Office of the Prosecutor and the Court's long-term
viability.

