Mr. Tan (Singapore): The world's attention is
focused on the issue of Iraq. The development and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction pose a
grave threat to international peace and security. The
threat of military action against Iraq draws nearer each
day, and with it the potential for far-reaching
humanitarian consequences.

During Singapore's term on the Security Council,
we consistently took the position that the Iraqi
authorities must comply with all Security Council
resolutions. This is an important point of principle.
International law must be observed. We supported the
consensus in the Security Council on resolution 1441
(2002) in the hope that international law and order
would be preserved. The unanimous adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002) by the Security Council sent a
clear message to Iraq to comply with its disarmament
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions or face the consequences. On critical
element of those resolutions is the full disarmament of
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.

From the regular update the Security Council has
received from the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
it is clear that some progress has been made in the
inspections, particularly in terms of cooperation on
process and procedure. That is a positive sign. But at
this stage, it is also clear that "some progress" is not
enough. Based on the most recent updates delivered
last Friday by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, it has
become more urgent and imperative for Iraq to
demonstrate without delay that it is complying fully
with resolution 1441 (2002) and that it is extending its
full and active cooperation to the United Nations
weapons inspectors.

We stand at a crossroads on this issue. If the
Government of Iraq refuses to meet its disarmament
obligations, it will in all likelihood lead to an outcome
that we would all prefer to avoid. We therefore urge
Iraq to do all that is necessary to fully comply with
resolution 1441 (2002), including ridding itself of all
its weapons of mass destruction. Otherwise, as
Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in his address at the
College of William and Mary on 8 February 2003,

"the Council will have to make [a] grim choice,
based on the findings of the inspectors - a
choice more complex, and perhaps more fateful,
than the one that faced it in 1990. And when that
time comes, the Council must face up to its
responsibilities". (Press release SG/SM/8600)

But also, we must not lose sight of the human
dimension of the Iraq issue. Singapore attaches great
importance to improving the humanitarian situation of
the people of Iraq. They have already suffered greatly
over the past decade as a result of the Iraqi
Government's non-compliance with Council
resolutions, which attracted Security Council sanctions.
We urge the Iraqi Government to make the right
decision.

