Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to join preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. You can be assured of the cooperation of my
delegation. I also wish to commend Ambassador Heller
of Mexico and the entire Mexican delegation for the
excellent leadership shown during their presidency in
April. In addition, we welcome Ms. Landgren and
thank her for her briefing and for the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and a
group of countries on behalf of Nepal.

We are closely following the situation in Nepal.
We hope that recent events will not undermine the
peace process in that country, especially since the
peace process has been going through a critical phase
requiring the cooperation of all parties to achieve
reconciliation, unification and the implementation of
the peace agreements and all other agreements reached,
so that the people of Nepal can enjoy peace, stability
and prosperity.

We were pleased to note Nepal's progress in the
peace process, particularly with regard to a constitution
and the future of the Nepal Army and the Maoist army.
We hope that that progress will continue, so that the
people of Nepal can draft a constitution guaranteeing
the rights of all citizens, including those who have
traditionally been marginalized. That would lend
momentum to the peace process and help to bring
about lasting stability in the country.

We welcome the resumption of the work of the
Special Committee aimed at the reintegration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel, as well as the
steps taken by the Government to demobilize them at
various cantonment sites. We hope that those efforts
will result in demobilization, especially for minors, and
will help to bring about successful rehabilitation and
reintegration within the desired time frame.

Despite all that has been accomplished, we
remain concerned at the differences existing among the
various political parties with regard to the current
crisis, the murders, the abductions and the security
problems, as well as the refusal of a number of groups
to participate in dialogue. Thus, we call on all political
parties and other relevant actors to work together to
establish a dialogue and respect State institutions,
striving to achieve compliance with the peace
agreements, to strengthen the rule of law, to improve
the security situation and to address impunity, taking
into account the needs of marginalized groups. We

believe that those are the prerequisites for the peace
process.

Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General that,
if the current political challenges continue, they will
fray relations among various groups, to the detriment
of compliance with the peace agreements and the peace
process. Therefore, all political groups must work
together to coordinate the peace process and to
re-establish trust and a spirit of national unity and
common policies.

