Mr. Rendon Barnica (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Honduras has always unequivocally condemned
all acts, methods and practices of terrorism - wherever
and by whomever they are committed. We have invariably
deplored the loss of human life resulting from such acts,
and we have supported all efforts consistent with
international law to combat the threat that international
terrorism represents to security and peaceful relations
between States.

The international community's necessary struggle
against such acts is based on its shared repudiation of the
criminal activity of terrorists and the absolute
unacceptability of their justification. The repeated
commission of these reprehensible acts makes it ever
more clear that there is an urgent need for States to
cooperate with each other at all levels and for the United
Nations to foster such cooperation in order to prevent and
eradicate them.

The assassination attempt against the President of the
Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa on 26 June 1995
is a clear example of an intolerable practice that, spilling
across borders, has damaged the sovereignty and stability
not only of Ethiopia but also of the African region as a
whole. This act also serves as a reminder to States of
their obligation to adopt measures to combat and
eliminate terrorism by abstaining from instigating,
causing, promoting or permitting the conception of
terrorist acts in their territory and of their duty to refuse
to admit perpetrators as asylum-seekers or refugees so
that justice can take its course and the guilty can be
punished. Impunity for these acts is absolutely
unacceptable, especially when there are agreed
mechanisms between the States involved, such as
extradition, to facilitate the trying and conviction of those
responsible.

My delegation believes that one of the ways to
combat and eliminate such acts and secure conviction of
the guilty is cooperation between States and international
organizations. In this regard, we believe that Ethiopia's
efforts to resolve the problem of extraditing the suspects
in the attack against the President of the Arab Republic of
Egypt, both bilaterally and regionally, are commendable.
My delegation believes that in the battle waged
against terrorism, international agreements are not enough.
It is also necessary for States to show a resolute will to
fight and a clear determination to remove the obstacles
impeding cooperation between them. Therefore, my
delegation feels it is appropriate for this Council to urge
the Government of Sudan to comply with the requests
contained in the statements of the Central Organ of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, issued
on 11 September and 19 December 1995. In this regard,
we have taken note of the statement of the representative
of Sudan, in which he stated that his Government was
prepared to cooperate with the OAU and the States
concerned.

 

Having said this, my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before the Council.

