I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings. The Niger welcomes the latest developments relating to the work of the fourth session of the Constitutional Committee, at which representatives of the Government and of the Syrian Negotiation Commission met with a view to agreeing on the agenda for the work of the Committee. Although their positions have hardly changed, the atmosphere at that latest meeting gives room for hope that there will be some movement very soon, and we welcome the announcement that the fifth session will be held from 25 to 29 January 2021, as agreed with the co-Chairs, to focus on the fundamental texts. In that regard, my delegation calls on the parties to actively engage in good faith in those long-awaited negotiations, which inspire such great hope, and to show openness so as to advance the political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The openness we are calling for from the parties would encompass the urgent need for progress on political prisoners and the disappeared. Indeed, it is high time to free arbitrarily detained persons and to share information with their families. We also reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's call for an immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria with a view to facilitating the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is now spreading with alarming virulence in the country. As winter aggravates the already difficult living conditions in overcrowded refugee and internally displaced person camps, so that social distancing remains impossible, we fear the spread of COVID-19 will increase exponentially. In terms of the humanitarian situation just described by Mr. Lowcock, Syria must be able to access badly needed basic commodities and essential medical supplies, the lack of which is exacerbating the already extreme situation, with greater and more tragic consequences for the innocent Syrian population than for the authorities in power. We therefore once again call for the lifting of the sanctions imposed on Syria so that it may tackle the humanitarian situation. In conclusion, the Niger once again recognizes the right of the Syrian Government to combat the dangers of terrorist groups, especially given the attempts by those criminal groups to take advantage of the prevailing health crisis to regroup and resume hostilities, as evidenced by increased attacks in north-west and south- east Syria.
