Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Greece, Mr. Petros Molyviatis, and his delegation for
having proposed an open debate on the timely and
important problem of humanitarian crises.

There is no doubt that the humanitarian crises
confronting the Security Council are largely due to the
proliferation of civil conflicts following the cold war.
In fact, since the cold war, more than 33 internal civil
conflicts have erupted or have been re-activated and
have cost over 5 million lives and have left almost 17
million people as refugees or displaced persons.

We believe that the Council has three main
functions when facing humanitarian crises. The first is
to prevent a humanitarian crisis, and that means
preventing the conflict. The second is to respond to a
crisis. That response includes diplomatic measures,
enforcement action, sanctions and, in extreme cases,
military intervention. The third function is to direct
reconciliation and the reconstruction of the collapsed
country. That means modernization of the economy and
building or rebuilding democracy.

One lesson that we must learn from humanitarian
crises is that, as we have said, they are the result of
civil conflicts caused mainly by social exclusion.
Therefore it is no coincidence that most humanitarian
crises now under consideration in the Security Council
occur in countries where personal income has not
grown more that 2 per cent over the last thirty years.
Those countries - which in addition have an explosive
population growth, especially the urban population,
and export only primary products and are
technologically very backward - have been left out of
the global flows of trade, investment and technological
innovation. Therefore they have become indebted in
order to buy the progress that they are not able to
produce. In other words, they are becoming almost
unviable national economies.

We must understand that behind the conflicts that
cause humanitarian crises are those unviable national
economies, which produce a great deal of social
exclusion, which in turn exacerbates political
instability and ethnic and religious conflict to the point
of turning the country into a failed State. In the face of
this reality, it is thus necessary to introduce in the
Security Council measures that strengthen its
preventive capacities so that it can identify, in
coordination with the Economic and Social Council
and the Bretton Woods organizations, which countries
are at risk of becoming failed States. The Council should
be a kind of early-warning mechanism so that countries
experiencing political instability can immediately be
given economic and financial intensive care by the
international community so that humanitarian crises
can be averted. That intensive care would focus above
all on debt forgiveness and on a massive increase in
assistance in order to meet the most urgent social
demands and thus provide political stability.

To improve the Security Council's response to
humanitarian crises, we believe that its five permanent
members could arrive at a gentlemen's agreement not
to use the veto when it is a question of crises involving
crimes against humanity such as massive violations of
human rights, ethnic cleansing and genocide. That
gentlemen's agreement would function in cases
presented by the Secretary-General and supported by
reports from the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Secretariat's Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. The idea is that the permanent
members of the Council would cooperate in the face of
a request from the international community by not
using the veto against Council operations that could
save thousands of lives.

Nonetheless, such a gentlemen's agreement will
serve no point if the Security Council's peacekeeping
or peace enforcement capacity is weakened because of
a lack of recruitment or because of shortcomings on the
part of recruited troops and if the United Nations
forces are not deployed quickly.

For all those reasons the Security Council, in
order to improve its response capacity, should endorse
the recommendations of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change that ask those
countries that have greater military capacity to make
available to the United Nations autonomous reserve
battalions with a high level of preparation and self-
sufficiency. They might be as large as a brigade in size.

As for reconciliation and the reconstruction of
failed States, the Security Council should ensure that
reconstruction does not simply rebuild an unviable
economy based on the export of primary commodities
and with low technological capacity. If it does, the
State concerned will not be able to count on sufficient
resources for a growing population and social
exclusion will continue to recreate instability, civil
conflict and humanitarian crises.
The most important aspect of the Council's role
in reconstruction and reconciliation, however, is the
establishment of democratic institutionality, which
should begin at the local level. The first essential task
is the establishment of local democratic Governments.
Democracy must rise from the local to the regional
level and from the regional to the national. Thus, it will
emanate from the people to the local and State
authorities.

It can be said today that humanitarian work has
virtually become the principal activity of the United
Nations. That may seem quite normal to us here, but it
is seen very differently by analysts of international
relations. In fact, as they see it, the expansion of the
United Nations humanitarian activity is very clear
evidence that the Security Council is failing to fulfil its
primary mandate to maintain international peace and
security because it is unable to prevent and to resolve
conflicts. They believe that the United Nations is
expanding its humanitarian work for want of a better
alternative.

That does not mean, of course, that we ought not
address humanitarian crises, but the magnitude and
recurrence of tragic humanitarian situations cannot and
must not cause us to forget that the principal work of
the United Nations and the Security Council is
effectively to prevent and adequately to respond to
civil conflicts in order to avoid humanitarian crises.

In conclusion, I cannot fail to note that, if we do
not adopt measures to strengthen the functions of the
Security Council in preventing and responding to
conflicts and humanitarian crises, and if we merely
convene open debates, we run the risk of repeating the
events of 1453, when, in Byzantium, the doctors of the
faith were debating the issue of whether angels have a
gender at the very moment when the enemy army was
at the gates of Constantinople. Our discussions here must
be neither an impediment to action nor unproductive
exercises or dialogues; rather, they must constitute a brief
reflection, since we have a great deal to do in Darfur.

