Mr. Laurin (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We thank the Under-
Secretary-General for his impassioned statement and
for the updated aide-memoire and the road map.

Mr. Egeland rightly focused on the need for more
consistent and deliberate action. Indeed, if the Council
is serious about protecting civilians, it must translate
rhetorical commitments to international humanitarian
law, human rights and refugee law into action at the
country level. The Council must continue to be
proactive in monitoring the implementation of its
protection-related commitments in the countries under
its consideration. It should draw on lessons and be
prepared to rethink its strategic approaches when they
are at cross-purposes with its responsibilities for
protecting civilians. The Council should deliver.

Canada fully endorses the lO-point platform laid
out by the Emergency Relief Coordinator and the use
of the aide-memoire and the road map to buttress those
efforts. Given the current international environment,
those tools are essential in helping guide the efforts of
the Council and other actors.

A good framework exists. Over the past four
years, the Council has developed a comprehensive
agenda to strengthen civilian protection. Resolutions
1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000) - along with those on
conflict prevention, women, peace and security,
children and armed conflict, the safety of humanitarian
workers, impunity, and the exploitation of natural
resources - lay out a clear set of mutually reinforcing
Council commitments.

And yet, while the resolutions may provide a
framework for Council action, they equally provide a
benchmark for holding the Council accountable for
inaction. Canada welcomes the inclusion of protection
components in recent peace operations, including those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Cote
d'Ivoire. We recall that, when peace operations are
given such responsibilities, they must also be given
unambiguous mandates and adequate financial and
human resources to facilitate civilian protection. For
example, we also know that the effective presence of
child-protection advisers in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) has had a positive impact on the
lives of children. We know from other peace operations
that the inclusion of gender advisers is essential in
order to adequately address the specific protection
needs of women and girls.

The Council must continue to devote attention to
civilian protection issues in its field missions, as was
recently the case with the missions to Afghanistan and
West Africa. As part of those missions, the Council
should seek to meet directly and regularly with affected
populations in order to better understand their
perspective. Council missions are indispensable
opportunities to urge parties to a conflict to permit safe
and unimpeded access by aid workers to those in need,
to ensure that there is no impunity for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity and to ensure that
United Nations missions are vigilant in their efforts to
protect civilians from gender-based violence and to
implement strategies to meet the needs of displaced
populations.

We applaud the Council's efforts to develop
more-targeted sanctions regimes that, among other
things, focus on arms embargoes, the seizure of assets,
bans on travel and restricting the trade in certain
commodities. For those efforts to produce results, the
potential humanitarian impact of sanctions on civilian
populations should be more clearly identified so that it
can be minimized.

(spoke in English)

The Council has recognized that the illicit
exploitation of natural resources perpetuates violent
conflicts that undermine the safety and well-being of
civilians. The recent report of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo demonstrates once again the risks that natural
resources can pose to sustainable peace. The Council
must continue to undertake effective monitoring,
including the use of panels of experts. It must also
continue to encourage full participation in international
mechanisms to address illicit exploitation, such as the
Kimberly Process on conflict diamonds.

Finally, the Council's efforts to protect civilians
must not simply be restorative, but preventative as
well. In that respect, the Council should show greater
willingness to draw on United Nations human rights
mechanisms for early warning, promote preventative
deployment and diplomatic initiatives and urge
adherence to, and respect for, international legal
instruments. It must also be vigilant. In the immediate
post-conflict environment, even where a peace
agreement exists, civilians may remain at risk.

To succeed, this initiative must be viewed as a
shared commitment. It requires more than the Council.
Let me affirm Canada's strong support for this agenda.
We have been pleased to work with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and others on a
variety of related initiatives this past year, and we will
continue to do so. But all Member States have a role to
play. Regional organizations have a role to play. Non-
governmental actors, including the private sector, have
a role to play. Above all, parties to armed conflicts
must take responsibility and must be held accountable
for protecting war-affected populations. The
International Criminal Court (ICC) is a key instrument
in ensuring that accountability. We again urge the
Council to do all it can to support the ICC in this
vitally important work.

To the Secretariat and United Nations agencies I
say: be bold. Previous resolutions have given you the
authority to bring to the attention of Member States
circumstances that demand their attention so that
civilians may be protected. In your reporting, provide
the Council and other appropriate bodies with concrete
advice and recommendations based on monitoring of
the situation so that they have guidance. Help the field
use the road map that you have developed.

Let us be clear on the consequences of not
fulfilling our objectives. The suffering of individual
civilians caught up in various conflict zones will
persist - whether those civilians are displaced,
separated from their families, missing or exploited. The
protection of civilians is not a North-South issue. It
should not be marginalized because it is sensitive, or
not implemented because of a lack oftools.

In closing, Canada joins other delegations in
calling on the Council to adopt the revised aide-
memoire and to endorse the road map as a
complementary tool for effective follow-up on the
protection of civilians agenda. We have a genuine
chance to ensure that civilian survival is higher than at
any time in the past. We must seize the opportunity.

