Mr. Jokonya (Zimbabwe): Like all my
colleagues who spoke before me, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. The
timing of today's meeting, coming as it does
immediately after the release of the report of the
Security Council mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo from 4 to 8 May 2000, could not be more
than perfect, and Zimbabwe regards it a privilege to
pronounce itself over an issue of such import before
the Council.

My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
the sentiments expressed by President Robert Mugabe
during his meeting with the Security Council team in
Harare on 6 May. President Mugabe informed the
Council team that now was the opportune moment for
the United Nations to deploy peacekeepers in order to
prevent any further unravelling of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. According to
President Mugabe, the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should not be
contingent upon progress or the lack of it in the inter-
Congolese dialogue, since the conflict remained
uppermost in people's minds.

Besides associating himself with the United
Nations position on the issue of the illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, President Mugabe also submitted that
Zimbabwe would extend its full cooperation to any
expert panel created by the Security Council, including
in the areas of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
under its control.
On a sad note, while the Security Council mission
was visiting the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Corporal Foday Sankoh's Revolutionary United Front
rebels flagrantly violated the ceasefire in Sierra Leone
and in the process rekindled assertions by afro-
pessimists that Africa was a lost cause and that the
continent could not be saved. Some so-called experts
on Africa have feverishly taken to the media to remind
the West of Somalia and the "Mogadishu syndrome" -
a perception that Africa's civil wars are somewhat
different and more intractable than those in other
regions. I do not need to remind the Council that this
perception is not borne out by experience. The
impression I got from reading the New York tabloids
was: "Let Africa drift in her own sea of misery and
hopelessness. It is of no concern to us."

Sadly, the media, which should be playing a very
important role in awakening the conscience of the
international community in order to draw its attention
to needy peoples, last week wittingly helped foster a
misperception that Africa is a continent caught in an
unbreakable downward spiral. In spite of this negative
publicity by the media about events in Africa, my
delegation is glad that Article 24 of the United Nations
Charter clearly states that the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
rests with the Security Council, and not with the media.
This Article arose from the fact that the international
community, having seen two world wars, is not
prepared to descend again to that depth of human loss,
genocide and holocaust. It is in conformity with this
role that the United Nations has tried over the years of
its existence to intervene in all areas of conflict that
clearly go beyond the ability of the parties involved to
solve. The aim is to save lives.

Let me observe that some regions are more
fortunate than others in their history and geography.
My own continent of Africa has witnessed more United
Nations peacekeeping failures than any other. Some of
us are still haunted by vivid memories of occasions
when the United Nations found it easier to walk away
from Africa in its hour of need than to mandate and
equip a mission that could have saved the day for us
all. On more numerous occasions, the United Nations
has found excuses to drag its feet while African
situations have flared up. Even in the cases where
African subregional arrangements have stepped in to
contain situations in anticipation of Security Council
assistance, the United Nations has stood aloof. The
peace opportunities in Sierra Leone and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, created by regional initiatives
through the Lome Agreement and the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, respectively, should not be allowed to
unravel.

Last year, repeated pleas by African leaders for a
robust Chapter VII peacekeeping mandate in Sierra
Leone were spurned and, in hindsight, it has become
clear that half-hearted efforts seriously undermine the
credibility of the United Nations and call into question
its commitment to peacekeeping, particularly in Africa.
The Sierra Leone case has demonstrated that all
successful United Nations operations depend on clear
and unambiguous mandates that equally provide the
resources to support the missions.

The heads of State of the States parties to the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement addressed the Security
Council, under the presidency of Richard Holbrooke of
the United States during the "month of Africa" in
January 2000, and affirmed their unwavering
commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. It is
now almost half a year since the heads of State
convened in New York and yet the deployment of
MONUC has not yet been effected. This is a cause of
concern to those suffering civilians in the areas of
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
report before us is a reiteration of the belligerents'
commitment to the peace process. We therefore urge
the Security Council immediately to deploy MONUC
observers, who will be able to identify and verify
parties that break the ceasefire, thereby enabling the
Security Council to impose costs on those bent on
pursuing the military option.

Unlike Somalia, where the United Nations
encountered a collapsed State with no Government to
account for its morally reprehensible behaviour, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo we have six States
that are Members of the United Nations. Surely the
United Nations has means and ways to discourage
wayward behaviour by its Member States. The allied
forces of the Southern African Development
Community are ready to withdraw from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in fulfilment of their Lusaka
ceasefire obligations and we hope that other signatories
of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement will oblige in like
manner. My delegation further implores the Security
Council to deploy a peacekeeping mission with a
robust Chapter VII mandate that will complete the
work of phase II of MONUC.

History has taught us that any enforcement action
requires the deployment of a force that is
overwhelming enough, both in numbers and in
capability, to force warring parties to accept terms laid
down in a peace agreement.

