I thank Under-Secretary Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings and for their joint visit to Abyei in February. We commend the activities of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) during this difficult period of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including its vital support for local peace and protection committees, as noted in the Secretary-General's report of 16 April (S/2020/308). The United States recognizes Ethiopia's leadership and welcomes the Ambassador today in support for UNISFA, as well as some positive steps that the Sudan and South Sudan have undertaken to address insecurity in Abyei, such as joint security monitoring. We welcome the Ambassador to the Sudan here today as well. However, despite those steps, the United States is concerned about the recent violence in Abyei, as was outlined. In January, attacks in the area of Kolom led to the killing of more than 30 civilians. In mid-April, there was an armed attack on Mabok village. This violence, the brunt of which has been borne by women and children, is unacceptable. Perhaps most troubling, though, is that it demonstrates the lack of political progress made by the Sudan and South Sudan in resolving outstanding border issues. The people of Abyei and those along the border between the Sudan and South Sudan deserve better. This violence should serve as a call to action for the Sudan and South Sudan. Their leaders should capitalize on the improving relationship and agree on the implementation of arrangements for security and the administration of Abyei. The Council has repeatedly mandated a reconfiguration of UNISFA to address current security dynamics. Today we call on the parties to remove the obstacles preventing UNISFA from realizing its mandate. Moving forward, the United States encourages senior United Nations officials to redouble their efforts with the parties and with the African Union to allow UNISFA's mandate to be fully implemented. Furthermore, we urge them to push for progress in establishing joint security and administrative arrangements. The participation of women is absolutely critical in these discussions. The United States remains committed to peace and security in Abyei and across the region, especially in these challenging times.
