Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation congratulates Peru on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April and assures it of our full support. We
also commend the Kingdom of the Netherlands on its
presidency for the month of March and on its outstanding
conduct of the work of the Security Council.

My delegation thanks the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his informative briefing on recent developments in
the Republic of Haiti, as well as on the activities of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

The establishment of MINUJUSTH on 16 October
2017 was an important part of the transition towards
a United Nations presence in Haiti that is not a
peacekeeping operations, as provided for by Council
resolution 2350 (2017). Echoing the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/241), my delegation welcomes the
political, security and socioeconomic progress made in
Haiti over the past year.

At the political level, my delegation appreciates
the efforts undertaken by the Haitian authorities to
strengthen the country's institutions, in particular
the judiciary and the Haitian National Police. It also
welcomes the measures aimed at strengthening the rule
of law and the promotion and defence of human rights.
My country remains convinced that these measures
will certainly contribute to Haiti's progress on the path
of development, as envisaged in the United Nations
Sustainable Development Framework 2017-2021. To
that end, it welcomes the visit made by Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, which reaffirmed the United Nations strategic
partnership with Haiti in the context of support for
the Haitian authorities in the area of sustaining peace
and peacebuilding.

Cote d'Ivoire is convinced that the presence of
MINUJUSTH is a real opportunity to consolidate the
achievements and support the efforts of the Haitian
Government to achieve the objectives of development
and stability, with a view to the bringing the current
peacekeeping operation to an end. In that regard, it
welcomes the visit of Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
to Haiti from 5 to 9 February, which gave her the
opportunity to discuss issues relating to the gradual
assumption of responsibility by the Haitian authorities
in the field ofjustice and the rule of law, with a view to
a successful withdrawal of the United Nations Mission.
In that connection, my delegation supports the decision
to establish in the near future, in collaboration with the
Haitian Government, a mechanism to monitor progress
in achieving the objectives of the crisis exit strategy,
with a timetable and agreed indicators.

On the security front, the progress made in
professionalizing the Haitian National Police must not
make us lose sight of the fact that the overall situation
in the country remains precarious. Cote d'Ivoire also
encourages the Haitian authorities to pursue their
efforts in the fight against corruption, in the protection
and promotion of women's rights, as well as in the
improvement of temporary detention procedures and
the living conditions of the prison population.

On the socioeconomic front, my country remains
concerned about the country's persistent vulnerability
and the deplorable living conditions of vulnerable
populations. In the light of the people's limited access
to drinking water and poor sanitation, my country calls
on the international community to support the work of
the Haitian authorities in order to promptly respond to
the expectations of the populations in need.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the progress made in the
fight against cholera and supports the new strategy
put in place by the Secretary-General to eradicate
this pandemic. In that regard, my country welcomes
the commitment of the United Nations, alongside the
Government and people of Haiti, to consolidating the
progress made and to find satisfactory responses to
ongoing challenges. We therefore urge the international
community to support the economic and social
development under way in Haiti.

In conclusion, my delegation commends the
work of the United Nations country team in Haiti and
MINUJUSTH, and encourages the Security Council to
provide them with the necessary means to ensure the
success of the Mission within the framework of the
renewal of the mandate of MINUJUSTH. I would also
like to reaffirm the readiness of my country - which,
thanks to the support of the United Nations, has emerged
from a decade of crisis - to contribute, alongside the
other members of the Security Council, to bolstering
stability, economic growth and social development
in Haiti.

