Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
Your presence is clear testimony to the importance you
and your country, Burkina Faso, attach to the need to
urgently address the threat to international peace and
security associated with drug trafficking. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his statement, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his briefing. I also
recognize the presence of Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

This thematic debate provides an opportunity for
the Security Council to comprehensively focus on drug
trafficking as a threat to international peace and
security. We have, in the past, addressed the issue of
drug trafficking with respect to regional and country-
specific situations. In particular, we have considered
the West African subregion, and countries such as
Afghanistan.

The dangers posed by transnational drug
trafficking are widely recognized. The World Drug
Report 2009, published by UNODC, highlights the
linkage between drug trafficking and crime, and the
dangers it poses to the security, stability and
development of many affected countries.

The fact that drug trafficking has serious
implications for security, health and other socio-
economic facets are well known. In a June 2009
meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which Uganda
chairs, the head of the United Nations Office for West
Africa, Ambassador Said Djinnit, highlighted the link
between the spread of drug trafficking in the subregion
and the risk of countries relapsing into conflict. That
meeting also noted that, if not addressed immediately
and effectively, the surge in drug trafficking in West
Africa could jeopardize democratic governance in the
region and lead to the expansion of criminal and
terrorist networks.

It is therefore critical that actions and responses
at the national, subregional and regional levels, and by
the United Nations system and the wider international
community, be comprehensive and well coordinated.
No country or region can manage on its own to control
drug trafficking and its associated threats. There is
need to take effective measures in countries where
drugs and precursors are produced, on trafficking
transit routes, and in drug destination countries. It is a
fact that as long as the demand for drugs exists,
especially in developed countries, drug trafficking
networks will continue targeting countries with weak
control measures and systems.

My delegation commends the role played by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Narcotics Control Board and other
relevant United Nations organs and agencies in
assisting Member States in the fight against drug
trafficking. We welcome the joint efforts by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office
for West Africa, the Department of Political Affairs and
INTERPOL in this endeavour.

It is encouraging that the World Drug Report
2009 shows a downward trend in the major drug
markets in the developed countries. But new data that
suggest an increase in the production and use of
synthetic drugs in the developing countries, including
in Africa, raises serious concerns.

My delegation requests the Secretary-General to
consider mainstreaming the issue of drug trafficking as
a factor in conflict prevention strategies and in overall
assessment, planning and peacekeeping support.

In conclusion, it is clear that drug trafficking is a
transnational and cross-cutting problem. I wish to
reiterate the need to ensure that actions and strategies
at the national, subregional and regional levels and by
the wider international community to combat drug
trafficking and organized crime are comprehensive and
well coordinated.

We thank the delegation of Burkina Faso for
preparing the presidential statement which we adopted
this morning.
