Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Mr. President, I
thank you for convening this important debate. I
congratulate and welcome new Assistant Secretary-
General and head of the Peacebuilding Support Office,
Ms. Jane Holl Lute, and assure her of my delegation's
full cooperation. I thank the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Yukio Takasu
of Japan, for his presence and his introduction of the
annual report of the Commission.

The 2005 World Summit emphasized the need for
a coordinated, coherent and integrated approach to
post-conflict peacebuilding and reconciliation with a
View to achieving lasting peace in the world. The new
United Nations peacebuilding architecture of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office has been
operationalized as an institutional mechanism to help
address the special needs of countries emerging from
conflict towards sustained economic recovery and
reconstruction.

We welcome the efforts undertaken by the
Peacebuilding Commission in implementing its
mandates and core functions stipulated in General
Assembly resolution 60/180 and Security Council
resolution 1645 (2005), especially in such areas as
enhancing interaction with United Nations agencies,
regional organizations and international financial
institutions; strengthening public awareness and
outreach activities; providing strategy and policy
guidance on peacebuilding; establishing monitoring
and tracking mechanisms for the Integrated
Peacebuilding Strategies; and organizing field missions
to countries under review.

As reported by the Secretary-General, the
Peacebuilding Fund has made laudable headway in
providing assistance to countries in the early stages of
post-conflict stabilization and in mobilizing more
sustainable aid resources, which is reflected by pledges
of over $269 million from 44 donors, as well as the
operation of 37 peacebuilding projects in ll countries.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the tangible
results achieved by Sierra Leone and Burundi, the first
two countries supported by the Peacebuilding
Commission, in the critical areas of preparing local
elections, promoting economic growth, rehabilitating
infrastructure, youth employment and empowerment,
the rule of law and public administration reform. The
recent establishment of country-specific configurations
for Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic, as
well as the consideration of Cote d'Ivoire's request for
placement on the Commission's agenda, can be also
highlighted.

Despite those achievements, my Delegation
shares the View that an evolving Peacebuilding
Commission will continue to face a wide array of
challenges. Protracted conflicts, the worsening global
economic imbalances, the food and energy crisis, the
shortage of natural resources, frequent disasters and
widespread epidemics have exerted negative impacts
on international collective efforts towards durable
peace and sustainable development. The Peacebuilding
Commission has the difficult task of improving its
working methods and provisional rules of procedure,
rationalizing its institutional relationship with other
United Nations bodies and non-United Nations entities
and with the Commission's configurations and
formulating a clear consensus on the concepts and
priorities of peacebuilding.

On another note, the Peacebuilding Fund has not
yet developed its full potential owing to lack of
substantial progress in resolving such strategic and
managerial issues as the criteria for selecting
beneficiary countries, timeframes for drafting and
approving projects, the financial and institutional
absorptive capability of local Governments, the
eligibility of countries for various emergency window
funding and the Fund's mobilizing force. Looking
forward to the planned 2010 review process of the
overall work of the Peacebuilding Commission, we
hope that valuable lessons, practices and synergies will
be further developed, thus helping not only to prevent
the concerned countries from relapsing into conflict,
but also to reinforce the early-warning capacity to
anticipate potential conflicts and to engage the
international community in addressing them.

As the Peacebuilding Commission enters its third
year of operation, much remains to be done to help the
Commission achieve more concrete results and truly
become one of the key international instruments in the

coordination of peacebuilding activities. Besides
identifying appropriate relationships with the organs
and bodies of the United Nations system, the
Commission should further strengthen its interaction
with the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council in joint efforts
towards better coordination, complementarity and
division of labour.

Enhanced interaction among various stakeholders
is of vital importance. The broad experience of the
United Nations system in conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping, humanitarian and election
assistance, reconstruction and sustainable development
must be fully exploited in conjunction with diverse
inputs from local Governments, the Bretton Woods
institutions, regional organizations and non-
governmental organizations so as to maximize impact
on the ground and avert the possible overlapping and
duplication of efforts.

The Commission should strengthen its role by
improving the integrated peacebuilding strategies and
formulating efficient tracking and monitoring
mechanisms with a view to fully reflecting the socio-
economic reconstruction and development priorities of
recipient countries, the comparative advantages and
practical commitments of international donors and
avoiding unnecessary burdens on national
Governments.

We recognize that the Commission may become
involved with various activities under different post-
conflict contexts, and that a comprehensive and
country-specific approach to peacebuilding is therefore
essential. My delegation believes that further
improvements in the development agenda, especially in
poverty reduction, education and training, rural and
agricultural rehabilitation, private sector reform and
capacity-building, will help address the root causes of
conflict, nurture socio-economic recovery and create a
framework for lasting peace and sustained
reconstruction. The Commission should also promote
national ownership and participation in all stages of its
work.

In the final analysis, the overarching goal of
peacebuilding is to enable the countries emerging from
conflict to build up autonomous capacity and domestic
resources towards self-sustained peace, security and
development, conditions in which the local people are
both the primary force and the biggest beneficiaries.
The supplementary role of international expertise and
assistance should be implemented with due respect for
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States and bearing in mind the specificities and
interests of the countries under consideration.

