The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Slovenia.

We are gravely concerned about the recent
resumption of large-scale fighting in Afghanistan, which
is again taking a high toll on the country and its people.
However, despite the immense suffering and destruction
caused during all the years of fighting, the parties still
seem determined to pursue the military option and are not
prepared to engage in a serious dialogue to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict.

The situation in Afghanistan has the potential to
escalate, with an alarming destabilizing effect on the
region as a whole. That threat includes both military and
non-military aspects, including drug trafficking and the
harbouring and training of terrorists.

The illusion of a quick military victory on one side
could lead to a protracted military and ethnic conflict. The
only way to resolve the situation in Afghanistan is to stop
the fighting, resume negotiations and work towards the
establishment of a broad-based Government and national
reconciliation.

The role of the international community, and of the
United Nations in particular, is important. In order to
make peacemaking efforts more effective, the United
Nations needs to offer a coherent approach to the
problem. For that to become possible, full cooperation by
the countries with influence in Afghanistan, especially
those neighbouring it, is crucial.

Full cooperation with the United Nations means, first
and foremost, that foreign military interference in
Afghanistan has to cease. Foreign interference in the form
of active political or military support, including foreign
military personnel, is one of the main obstacles to the
efforts for peace in Afghanistan. The appropriate solutions
should be found to curb the flow of arms and other
supplies to the warring factions.

 

Security conditions for United Nations and
humanitarian personnel have been deteriorating for some
time now and have finally resulted in the relocation of the
United Nations international staff from Afghanistan. We
strongly condemn the killing of an Italian national - the
Military Adviser to the United Nations Special Mission in
Kabul - and of the two Afghan staff members of the
World Food Programme and of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in Jalalabad. We
expect that a full investigation into these crimes will be
conducted.

We would like to express our deep concern at the fate
of the personnel of the Iranian Consulate-General in Mazar-
e-Sharif and of the other Iranian nationals who have been
missing since the Taliban captured the city. We call upon
the parties, in particular the Taliban, to respect their
diplomatic status and the provisions of the Vienna
Conventions and to secure their safe passage out of
Afghanistan.

We call upon the parties to respect humanitarian law
and human rights. We are particularly concerned at the
reports of ethnic and religious persecution, impediments to
the work of international humanitarian organizations and the
displacement of innocent civilians. We would like to
reiterate our concern at discrimination against girls and
women and urge the Taliban to recognize and protect their
rights in accordance with international human rights
standards.

We believe that this is an appropriate time for the
Security Council to make a firm pronouncement on the
situation in Afghanistan.

Slovenia co-sponsored the draft resolution submitted
for action today and shall vote in favour of it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1998/810) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1193 (1998).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.20 pm.

