Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Today's events are indeed regrettable. The Security
Council was once again prevented, because of the
twenty-eighth use of the veto by the United States on
the question of the occupied Palestinian territories. I
would say the Council was unable to assume its
responsibilities in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

What is even more regrettable is that this action
takes place amidst the very severe tension within the
Middle East, including the negative effects that will be
a consequence of the inability of the Council to adopt a
measure as happened today.

There is no doubt that millions of people will be
unable to understand what happened today and this
action will therefore not contribute to calming the
situation or be a push towards moderation or dialog in
the region. The Arabs have shown great flexibility in
the past few days in a serious attempt to adopt a
unanimous decision. Before today's action, we had
considered a presidential statement that naturally, we
had hoped to adopt by consensus. Again, the Arab side
did this because we fully understood that the way in
which the Council's work concluded was not in the
interests of any responsible party or any party that is
anxious to see peace prevail in the area. As the
representative of Algeria stated earlier, the draft
resolution, which has not been adopted, contained a
very clear condemnation of all terrorist attacks against
any civilians as well as all acts of violence and
destruction.

Regrettably, however, the super Power that voted
against the draft resolution made suggestions that were
impossible to accept. Of course, we would have liked
to have seen more countries voting in favour of the
draft resolution in the Council, but, once again,
proposals were made that we simply could not accept
for various reasons, including legal aspects that were
perfectly clear. Allow me to cite an example: there was
an attempt to broaden the definition of terrorist attacks
in a way that would not confine the definition to
attacks against civilians. That is indeed bizarre and
unacceptable, particularly in a case involving foreign
occupation.

All we hope for now is a clear stance in the near
future that will make Israel, the occupying Power,
understand that it cannot continue its illegal policies,
especially extrajudicial killings. This will require a
clear position, particularly - ifI may speak frankly -
from the United States of America. Very modestly and
humbly, we call upon the United States to reassess its
position on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We call
upon the United States to adopt more neutral, objective
and fair positions to enable it to assume its natural role
as the sponsor of the peace process and a member of
the Quartet, with a view to the implementation of the
road map and the establishment of peace based on the
principle of two States, Palestine and Israel.

We would like to express our deep appreciation to
Algeria, the Group of Arab States, the members of the
Non-Aligned Movement, the members of the Council
and, of course, all countries that voted in favour of the
draft resolution today. Our Palestinian people express
to all of them their thanks and deep appreciation.

