Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): First of
all, the Republic of Korea joins Rwanda and the
international community in commemorating the
twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide. The
reverberation of what happened 20 years ago is still
echoing in our thoughts and conscience. We thank you,
Madam President, for providing this timely opportunity
to remember and to build on the lessons of that tragic
event. Our appreciation also goes to Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson and Ambassador Colin Keating,
whose briefings help us to renew our commitment to
"never again".

Based on the lessons of the Rwanda genocide,
the United Nations and Member States have worked
together to prevent another terrible humanitarian
ordeal. We have made efforts to strengthen the
institutional capacities of the international community
to address grave crimes against humanity through
international and national criminal justice systems.
The establishment of the Human Rights Council is
significant in that it can play an important early-
warning role by maintaining vigilance over any grave
violations of human rights and crimes of mass atrocity.
Empowering various United Nations peacekeeping
missions throughout the world with a clearer mandate
to protect civilians is also an important step in the right
direction. The Secretary-General's calls, including the
Rights Up Front initiative and the open-gate policy,
have been playing a catalysing role to boost the moral
authority and operational reach of the United Nations.
However, there are still challenges to face before we
can claim that past lessons have been fully acted upon.

For one thing, there is work to be done to narrow
the gap between the desperation of people in dire
situations and the aspiration of the international
community to help them. Formulating an international
contingency plan that can be promptly invoked in a
serious humanitarian crisis may be one way to address
these challenges. Promoting regional cooperation and
partnerships with non-governmental organizations
in this field, such as the recent Brussels International
Conference on Genocide Prevention, is a path that
should be explored further.

How to deal with the culture of impunity is another
big challenge. In that regard, we appreciate the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
The international community needs to continue support
to the ICTR in order that it can conclude its work in
accordance with the completion strategy.

In a broader context, international cooperation to
bring all fugitives to justice should be strengthened.
We call for more support for the International Criminal
Court, the only permanent international criminal
justice mechanism.

The responsibility of States to protect their
own people should be given more attention, and the
discussions on the responsibility to protect should
produce more tangible results.

As we learned the hard way, successful efforts to
stop the most egregious humanitarian crimes require
our collective wisdom and close cooperation. We
shouldjoin forces and do everything we can so that our
commitment to "never again" does not slip into another
agonizing resignation of "again and again".

