Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Director General of the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) for their respective briefings.

Last Sunday marked the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the release of Casablanca, a classic of the silver
screen that I am sure the majority of the Council will
have seen. In one of its most famous scenes, Captain
Renault tries to shut down Rick's Cafe, claiming to be
shocked that gambling was happening on the premises.
The words have barely passed his lips when one of the
croupier's hands over a bag to the Captain containing
his winnings, who thanks him and gives the order to
shut the place down.

Setting aside the obvious differences, there is a
parallel here with the situation that we are seeing in
Libya, which is not the only country suffering the
phenomenon under discussion today. There have been
reports about the existence of a slave market in Libya
for months. The difference lies in the fact that what we
have seen in recent days is no movie but harsh reality.
What is most shameful is that there are despicable
people who profit from the misery and despair of
migrants.

In April in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7934),
Uruguay referred explicitly to an IOM. report on the
existence of that slave market and unequivocally
condemned that horrific state of affairs. Nonetheless,
until a video providing irrefutable proof of the IOM
report was made public, declarations of outrage and
repudiation of this absolutely abominable fact from the
major international authorities were conspicuous by
their absence.

We must admit that collectively we have lagged
in condemning this situation much earlier and taking
concrete steps in that regard. Today we still have
time to correct the mistake by cooperating on the
prompt investigation of those crimes by establishing
mechanisms that make possible accountability for
the perpetrators.

The inhumane treatment of migrants who use Libya
as a country of transit to reach Europe has been known
for years. Hundreds of thousands of sub-Saharan
migrants are subjected to degrading practices, such as
violence, torture, hunger, sexual abuse and even murder,
in acts that constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. To the extent possible, the Libyan authorities
have the obligation to detect and to dismantle those
trafficking networks. The United Nations, through
the appropriate coordination of its agencies and the
cooperation of regional organizations, must help the
Libyan authorities to fight against that scourge and
to protect migrants, in particular the most vulnerable
groups, such as women and children.

The recent adoption of resolution 2388 (2017)
reaffirms the importance ofthe fight against trafficking
in persons in conflict situations. Uruguay emphatically
condemns human trafficking in its broadest sense and
related crimes that seek to exploit an individual and to
take advantage of their person or their vulnerable state,
which entails disregarding the nature of an individual
as such and a substantial violation of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms.

In recent years, the proliferation of armed conflict
and the persecution of ethnic and religious minorities
have triggered a series of consequences, including the
unprecedented phenomenon of mass migration and
situations of refugees, internally displaced persons and
asylum seekers, which are precisely the contexts from
which the traffickers of human beings benefit, vilely
profiting from vulnerability and misfortune.

The trafficking in persons in situations of conflict
is a global problem, since it concerns not only the
countries of origin but also the countries of transit
and of destination of the victims, the countries in
which the criminal networks operate and the countries
through which the money from which those networks
profit goes. Combating trafficking in persons is
therefore the responsibility of the entire international
community. The work of States must focus not only
on the fight against trafficking in persons in situations
of conflict but also on ensuring the fundamental
rights of the victims by strengthening prevention and
protection mechanisms and measures. Those who
flee from conflict not only are displaced within the
political borders of their countries but also may seek
a better reality in other States. It is very serious that,
in addition to the psychological burden of migration
under extreme conditions and displacement towards
the unknown, migrants may remain at the mercy of
those criminal gangs.

As we prepare to begin the negotiations on a
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration,
Uruguay would like again to emphasize the principle of
the non-criminalization of irregular migration. Giving
migrants the necessary tools to develop in the countries
of transit and of destination makes them less vulnerable
to trafficking in persons. States must therefore promote
and protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of all migrants, regardless of their status.

To conclude, Uruguay echoes the appeal of the
Secretary-General to deal with migratory flows in a
comprehensive and humane way through international
cooperation that addresses the root causes of that
phenomenon, increases the opportunities for legal
migration and strengthens the fight against the
smugglers and traffickers of people, while protecting
the human rights of the victims.

