Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I should
like to join previous speakers in expressing our
felicitations to you, Sir, on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council and to congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry, on
the excellent way he conducted the work of the Council
last month. I also wish to thank you for having
convened this urgent Council meeting.

The Israeli violation of Lebanese territory and
airspace and the raid against civilian centres in Syria,
causing destruction and casualties, is a further random
act in the course of the incessant Israeli aggression
against Arab countries and the Palestinian people. It
clearly represents Israeli persistence in the pursuit of a
policy of State terrorism, which must be vigorously
condemned. No justification or pretext can be accepted
for such a policy of reckless recourse to armed
aggression, which represents a clear violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and the most basic
principles of international law.

This aggression represents a serious escalation at
a time when tension is running high in the region. The
raid further deteriorates the situation and threatens to
broaden the scope of violence. It is in line with the
policy of escalation that the Israeli regime has pursued
all along with a view to holding on to the Palestinian
and Arab lands it has continued to occupy for decades.
That is nothing but playing with fire in a region already
scarred by decades of aggression and occupation by
Israel.

My delegation rejects the baseless fabrication
against my country presented in the Council today. But
it is evident that no amount of slander, deception and
smear campaigns by Israel can cloud the obvious: that
the Sharon regime has engaged in a systematic
campaign of provocation and escalation, from
desecration of holy places to targeted murder of
Palestinian leaders, in order to obliterate any prospect
for peace.

However, this new adventure is all the more
ominous, because it clearly indicates the fact that
Israel, in its manoeuvring to continue its policy of
occupation through escalation and provocation, is
running out of options. It is attacking Arab countries in
the belief that that will enable it to get out of the
impasse it has created for itself. This new course of
action, if unchecked, will drag the entire region into a
downward spiral of violence, as it is designed to do.
The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran has
already condemned this act of aggression - which is
an integral part of the provocative and aggressive
Israeli policy - and expressed its full solidarity with
the Government and the people of Syria and the
Government and the people of Lebanon.

We call on the international community,
represented by this body, to impose restraints on the
Israeli regime, whose actions are a threat to peace and
stability in the Middle East. It is unfortunate that the
Security Council, bearing primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, has
thus far been prevented from shouldering its
responsibility with regard to the crisis in the Middle
East. There is no doubt that the impunity that Israel
enjoys emboldens it to perpetrate its policy of
aggression and occupation. Thus we urge the Council
to take decisive action this time on this new, alarming
aggression. This is especially necessary in the light of
further threats by Israel to launch more attacks on
Syria.

