Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for his briefing
and appreciate the efforts made by the Ambassador and
his team to promote the work of the Committee.

China has always attached importance to and taken
an active part in the Committee's work and hopes that
the Committee will continue to carry out its mandate
in a balanced and practical manner. China is of the
View that all parties have the obligation to implement
the Security Council's resolutions on sanctions against
Iran in an earnest, accurate and comprehensive manner.
However, the sanctions themselves are not the purpose
of the Security Council resolutions. The activities of the
Committee and the Security Council should all serve
the efforts aimed at reaching a negotiated solution to
Iran's nuclear issue.

China has taken note of the final report submitted
by the Panel of Experts and hopes that the Panel will
continue to carry out its activities in accordance with
to the mandate of the resolution and in an objective and
just manner. The Committee should properly address
each case on the basis of clear facts, verified evidence
and broad consultations.

At the meeting of foreign ministers in Lausanne
in April, the six parties and Iran agreed on the core
elements of a comprehensive agreement on the Iran
nuclear issue. That marked a major breakthrough
in the negotiations and constitutes a solid basis for
a comprehensive agreement. In the next stage, as
the deadline is fast approaching, all parties have
demonstrated strong political will to reach an early
comprehensive agreement through rigorous negotiations
on the text ofthe agreement. China hopes that all parties
will respect the results of the negotiations in Lausanne,
pay attention to and resolve in a reasonable way all
the legitimate concerns of all parties, avoid various
actions aimed at interfering with each other and be
decisive in making a timely political decision, so that
a comprehensive agreement can be reached according
to schedule.
An early comprehensive agreement on the Iran
nuclear issue will contribute to the international
non-proliferation regime and will also contribute to
peace and stability in the Middle East. As a major
party to the negotiations, China has always played a
constructive role in moving the negotiations forward
by taking a just and objective position. China will
continue to take an active part in the negotiations and
work tirelessly for a comprehensive long-term and
proper solution to the Iran nuclear issue.

