Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

We would first of all like to congratulate the
Republic of Korea on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and to express our appreciation
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of
the Republic of Korea for presiding over the open
debate this morning. We would also like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their participation and important statements.

The character of armed conflict is changing. Today,
the majority of conflicts are in fact civil wars. They
are often fought not on a clearly defined battle-ground
but in populated areas, using guerrilla tactics. Too
often in such situations the principles of international
humanitarian law, such as distinction, proportionality
and precautions in attack, are not respected and
civilians suffer. We call for full respect of international
humanitarian law and human rights law by all parties to
armed conflict. The obligations to protect the civilian
population during armed conflicts and the need to take
particular measures to protect especially vulnerable
groups, such as women, children, the elderly and people
with disabilities, must be respected.

The parties to an armed conflict must allow and
facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of impartial
humanitarian assistance. In particular, we recall the
obligation to respect the wounded and the sick, as
well as healthcare personnel and facilities and medical
vehicles, and to take all reasonable measures to ensure
safe, prompt and unhindered access to health care for
the wounded and sick. Syria is of course a case in point.

The risks faced by civilians will differ depending
on whether they are boys or girls, men or women.
The implications of sexual assault during warfare
are horrendous, both for the victims and for entire
communities, and must simply stop. The implementation
of international humanitarian law with a gender
perspective will enhance the protection of civilians.
Women and girls who become pregnant after being
raped as part of warfare in an armed conflict must have
access to adequate sexual and reproductive health-
care services. Above all, we need to eliminate the
widespread impunity of perpetrators of sexual violence
in conflict. The Nordic countries strongly support
the work of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Bangura.

We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
with regard to the use of explosive weapons with
wide area effects in densely populated areas. We
recognize the need to gather data on the use and impact
of explosive weapons in populated areas, including
recording civilian casualties. We request the Secretary-
General to include in his next report to the Council
recommendations and analysis on the impact of the
use of explosive weapons in populated areas, as well as
the practice of United Nations bodies, States and other
actors on civilian casualty recording.

Negotiations on the arms trade treaty will resume
in March. We expect the adoption of a strong and robust
treaty that incorporates very strong provisions on
human rights and international humanitarian law. Such
a treaty is likely to reduce illicit trafficking and human
suffering in conflicts.

We should insist that those that commit war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other violations of
international law must be held accountable. Impunity
must not be an option. We recall that the State has
the primary responsibility to ensure accountability in
every situation. If the State is unwilling or unable to
investigate and prosecute such international crimes,
the international community should offer its support.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) and other
international tribunals play a crucial role. The Security
Council must do its part to ensure accountability when
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law have occurred.
The Nordic countries are horrified by the continuous
atrocities in Syria and urge the Council to take decisive
steps to ensure accountability for those responsible. We
welcome the decision by the Prosecutor of the ICC to
open an investigation into the war crimes in Mali and
encourage the Malian authorities to cooperate with the
Court.

Accountability requires facts and investigations.
We welcome the international commissions of inquiry
and fact-finding missions carried out under the
auspices of the Human Rights Council, as well as those
initiated by the Secretary-General. They are important
mechanisms to verify and investigate allegations of
serious violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law. We would also like
to draw attention to the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission. That mechanism under the
Geneva Conventions has unique and extremely useful
features as it is composed of experts in international
humanitarian law, medical treatment and criminal
investigation and is an option open to the parties to the
conflict.

In the end, however, only preventive measures
and full respect for international law will ensure that
civilians are protected in armed conflict. Where a
State is not willing or able to protect its population,
the responsibility to protect must still be regarded as
a principle for the international community to uphold.
In that regard, preventive actions by the international
community will increase the protection of civilians.
Capacity-building in host countries is an important
preventive tool.

The comprehensive rule of law strategies of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions should
include assistance in the areas of access to legal
institutions and legislative reform, alongside support to
policing and the justice chain. To make that effective,
the peacekeeping operation in question must also
receive the relevant resources and training.

We look forward to the next report of the Secretary-
General on this topic. We believe that it would be very
useful for the Secretary-General to report regularly
on the state of play and the implementation of the
recommendations made in relation to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

