Mr. Almahmoud (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
congratulate France on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and thank it for presiding over this
important quarterly debate. The United Arab Emirates
also extends its gratitude to Mr. Miroslav Jenca,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing this morning.

The United Arab Emirates supports the regional
and international efforts to push the Middle East
peace process forward that resulted in the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016) and the signing of the
intra-Palestinian agreement last week in Cairo. In this
regard, we strongly commend the efforts of the brotherly
Arab Republic of Egypt to reunify the Palestinian
people and support stability in the region.

Despite international efforts to achieve peace in the
region, Israel continues to violate international laws and
resolutions and to expand its illegal settlement activities,
hindering the two-State solution. The illegal Israeli
practices against the Palestinian people have resulted
in the deterioration of the humanitarian, economic and
social conditions in the occupied Palestinian territories.
This situation has been exploited by terrorist groups
and their supporters to spread extremism and violence
in the Middle East.

The United Arab Emirates reaffirms the need to
put an end to the Israeli occupation and to grant the
Palestinian people their inalienable rights, including
their right to establish an independent Palestinian State
based on the June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with all international
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid
principles. In addition, we stress the importance of
providing support to meet the needs of the Palestinian
people and empowering them to build their State and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, like all
other countries. This year, the United Arab Emirates has
provided additional contributions to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Middle East to enable the Agency to deliver basic
services to the Palestinian people, including nutrition,
education and health care.

It is important to continue to work to reach a just
and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian cause.
The United Arab Emirates is also actively working
to restore stability in our region, which is enduring
multiple dangerous conflicts and crises. The absence
of security and stability in the region has caused
significant loss of life, the displacement of people and
the destruction of economic and social infrastructure.

There is no doubt that the continued provocative
behaviour and regional intervention of rogue States,
as well as their support of extremism and terrorism,
have destabilized the region and threaten international
security. Therefore, these States must respect their
obligations under international law and the Charter of
the United Nations and stop spreading conflicts and
regional and international chaos. The Security Council
and the international community should hold countries
that support and finance terrorism accountable and
demonstrate zero tolerance for whomever offers
assistance or safe haven to terrorist groups that wreak
havoc in the region.

In conclusion, we emphasize that political
solutions to the crises in Libya, Syria and Yemen are
the only way to restore stability. In this regard, the
United Arab Emirates reaffirms its support for United
Nations peace efforts to encourage parties in these
countries to negotiate and reach comprehensive and
political solutions.

