Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2460 (2019) just adopted by the Security
Council to extend the mandate the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We believe that
the United Nations Mission has an important role in
coordinating international humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan. We highly appreciate the courageous
and self-sacrificing work of United Nations staff
in that country, It is our view that an important
precondition for the effectiveness of our joint efforts
to resolve the situation in Afghanistan should be the
adoption of decisions that are based on a thorough
assessment, taking into account the current realities
and acknowledgement of the common positions of the
international community towards establishing peace in
that important State.

The need for such an approach is increasing, in
particular at this time, since because Afghanistan is
on the verge of fundamental changes in the life of the
country and the people. The Afghans themselves must
play a key role in resolving national issues. Ensuring
the most inclusive peace process in Afghanistan, whose
most important task is to seek sustainable national
reconciliation, and involving all public and political
forces in the country in that process is crucial. We
are convinced that stabilization in Afghanistan and
addressing the complex challenges facing the country
will be possible only through the integrated and
consistent approach of the international community.
Russia is working to ensure that all Afghan political
parties and key external stakeholders act in unity on the
basis of common rules.

We regret that on this occasion the Council was
not able to adopt a substantive resolution, which
would have reflected the coordinated approaches
of all Security Council members on the issue of
Afghanistan. We once again draw attention to the
procedure for negotiating resolutions. We understand
that the co-authors were trying to bring the Security
Council to a consensus but external pressure prevented
the work from being conducted in such a way that the
consultation process could take into account the wide
range of positions. Some of our colleagues decided to
ignore the views of a number of Council members, at
the last moment changing positions on the previously
agreed language. That gave rise to a counterproductive
situation, ultimately undermining our joint efforts
to resolve the situation in the country and to achieve
national reconciliation.

In the Council's future work on Afghanistan, we
call on all colleagues to take into account the military
and political realities in the country. There must be a
realistic assessment of the situation in Afghanistan,
which requires strengthening the joint fight against
terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Al-Qaida and affiliated terrorist organizations.
The ongoing focus must continue to be on combating
drug trafficking and the narcotics trade. Regional
organizations, in particular the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, continue to play an important role. The
Moscow consultations formation on Afghanistan and
the intra-Afghan dialogue launched in the Russian
capital seek solely to achieve lasting and irreversible
national reconciliation.

We once again affirm our commitment to
working in close cooperation with the Government
of Afghanistan, all political parties in the country
and regional and international partners. We call on
the Council members to act in a mutually respectful
way on the basis of consensus in pursuit of a common
solution. In that regard, we note the important role that
the People's Republic of China can play in finding a
lasting settlement in Afghanistan.

