Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Mohamed Khiari
for his briefing.

We are gravely concerned about the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's announcements that it
is stepping back from its denuclearization talks, as
well as about its threats to continue missile launches
in the future. Its provocations are aggravating the
already fragile security situation on the Korean
peninsula and in the region and are in clear violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, which
require the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to refrain from conducting any further nuclear tests
and launching ballistic missiles, suspend all activities
related to its ballistic-missile programme and in that
context re-establish its previous commitment to a
moratorium on missile launches. We therefore urge the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to refrain from
further provocations and take concrete steps towards
abandoning its nuclear and ballistic programmes in
a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. We
believe that the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization can play a significant role in that process.

Until a sustainable solution to the problem of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear
and ballistic programme is achieved, United Nations
sanctions must continue to be thoroughly implemented
by all Member States. The Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's ongoing sophisticated sanctions
evasion tactics are upsetting.

In that context, the unity of the Security Council
and the entire international community in further
reinforcing the full implementation of sanctions is
essential. At the same time, we reiterate our position
that sanctions are only an instrument to bring
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the
negotiating table and persuade it to return to compliance
with its international obligations and the law. It is the
responsibility of the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to respond to the basic
needs of its people instead of channelling its resources
to build up military programmes, most of which are
illegal. Consequently, the situation for the citizens of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea will remain
grim as long as the authorities continue to follow that
path.

To conclude, there is no way to achieve security
and sustainable peace, economic development or the
well-being of people on the Korean peninsula other
than through meaningful negotiations. We therefore
call on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
return in good faith and without further delay to the
negotiation talks.

