Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would also
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this very
important meeting, as well as the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing on the current situation in
Mali. I would also like to extend our appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annandif, and, of course, to all
MINUSMA personnel on the ground. In that same vein,
I would like to sincerely welcome His Excellency Prime
Minister Maiga and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs. I
thank the Prime Minister for recently hosting us in her
beautiful country.

We gather here today following a visit by the Security
Council visiting mission to Mali and Burkina Faso last
week. That visit has been useful to us in discussing and
envisioning a way forward with regard to supporting
the peace process and development in Mali. We saw
the sincere commitment of the Government of Mali
to protecting the interests of its people. The Council
and the international community must therefore give it
their full support. In addition, allow me to share three
pertinent points.

First, the progress achieved in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation is
commendable. Indeed, there is some progress, including
the continued establishment of interim authorities, as
well as a disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and integration process. Yet there are many areas that
require further hard work and accelerated progress.
The constitutional reform and the reconstitution
and redeployment of defence and security forces, as
well as the establishment of a northern development
zone, are the areas in which Indonesia believes that
progress is of the utmost importance. We appreciate
the seriousness of the Government to that end through
its creation of the Ministry of National Reconciliation
and Social Cohesion, the key word being reconciliation.
In addition, we would like to reiterate our view that
constitutional reform, in particular, is crucial for the
success of the agreement. We hope that it will continue
to progress in a meaningful and inclusive manner.

Secondly, we remain concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation, particularly in the north
and centre of Mali. As detailed in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/262), there have been an
increasing number of attacks by terrorist groups
targeting the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the Malian defence and security forces and other
international forces serving in Mali. Insecurity in Mali
has caused distress among the civilian population and
has altered their livelihoods and other basic services in
certain regions.

There has also been an increase in civilian casualties.
Just last week, during our visit to which many have
alluded in this Chamber, intercommunal violence
resulted in the death of more than 160 people and
injured approximately 75 others. We condemn any
attack on civilians or peacekeepers and reiterate our
sincere condolences and prayers for the victims.

In that regard, we would once again like to
reiterate the importance of strengthening the capacity
of MINUSMA and Malian law enforcement. We
welcome the launch of a campaign to protect civilians
by MINUSMA, which has facilitated the reconciliation
process among communities. We also commend the
series of community dialogues on addressing the
conflict. We believe that such confidence-building,
facilitation, mediation and community-engagement
measures could enhance the ability of MINUSMA to
protect civilians and should therefore be promoted.

While in Mali, I had the opportunity to speak
with Indonesian peacekeepers serving in Bamako
and Timbuktu and I heard praise and many positive
stories from the people of Mali regarding the role of
MINUSMA in helping the civilian population, which is
a noble cause of which we should all be proud.

Thirdly, the progress achieved should translate into
improved living conditions for the population of Mali.
The situation in Mali has not only had an impact on the
daily lives of the Malian people in terms of loss of life
and livelihood - it will also be hard for Mali to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals without resources,
assistance and understanding from the international
community. We are ready to share experience and
capacity-building in that regard.
I would also like to underline that, now more
than ever, we, the international community, must
pledge our solidarity to, and show our support for, the
Malian people, not only by supporting United Nations
resolutions but also by concretely supporting Malian
economic development efforts. In our humble way, we
have contributed Indonesian peacekeepers to Mali in
the past and will continue to do so in the future. As
the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial meeting
is being held in the next room, I would like to once
again reiterate our pledge to provide a long-range
reconnaissance patrol unit to MINUSMA, which would
constitute over 200 personnel.

All of the points on which I have elaborated should
be kept in mind when we consider MINUSMA's
mandate renewal in June. As we heard during our visit
to Mali, MINUSMA remains a necessary presence in
the country. If MINUSMA were absent, there would be
instability and loss of human life not only in Mali but
also in neighbouring countries. Therefore, the future
configuration and possible adjustment of MINUSMA
should take into account the latest developments, aim
to prevent further deterioration and have the ultimate
objective of ensuring lasting stability in Mali.

In conclusion, I would like to quote an old
proverb from the people of Mali: "One finger cannot
lift anything". We now need the many fingers of the
international community to lend a hand in helping to
create a safe and prosperous Mali, which will contribute
to peace in the Sahel region. Our heart is with the
people of Mali.

