Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, like other Security Council members, I
should like to commend you for this mission. Our visit
to the region was an important initiative that allowed
us to take stock of developments in the Sudan and in
particular of the humanitarian situation in Darfur; the
agreement reached between the parties; the realities on
the ground; and developments aimed at ensuring
stability in the region.

We have also listened attentively to the views of
the African Union, and we commend the efforts it has
undertaken in support of the peace process. We note
also the developments that have taken place in the
relations between Khartoum and Chad and their
implications for refugees and displaced persons along
the borders.
06-41082
Without a doubt, the visit was positive. We heard
the views of all parties involved in the question of the
Sudan. There were differences of opinion, in particular
with regard to the tense relations between Chad and the
Sudan.

The state of relations between those two
neighbouring countries - the Sudan and Chad - is
particularly important in terms of alleviating the
situation of displaced persons. My delegation deems
mediation efforts important so as to ensure that the
parties can settle their political differences and, in turn,
resolve the issue of displaced persons so that the latter
can return home.

In the absence of such political solutions, the
situation will remain tense, which will not serve the
interests of displaced persons. We must also strengthen
the Tripoli Agreement in order to resolve the
humanitarian crisis of displaced persons, both in
Darfur and in Chad, and address the consequences of a
complex crisis situation. We welcome the Abuja
Agreement, whose full implementation must be
ensured, and we must persuade those parties that have
not acceded to the Agreement to sign it.

We note that the Sudanese Government was the
first party to become a signatory to the Agreement. In
that respect, we wish to commend the Sudanese
Government for the efforts it has undertaken in order to
resolve the very complex crisis in Darfur.

With regard to the transition from an African
Union to a United Nations peacekeeping mission and
the difficulties that may result, we believe that a
dialogue should be undertaken with the Sudanese
Government in order to address any problems that may
ar1se.

There is no doubt that resort to Chapter VII has
had very negative consequences, as we noted during
the visit of the Security Council mission with the
Government and parliament of the Sudan. For that
reason, we believe that we should build upon the
positive initiatives of the Government of the Sudan in
order to address points of contention in a thoughtful
and measured way.

In any case, the issue that the Council must now
address is the transition from the African Union
Mission in the Sudan to a United Nations force.

