Mr. Elnor (Sudan) (Spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I have every confidence that
your presidency will add new momentum to addressing
the issue of Darfur, as you come from a country of the
region that has participated in stabilizing the situation
in Darfur. I therefore thank President Idriss Deby Itno
for his efforts to contain inter-tribal clashes and to
maintain stability in Darfur, as evidenced at the first
two meetings held in Um Jaras. I should also like to
thank Mr. Ladsous for his comprehensive briefing
today.

The report before us (S/2014/852) details the efforts
made by the African Union-United Nations Joint
Chief Mediator to ensure that the groups that have not
signed on to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
join the peace agreement. We welcome the efforts of
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Head of the African-Union High-
level Implementation Panel. As I speak here today,
delegations are negotiating at Addis Ababa on behalf
of the Government of the Sudan. One is headed by the
Minister of State responsible for Darfur, Mr. Amin
Hassan Omer. It is to discuss with the armed movements
in Darfur that have not signed the Doha Document - the
Justice and Equality Movement-Jibril Ibrahim and the
Sudanese Liberation Army-Minni Minawi - in order
to get them to join the peace process. Information we
have received regarding those meetings indicates that
efforts are being made under the auspices of Mr. Mbeki
and Special Envoy ofthe Secretary- General Menkerios.
We hope that they will lead to positive results. The
second delegation is head by Mr. Ibrahim Ghandour,
aide to our country's President. It aims to negotiate
with the popular movements in the north with regard
to the situation in Blue Nile and South Kordofan states.
The negotiations have allowed us to move forward, and
we trust that the Security Council will play an effective
role in the national dialogue announced by the Sudan's
President.

Paragraph 2 of today's report states that military
operations decreased overall in Darfur. However,
several paragraphs note that there is still instability in
certain parts of Darfur owing to inter-tribal violence
and banditry. Those phenomena have been referred to
in many statements in the past: they are very ancient
features of Darfur. There is also mention of the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and of a
culture in Darfur of carrying weapons. That too is also
nothing new.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in the
region, paragraph 23 of the report highlights that
among the main reasons for the number of displaced
persons are the clashes between the Ma'alia and Hamar
and between the Ma'alia and Rizeigat in east Darfur,
and between Ma'alia and Rizeigat and Beni Hussein
and Northern Rizeiga in north Darfur.
We welcome paragraph 40 of the report, which
clearly states that the implementation of the Doha
Document has made it possible to make progress, in
particular with regard to security measures on the
integration into the Sudanese armed forces of former
combatants of movements that are signatories to the
Document.

Paragraph 42 mentions the progress with regard to
the implementation of the Darfur Reconstruction and
Development Fund. It also states that the the Darfur
Regional Authority reported that 70 per cent of the
315 development projects launched early in 2014 were
nearing completion, including in the areas of education,
health and water. In that regard, we thank brotherly
Qatar once again for the agreement it signed with the
United Nations Development Programme providing
$88.5 million for the implementation of reconstruction
and development projects in Darfur.

The positive developments that I have mentioned
with regard to the political process, as well as the
progress in the implementation of the Doha Document,
strengthen and support the onset of UNAMID's
withdrawal, as I said in my statement to the Council
in August (see S/PV.7250). In that regard, we recall
that what we said regarding exit strategy was based
on clear references, primarily resolution 1769 (2007),
which mentions it very clearly, and resolution 2073
(2014), which renewed the Mission's mandate. We
therefore reaffirm that the statements made by officials
of the Sudan referred to an exit strategy and not, as
Mr. Ladsous said, to an immediate exit.

As to the exit strategy to which the Council's
resolutions refer, I recall that I met with Mr. Ladsous
personally two months ago and presented him with a
note in that regard, stating that it was time to discuss
an exit strategy, but not an immediate exit, as he
stated. Prior to that, the administration had sent a
mission review team specifically to consider the police
component. As we speak, ajoint peacekeeping mission
of the African Union and the agencies concerned is
holding consultations in Khartoum as part ofa strategic
review of the Mission and its exit strategy, specifically
the drawdown of the military component. When we talk
about an exit strategy, therefore, we are talking about a
joint effort to be implemented in coordination with the
African Union and the United Nations.

In addition, regarding what has been wrongly
discussed in some media concerning the closure of the
UNAMID human rights office, I would like to point
out that I met with Mr. Ladsous on this point, too, and
explained to him the nature of that decision. The reports
are false. I assure the Council that the main UNAMID
human rights office and its branches in Darfur remain
open and that they remain unaffected by the decision.
What happened, in fact, was that UNAMID opened a
small human rights branch office in Khartoum without
previously informing the competent authorities,
including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, or even
coordinating with them. That branch was therefore
closed precisely because UNAMID is mandated and
deployed exclusively to the five states of Darfur, and
not to Khartoum.

In paragraph 57, the report notes allegations and
rumours disseminated by Radio Dabanga regarding
the village of Thabit, claiming that UNAMID
representatives had been prevented from entering
the village. We confirm that this information is not
correct. We authorized UNAMID and facilitated its
access to the village on 9 November in order to carry
out its investigation free of any interference or attempts
to influence its interviews and investigations. The
Mission remained in the village as long as it wanted and
then, having completed its mission, it left to prepare
and present its report.

It was therefore to our great surprise, upon
receipt of the report i which proved these lies to be
baseless - that some have denounced it because they
wished to see it reaffirm the lies of Radio Dabanga and
condemn the Government of the Sudan. If the report
did not confirm their version of events, they were
determined to condemn it. That is why we decided not
to let UNAMID return to the village once we were sure
that what it ultimately wanted was a report convicting
the Government of the Sudan, and that any report to
the contrary would not be accepted even if the Mission
visited the village several times.

The lies spread by Radio Dabanga, which are
known to UNAMID, which itself has been criticized
several times, have been accepted by some people. The
Sudanese Government condemns that radio station,
which is known to be affiliated with groups that refuse
to sign the peace agreement and which is now advancing
an agenda for some states based on those lies. It is
therefore only logical to ask whether it is believable that
more than 200 women and girls could have been raped
in the village without anyone avenging the honour of
his wife or daughter, or reporting the incident? Despite
our belief that Radio Dabanga does nothing but spread
lies, we allowed UNAMID to travel to the village
and provided the necessary support to carry out its
investigation in total freedom. The Mission completed
its investigation, fulfilled its tasks and left the village.

We are therefore absolutely astonished by the
UNAMID report, which had for years been an
unimpeachable and unquestioned reference beyond
reproach or doubt. Some parties have requested that
UNAMID present a second report, since the first
exonerated the Government. The question now is
whether they would have asked the Mission to modify
its report if it had designated the Government as the
guilty party and confirmed the lies of Radio Dabanga.
Council members know the answer to that question. That
is why we refused to allow the Mission to return to the
village once we were totally convinced that the purpose
was to draft a report condemning the Government.
Thus, every time a report fails to serve that end, it will
be rejected by those who will request UNAMID to
redraft it again and again. This is provocative to us as a
sovereign State and we will not accept it.

The very unprofessional manner in which the report
was drafted - that is, insisting that it was necessary to
return to the village - is in itselfis a major shortcoming
and shows the lack of professionalism in the Mission,
which should have immediately withdrawn from the
village if there had been a military presence or other
threat hindering its work. But that is not what happened.
The Mission carried out its investigation and presented
its report. Therefore, the gaps in the investigation or
in the way the report is presented are the Mission's
own fault. The Council is very well aware of the many
shortcomings and gaps in UNAMID's performance. A
professional approach would have led the Mission to
admit that it was unable to carry out its functions and
therefore could not present a report.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that we
submitted a comprehensive report regarding the
document of the Prosecutor of the Darfur Criminal
Court appointed pursuant to the Doha Peace Accord.
The Prosecutor headed a team and conducted
investigations into the matter The report, like the
first UNAMID report, showed that the accusations
were unjustified. We call on the Council to ignore
rumours and misinformation, and to play its full role in
promoting peace by encouraging the parties that have
not yet signed the peace agreement to do so in order to
turn the page on the conflict in Darfur once and for all.

