Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to begin by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mariano Fernandez
Amunategui for his informative remarks on the
situation in Haiti.

The United States supports the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for another year under broadly the
same terms as the 2010 mandate. MINUSTAH has been
working tirelessly in Haiti to restore a secure and
stable environment, to promote the political process
and to strengthen Haiti's Government institutions and
rule of law structures, as well as to promote and protect
human rights. MINUSTAH has provided vital security
and logistical support during presidential and
legislative elections, supported programmes designed
to strengthen the rule of law and conducted capacity-
building work with the Haitian National Police (HNP)
through the HNP reform plan.

The United States commends the role of the
United Nations in previous elections and underscores
the importance of United Nations assistance with the
next round of partial national and local elections in
Haiti. The United States supports the Secretary-
General's recommended reduction of two infantry
battalions and the reduction in authorized strength of
1,150 formed police unit personnel, but notes that
strong rules of engagement for the remaining
MINUSTAH forces will be important to deal with a
stable but fragile security situation in Haiti. The United
States believes that any determination of the future size
of MINUSTAH forces must be based on security
conditions on the ground. We commend the work of the
United Nations security assessment team, which led to
those recommendations, and we express our hope for
continued progress in Haiti.

The United States agrees with the Secretary-
General's finding that the Haitian National Police has
improved in some respects, but it is not yet in a
position to assume full responsibility for the provision
of internal security. The United Nations and the HNP
jointly need to develop a new iteration of the HNP
reform plan of 2006 and encourage Haitian ownership
and leadership of the reform effort. We urge the
authorities in Haiti to reach agreement to appoint
women and men of demonstrated integrity and
competence to Cabinet positions. The United States
urges the authorities in Haiti to fulfil their pledge to fill
all the six vacancies at the Cour de Cassation Supreme
Court by 3 October 2011. That pledge by the Haitian
President must be fulfilled in order to enable the
judiciary in Haiti to function.

We urge the authorities in Haiti to commit
sufficient and lasting budgetary resources from their
domestic budget to the HNP institutions, especially to
build up the systems that will allow it to function on its
own. The United States urges the HNP to fully support
its Office of the Inspector General and give it the
resources to help investigate allegations of wrongdoing
at all levels of the Police. The United States urges the
Government of Haiti to eliminate impunity and
prosecute abuses of power. We believe that Haitian
officials who are brave enough to investigate and
marshal evidence against those acting with impunity
must be allowed to do their jobs under the law without
political interference in the due process of law.

We are disappointed with the halt in the vetting
process for cadets at the HNP noted in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2011/540). The United States urges
the United Nations and the HNP to redouble the vetting
efforts. We believe that vetting cannot simply occur
when a cadet begins his or her career, but needs to
occur throughout their careers, at least at every
promotion in rank, to be a truly effective prevention
tool with respect to impunity.
The United States continues to play a leading role
in international efforts to ensure that United Nations
peacekeepers, military police and civilian, neither
exploit nor abuse the vulnerable people they have been
sent to protect. The United Nations has taken several
critical steps in recent years to establish and implement

a zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeeping personnel,
including establishing a well publicized code of
conduct and creating conduct and discipline units in
the field to perform training, carry out initial
investigations and support victims. In that light, we are
deeply concerned regarding the recent allegations of
severe misconduct by some MINUSTAH personnel. We
welcome the public commitment of Uruguay to
conduct a full investigation in cooperation with the
United Nations into the incident.

The Secretary-General recommended retaining
the MINUSTAH engineering units that the Council
authorized after the earthquake. The United States
supports those recommendations. We applaud the
military engineering battalions for working within the
plans of the Government of Haiti and the civilian
development agencies. We note with appreciation the
creative collaborations between the civilian experts at
the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission and the
MINUSTAH military component's tasking team. We
note with appreciation the contribution that makes to
stability.

Lasting stability of course will come not only
through the political and security arrangements but also
through the work that major donors are doing to
support Haiti's long-term plans for economic
development. To that end the United States applauds
the recent vote by the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission to approve the Government of Haiti's
16 neighbourhood/six camps project to help internally
displaced persons find housing. The use of the
neighbourhood returns approach, instead of mere camp
evictions, is the type of humane approach we fully
support. The United States has adjusted its housing
assistance programmes to be fully in line with that
Government of Haiti initiative, and we have backed the
same neighbourhoods-return approach in our
$65 million housing programme disbursement to the
Haiti Reconstruction Fund managed by the World
Bank. We applaud the work of the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme and the United Nations
country team in Haiti to provide experts that helped the
Government of Haiti design the programme in a
manner that respects human rights.

