Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to Mr. Mariano Fernandez,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), for his very comprehensive
briefing. I also pay my respects to the men and women
of MINUSTAH for the commitment and fortitude they
have demonstrated in a difficult situation.

I welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/128) on MINUSTAH issued last week. As the
report mentions, MINUSTAH personnel have shown a
continued dedication and commitment in support of the
recovery and stability of Haiti. We commend them for
that and for their concrete results.
Given the situation, we welcome the fact that
MINUSTAH is refocusing its efforts on key mandated
tasks. At the same time, many challenges remain to be
addressed, such as the internally displaced persons
camps, the cholera epidemic, unemployment and
strengthening of the rule of law in Haiti.

To ensure further success in the area of
rehabilitation and reconstruction, Japan would like to
underscore that both self-help efforts by the Haitian
authorities, based on the ownership of the Haitian
people, and international support for Haiti are of
paramount importance and must be implemented in
tandem.

With regard to the security issue, as the
Secretary-General's report also mentions, we
appreciate the endeavours of MINUSTAH and the
troop- and police-contributing countries in maintaining
a relatively calm security situation in Haiti. We also
welcome the fact that the capacity of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) to provide adequate protection
to the civilian population has been further enhanced.

Those achievements notwithstanding, we also
recognize that, in order to achieve sustainable
development, the Government of Haiti needs to secure
a socio-economic foundation through efforts to
strengthen the rule of law. In that regard, we would like
to stress that, when it comes to the capacity-building of
Haitian authorities, international partners should
coordinate their efforts closely with the Government of
Haiti. The Government, for its part, must deepen its
commitment to those efforts.

Japan is very concerned about political instability
in Haiti, as evidenced by the sudden resignation of the
Haitian Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Garry
Conille, and the continuing stand-off between the
legislative and executive branches. Political stability is
an essential component for overall stabilization and
reconstruction in Haiti. From that perspective, we urge
all relevant political actors in Haiti to cooperate with
each other from the broader perspective of the welfare
of the people of Haiti, and not to allow political
interests to dictate their priorities. It is also our
expectation that the new Haitian Prime Minister will be
approved by the Haitian Parliament in a timely manner
and that the Government of Haiti will be ready to take
renewed steps to accelerate the reconstruction process
as early as possible.
With regard to the reestablishment of the Haitian
army, while Japan respects the sovereignty of Haiti to
make decisions regarding its own national agenda, we
would like to underline our belief that one of the top
priorities for the country should be to rebuild the
Haitian National Police and to transform the HNP into
a credible organization that can take full responsibility
for security in Haiti. We also recognize that the
resources that the international community can provide
for Haiti are not unlimited, and that, therefore, such
resources should be utilized in an effective and
efficient manner.

In addition, we are concerned about the
increasing reports of the mobilization of armed former
members of the Haitian armed forces, who have
occupied a number of former training camps, and about
the insecurity and instability to which this may give
rise in Haiti. In that regard, we encourage the
Government of Haiti to take appropriate measures to
address this threatening mobilization and to investigate
its sources of funding and logistical support.

The cases of misconduct, such as sexual abuse,
by members of MINUSTAH that have taken place
recently are also cause for serious concern. Such
dishonourable conduct, by arousing hostility among the
Haitian people towards MINSUTAH and its personnel,
may have a negative impact not only on the safety of
other members of MINUSTAH but also on the overall
security situation and on the reconstruction efforts in
Haiti. We would like to call strongly on the Secretariat
to implement a strict zero-tolerance policy with respect
to the peacekeepers involved in such cases, and to take
effective measures to prevent the recurrence of
misconduct of that kind.

The Government of Japan has dispatched an
engineering unit of the Japan Ground Self-Defense
Force to MINUSTAH. The number of personnel who
have served in that contingent since its deployment is
already approximately 1,860. The contingent has made
a contribution to the reconstruction of Haiti through
various efforts, such as the removal of rubble, the
dismantling of damaged buildings, the repair of
facilities in internally displaced persons camps, road
repair, the construction of orphanage facilities and
water distribution in response to the outbreak of
cholera. It is our hope that the rehabilitation and
reconstruction efforts in Haiti will thus be further
accelerated.

In addition, Japan has pledged $100 million for
emergency relief and reconstruction for Haiti and has
already disbursed an amount exceeding its original
pledge. Japan intends to continue to extend support for
Haiti, particularly in the field of basic social services
such as health, hygiene and education.

It has been almost a year since the Great East
Japan Earthquake struck Japan on 11 March 2011. In
the aftermath of the devastating earthquake that
occurred in Haiti almost two years ago, the Haitian
people have made determined efforts to address many
challenges similar to those that the Japanese people
have now been facing. I am confident that Haiti and
Japan, in close collaboration with the international
community, will overcome these difficulties through
mutual encouragement and steadfast efforts towards a
brighter future.

