Mr. Laher (South Africa): Mr. President, South
Africa congratulates the delegation of Guatemala on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
very first time. We are particularly pleased to see you,
Mr. Caballeros, presiding over today's meeting.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and report on the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) during the last six months
(S/2012/678).
Haiti continues to make significant progress
since its emergence from conflict and the devastating
earthquake of January 2010. It is encouraging to note
that during the current reporting period a number
of significant political milestones were achieved.
Those developments bode well for the strengthening
of governance and the rule of law institutions. It is
particularly impressive that with seven of the 22 cabinet
positions filled by women, Haiti is setting an excellent
example, and in very practical terms, of giving effect to
resolution 1325 (2000) on the role of women in peace
and security.

Those achievements are significant in the context
of the many challenges that Haiti continues to face. It
is important that we support Haiti in consolidating the
gains made, especially in strengthening its institutions.
My delegation remains concerned over the challenges
preventing the formation of the Permanent Electoral
Council, especially as this problem has delayed the long-
awaited legislative, municipal and local elections. It is
therefore urgent that the stakeholders engage in genuine
dialogue in an effort to address the current challenges
in completing the appoinments to the Council and that
the elections be held as soon as possible.

We welcome the relatively stable security situation
that has prevailed in Haiti during the reporting period.
We note with satisfaction that the Haitian authorities,
supported by MINUSTAH through its Operation
Sunrise, have brought to an end the illicit activities of
former members of the Haitian armed forces and young
recruits, who had illegally occupied a number of sites
throughout the country.

The strengthening and capacity-building of the
Haitian National Police is critical in ensuring stability
in Haiti and in laying a firm basis for the drawdown
and larger withdrawal of MINUSTAH. My delegation
therefore supports the efforts of MINUSTAH and the
Government to increase the recruitment and training
of police and to strengthen the capacities of rule of law
institutions.

The Government of Haiti, like those of many
countries around the world, faces the challenge of
meeting the socioeconomic demands of its people.
Those demands place tremendous pressure on the
Government, which has to deal with the consequences
of frustration, which manifests itself in social unrest.
High levels of unemployment, the lack of service
delivery and the difficult socioeconomic conditions
will remain a threat to the stability of the State, as
witnessed in recent incidents.
The link between security and development as two
important pillars for ensuring the long-term stability of
the country is clearly prevalent in Haiti. The Security
Council has previously recalled the contribution that
peacekeepers and peacekeeping missions have made to
early peacebuilding, including through the creation of
conducive environments that enable economic recovery
and the provision of basic services. We therefore fully
support the activities of MINUSTAH, and in particular
its engineering component, in assisting the Government
in constructing schools and hospitals and the installation
of prefabricated units for the judiciary and other State
institutions. Those aspects of MINUSTAH's work are
conducive to the establishment of conditions for long-
term reconstruction and recovery and support the
notion of peacekeepers as early peacebuilders.

We recognize that Haiti continues to face major
humanitarian challenges. The number of people who
have died or who have been infected by cholera this
year is alarming. We urge the Government of Haiti
to strengthen its health capacity and its capability to
effectively respond to the cholera and tuberculosis
epidemics. It is also incumbent upon the international
community to provide all the necessary assistance
required to respond to the cholera challenge.

We welcome the development by MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team of the 2013-
2016 strategic framework aligning its priorities with
the Government's strategic development plan. While
international support for Haiti remains crucial, we
emphasize the need for national ownership and
leadership. We note with concern, however, that less
than 10 per cent of aid disbursed by the international
community has been disbursed through the Government.
We must avoid inadvertently creating parallel structures
that could undermine the Government of Haiti.
National ownership is essential to ensuring that the
needs of the population are effectively addressed. South
Africa therefore welcomes the announcement by the
Government of the new aid coordination mechanism,
which is aimed at aligning international assistance with
national priorities.

South Africa pledges its support for the renewal
of MINUSTAH's mandate and supports the proposal
by the Secretary-General regarding the drawdown
of MINUSTAH's military and police capabilities.
Such a drawdown should be gradual and conducted
in consultation with the Haitian authorities, taking
into account their needs and institutional capacity. We
further urge MINUSTAH to calibrate the withdrawal
of its engineering component with the needs on the
ground.

In conclusion, Haiti has made significant strides
towards peace and stability, and it is a testament to this
progress that it has been entrusted by its region to take
over the chair of the Caribbean Community. Challenges
do remain, and it is imperative that Haitians, with the
sustained support of the international community, work
with MINUSTAH to overcome those obstacles.

