This day is clearly a defining moment in human history, for many reasons of the highest possible order. The future we all desire is one in which we see humankind operating at its finest. We are ready to pursue this actualization. The modern world we own came into being packaged with many progressive ideas, but simultaneously plagued with many inhumane actions on a global scale. The legacies of those inhumanities continue to gallop, globally destabilizing the most reasonable corrective actions we have placed before the Security Council. I speak with a Caribbean voice honed but free of the history of 500 years of modernity's crimes against humanity. The Caribbean, we all know, was the primary global theatre for Western imperial warfare and competitive militarism. But this very Caribbean has been converted into a zone of peace, stability and the achievement of democracy that stands aloft as a global best practice. Crafted from the rubble of a crumbled, rejected colonialism, the Caribbean has risen with dignity. Indeed, our President, The Honourable Prime Minister of the multi-island State of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, stands proudly before us and before the world as the Caribbean's quintessential symbol of democratic politics and governance. In this way, he is constituted as the world's longest-elected democratic leader of a free State. The Caribbean is determined to be the freest zone of humankind in the postmodern world by turning its history of conflict upon its head. It celebrates and promotes the global industry of tourism, which is effectively the premier invitation industry that promotes humankind at its most generous. From this space of respect and tolerance comes the greatest movement of the twenty- first century. I refer to the reparatory justice movement against the legacies of slavery, violent colonization and institutional racism. The world is calling for the completion of this long and divisive journey to justice. We know that it took all of the nineteenth century to eradicate the institution of chattel slavery from the world. We also know that it took all of the twentieth century to achieve in its wake democratic civil rights and human rights and to erase most of the institutional legacies of colonialism. Finally, we understand that the twenty-first century will be the era of social and economic justice and the attainment of atonement, reconciliation and reparations. This is the inevitable logic of modernity's history. The twenty-first century will witness the preparations for reparations. As the world insists upon greater peace and stability, it is also calling for repairing wounds inflicted upon the people of Africa and their descendants. We stand today upon the battlefield of the violent inhumanities unleashed upon the world in the form of chattel black enslavement and African colonization. The legacies of those experiences have poisoned our societies throughout the world with the toxin of racism. We are faced, therefore, with the will of the world to uproot and dismiss these destabilizing legacies. The Western world has sought in many places to brush aside the debris of these legacies to the dustbin of history. This project has not succeeded. There is no carpet in the world that is large enough to hide this past and its current manifestations. Injustice anywhere is the seed of instability and violence everywhere. The Caribbean, Africa and its diasporas are calling for reconciliation and peace within the context of reparatory justice. The Governments of the Caribbean recently called for a summit with the Governments of Europe in order to discuss and resolve these harmful matters that continue to inhibit our peaceful development as a tribute to the democratic method and mentality. Reparations are about development. It is about the call for peace and justice to enable our humanity to fulfil its finest destiny. I call upon The United Nations to reconvene the 1960s Special Committee on Decolonization, which needs to complete its work. This mandate will not be completed until the matter of reparations has been settled, allowing those who suffer harm today to move forward with justice and equality. This is a necessary part of the Decade of Action adopted by the United Nations to alleviate the continuing suffering of people of African descent who have been the targeted victims of violent colonization. The twenty-first-century movement for reparations is further fuelled by the prior social and economic crises caused by climate change, the chronic-disease epidemic and other forces within the global economic space that have ravaged vulnerable nations and communities seeking to emerge from the constraints of colonization. We speak of reparatory justice for peace. It is a development paradigm for the Caribbean nations and other communities experiencing its debilitating legacies. So far, the twenty-first century has been described as an age of apology - but an apology without a commitment to reparations. There is no integrity or sincerity in an apology without a reparation plan. The Caribbean world presents itself as a core constituency of this very deserving cause - reparations as justice. The global Black Lives Matter Movement is addressing the history and continuity of institutional racism and has demonstrated further that the movement for reparatory justice is politically and philosophically sound. It is legally correct. And it is a commitment to global fairness. Reparations is a movement that will heal postmodernity as we go into the long twenty-first century. It will secure our age as one of peace and stability simply because it is an inevitable call for justice for those who continue to suffer harm. I am the Vice Chancellor of the University of the West Indies, which is now approaching seventy-five years of service to the region and the world. It has offered itself as a broker and a negotiator of this conversation for reparatory justice. Indeed, our President today, The Right Honourable Ralph Gonsalves, in his many speeches before the world has provided the philosophical framework for this conversation and negotiation. The world will speed ahead to meet its global destiny, and we welcome this. But the road must be paved by the reparatory justice movement, without which it will be an unpleasant and uncomfortable journey. This is not what we desire. We call, therefore, upon the Security Council to acknowledge the reparations for the slavery movement and to assist the world in moving on and beyond the historical site of these crimes. We call, furthermore, for the Council to assist humankind in this, in its finest hour. We are experiencing the convergence of the call for reparatory justice with the demand for an ending of the diversities of inequalities.
