Mr. Holkeri: In my presentation at the beginning
of this discussion, I tried to follow the advice of
Lakhdar Brahimi, who so wisely recommended three
years ago in his report on United Nations peacekeeping
reform, "The Secretariat must tell the Security Council
what it needs to know, not what it wants to hear"
(S/2000/809, page x).

I will try to answer some of the questions raised
by the members of the Council and other speakers,
following the order of the speakers.

First, I note Pakistani concern pertaining to the
question of standards before status. However, the
concept remains valid to me as long as the Security
Council has not decided otherwise. In accordance with
the decision of the Council, I intend to complete the
transfer of non-reserved responsibilities to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government by the end
of this year. The reserved powers will remain my
exclusive responsibility unless the Council makes a
different determination. At the same time, I intend to
involve the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
in some reserved areas, without transferring them. This
will happen through the establishment of consultative
mechanisms in different areas of administration.

With regard to the comments of the representative
of Germany concerning benchmarks, we have been
working on standards for four months in order to
operationalize them. Specific goals and indicators have
been devised. The indicators will permit the
identification of the level of performance to be attained
by local actors. Standards and indicators remain under
the control of the international community and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). My intention is to finalize the
implementation plan by the time of my next visit to the
Security Council.

The Ambassadors of Spain and the United
Kingdom referred to the question of corruption. Let me
assure them that the allegations are taken seriously and
will be subject to thorough investigation. In this
respect, administrative measures have already been
taken.

The representative of Spain raised two other
issues. His first question, about parallel structures, was
also touched on by the representative of Serbia and
Montenegro. Parallel structures continue to exist in the
public sector in two areas: administration and service
provision. That is detrimental to the rule of law and
prevents the integration of Kosovo Serbs into the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. In the first
case, we will deal firmly with attempts to run a parallel
government in Kosovo. In the other, UNMIK will take
a step-by-step approach, replacing, for example,
parallel schools and hospitals with Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government structures when they
can provide the same level of service. The issue of
parallel structures is addressed in my contacts with
Belgrade. Serbia must show its commitment to
resolution 1244 (1999).
The other issue raised by the representative of
Spain was that of returns. The rate of return has
continued to accelerate, with a total of 2,653 returns so
far this year, 845 of them being Serbs. This brings the
total number of returns to 8,768. Kosovo Serb returns
are 50 per cent greater this year than last. The situation
of returns depends, of course, on security conditions on
the ground and other conditions, not least job
opportunities. That is why our priority tasks in this area
are to improve the security environment and create the
necessary economic conditions on the ground, in
cooperation with local administrative structures.

The representative of Mexico wanted further
information on two questions, the first of which related
to the weapons amnesty. The amnesty conducted this
year can hardly be considered a success. The number of
weapons surrendered was very low - 150 or so. Of
course, we must take into account the fact that it was
the third exercise of that kind in Kosovo. But it must
be noted that, parallel to the voluntary surrender of
weapons, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and UNMIK
continue proactive measures, such as searches for
illegal weapons and checkpoints. We have been quite
successful in finding illegal weapons recently.

The other issue raised by the representative of
Mexico was the question of Dubrava prison. On 4
September, inmates of that prison, which is Kosovo's
largest detention facility, occupied and barricaded a
prison block in protest against conditions and refused
to return to their cells. When the prison guards, in an
attempt to force them back to their cells, tried to enter
the occupied block, the prisoners set fire to their
mattresses. Five prisoners died and a further 16 were
injured in the ensuing fire.

A police investigation into the incident was
launched immediately, and an independent Commission
of Inquiry consisting of international and local
members has been established to look into its causes
and to provide recommendations.

I should like to reassure the Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria that the case of Valentin
Krumov remains open. Any new information that
comes to the attention of UNMIK police will
immediately be communicated to the Bulgarian
authorities.

In conclusion, let me say that the Permanent
Representative of Russia and other speakers today
highlighted the need to proceed energetically in the
areas of housing security; law and order; improving
conditions for the Serb and other non-majority
communities in Kosovo; and advancing returns. I
should like to reiterate that those issues remain my key
priorities for the Mission.

