Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, allow me once again to congratulate you, on
this last day of your presidency of the Security Council
for this month. It has been a very fruitful month in
terms of the activities and varied initiatives
undertaken. I would also like to thank Mr. Edmond
Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his presentation at the beginning of this
meeting of the Secretary-General's periodic report
(S/2009/592) on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I would also
like to thank Mr. Djibril Bassole, Joint African Union-
United Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, for his
briefing on the peace process.

In earlier statements, we have said that the peace
process remains the only way of ensuring security,
stability and lasting peace, particularly since we have
now turned the page on military confrontation and
there is no longer war in Darfur. Indeed, the desire for
peace has won out as the unanimous choice of all of
the citizens of Darfur. Only one link in the chain is still
missing: the Security Council must breathe new life
into the political process by undertaking immediate and
decisive action to encourage those who are refusing or

09-6229]
hesitating to participate seriously in the negotiations
that are planned.

The Government of Sudan firmly believes that it
must focus its efforts on the political process as the top
priority. But we are also not neglecting the need to
meet the requirements of all the other tracks,
particularly the maintenance of peace. Indeed, the
report before the Council takes note of the cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan, the initiatives it has
undertaken and its close coordination with the African
Union and the United Nations in the context of the
Tripartite Mechanism, which was established to speed
up deployment and to resolve all of the problems that
still face us. The Tripartite Mechanism holds regular
meetings, Whose results confirm that the Government
of the Sudan is cooperating fully and is positively
addressing all the concerns expressed. The most recent
such meeting, the seventh, was held in Khartoum on
16 November.

Moreover, three days ago the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union organized an important
visit to Darfur, during which its delegation affirmed
that the situation in Darfur had clearly improved and
that the Government of the Sudan was cooperating
fully with UNAMID.

With regard to UNAMID contingents already
deployed, the report confirms that the Mission is now
fully operational and all that remain to be resolved are
a few support issues. Deployed military contingents
now number 14,638 personnel, the police component
4,449 personnel, and the civilian component 3,921. The
report states clearly in paragraph 43 that - while the
mission is now fully operational and has been for over
a year - it still lacks military support, for example
helicopters and transport units. This does not fall
within the purview of either the Sudan or the Tripartite
Mechanism.

Meanwhile, registration for the upcoming
elections in April is proceeding smoothly in all
provinces of the Sudan, including in Darfur, and
abroad.

Sudan has also undertaken an initiative with
regard to the brotherly country of Chad through the
important visit by presidential adviser Ghazi
Salaheddine to N'Djamena with a view to normalizing
relations between our two countries and brotherly
peoples.

All of the personnel on the ground in Darfur have
been deployed thanks to the unstinting cooperation of
the Government of the Sudan, the host country of the
Mission. So we were justifiably surprised that the
report, in some of its paragraphs, overlooks this reality
and gives the impression that there are still certain
obstacles facing UNAMID. Reference was made to a
few isolated incidents, which are the sort of thing that
could happen anywhere in the world, not to mention in
an area such as Darfur, where there has been an armed
rebellion. For example, if a UNAMID patrol was
somewhat delayed, the report indicates, in paragraph
66 for example, that Government officials - in the
plural - prevented access to UNAMID patrols.

What is more, a number of paragraphs in the
report describing the security situation do not faithfully
reflect what is actually happening. There has been an
end to fighting and an improvement in the security
situation in Darfur, and yet the report highlights a
number of isolated incidents, which the Government of
the Sudan has already strongly condemned. The
Government is seeking to prevent any recurrence of
incidents such as the kidnapping of two UNAMID staff
members or the killing of an individual by unknown
attackers.

The report makes reference to serious
developments in the security sphere. This is rather
startling to us. We do not want any guest of ours, or
any member of the Mission to be harmed, let alone
kidnapped or killed, and we condemn such acts. These
isolated incidents must not be exaggerated. We must
put them into their proper context as the exception, not
the rule. We note that the security situation in Darfur is
somewhat stable and continues to improve.

During your presidency of the Council, Sir, you
have undertaken a number of initiatives, for example
on the protection of civilians. But what is missing is
that we and the United Nations must be protected
against such non-factual reports, drafted by
international officials not in the interest of peace in
Darfur but to serve particular interests. The reports of
the United Nations should be objective and positive,
and they should serve the cause of peace, not run
counter it.

