Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Security Council this month.
I wish you and your delegation every success. I also
thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs;
Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF;
and the representative of Peru, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), for their briefings.

Five months have gone by since the Stockholm
Agreement was reached between the Yemeni
Government and the Houthi militias. Our patient people
yearned for that Agreement to mark the beginning of the
end of the tragedy, which has hit that great people hard,
as the Houthi militias led a coup d'etat and destroyed
the economic, social and cultural foundations of the
country. Unfortunately, the Houthi militias used those
agreements and other initiatives aimed at achieving
peace and a political solution to gain some time to
reinforce their military positions so as to commit
crimes against the Yemeni people and violations oftheir
rights in the areas under the control of those militias,
in flagrant breach of all humanitarian rules and values,
including international law and human rights law.

Those militias have opened up new war fronts and
pushed their followers into their barbaric war against
the Yemeni people, without realizing that the illusions
which they are trying to create will vanish and explode
in the faces of those who believe that they, with Iran's
assistance, can make our people yield and break their
determination. The Yemeni people continue to reject
foreign agendas that do not belong to their culture and
genuine Arab identity.

The Yemeni Government welcomes the efforts of
the Secretary-General and recalls that the Stockholm
Agreement is an initiative designed to build trust in
moving towards a comprehensive solution to the Yemen
crisis. The failure of the Houthis to work with the
international community and the Yemeni Government
in order to establish the necessary trust will make them
untrustworthy and puppets in the hands of terrorist Iran.

With respect to resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019), under which the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism ensures the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, represented by the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, the Yemeni
Government emphasizes its right to verify any step
taken as part of Stockholm Agreement and to check
reports issued by coastguard forces that will assume
responsibility for security in the ports that the Houthis
have withdrawn from.

Before beginning any discussion on any upcoming
steps, the Government also reaffirms its right to
monitor withdrawals, pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions and through the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. It is not enough for the Chair
of the Committee to provide a summary report of what
is happening. We underscore the fact that any attempt
by the Houthi militias to withdraw from the ports
without any supervision, monitoring and approval by
the Committee and its three parties would be a violation
of agreements reached in recent months and would
undermine the efforts of the international community.
This would be a free service offered to the militias,
which will not hesitate to repeat their masquerade of
unilateral withdrawal, as happened on 30 December
2018 in the port of Al-Hudaydah.

The Yemeni Government reaffirms its clear
position of adhering to resolutions 2216 (2015), 2451
(2018) and 2452 (2019), as well as to the spirit and letter
of the Stockholm Agreement. In that regard, we reject
any measure that is not subject to the criteria provided
for in the relevant Security Council resolutions and
that does not abide by the concept of operations. We
reaffirm our full willingness to work seriously for the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and all
its provisions concerning Al-Hudaydah, as well as the
Taiz understandings and the freeing of all prisoners,
detainees, abductees, disappeared persons and those
under house arrest.

The Houthi militias have tried to avoid
implementing first phase of the concept of operations
presented by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard, the
Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee,
which was approved by the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi militias. It defines the redeployment
mechanisms, distances, zones and maps, as well as
the roles of the joint control monitoring committees
and the verification mechanisms, along with every
logistical and technical detail. The Houthi militias try
to implement the Agreement in a way that deviates
from the concept of operations and through unilateral
action that departs from all previous agreements in
an attempt to implement the Agreement according to
their own vision, which is not based on any terms of
reference and understandings. The United Nations has
to implement agreements and to refute such fallacious
arguments. The Yemeni Government calls for a return
to the process provided for in the Agreement, in
accordance with the agreed concepts.

The Houthi militias reject peace opportunities
and want to prolong the war and increase the suffering
of the Yemeni people. That would confirm what the
Yemeni Government has said many times - that the
militias are not serious in their acceptance of peace
and the efforts of the United Nations and the Security
Council. The decisions they take are no longer their
own. Those militias have become puppets in the hands
of the Iranian mullahs and regime, which are trying to
promote their own sectarian interests in Yemen and the
region while blackmailing the international community
in order to evade the sanctions imposed on them.

The Yemeni Government has tried to end the
war by various means. We have shown the greatest
flexibility in implementing Stockholm Agreement by
following the directives of President of the Republic
Mansour Hadi. We have fully supported the efforts
of the Special Envoy and accepted all proposals and
plans put forward by Lieutenant General Lollesgaard
to achieve peace and bring an end to the humanitarian
suffering of our people. However, this desire on the part
of our Government has been met with stubbornness and
prevarication. The militias have pursued their escalation
and refuse to join the peace process. They continue to
ignore the Security Council resolutions and signed
agreements so as to gain more time to continue their
own war and to increase the suffering of the Yemeni
people. The preferred environment of those militias is
that of war and instability.

Two oil-pumping stations in the [Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia were the targets of terrorist attacks
yesterday carried out by drones associated with the
Houthi militias, supported and encouraged directly by
Iran. The Republic of Yemen strongly condemns such
terrorist attacks, which threaten regional security and
stability as well as international peace and security.
They are part of a terrorist act to destabilize and sow
chaos in the region.

The Yemeni Government is making every effort to
alleviate the economic and humanitarian suffering of
our people. In that regard, we are paying the salaries of
all civil servants in all governorates of the Republic. In
order to save the education sector and those who seek
to expand their knowledge even while they remain in
the destructive grasp of the militias, the Government
recently paid 50 per cent of the salaries of university
teachers in the zones controlled by the Houthis.

The Houthi militias are spreading extremism and
sectarianism while the fighting financial institutions
that are cooperating with the Central Bank in Aden
to make it seem as if the legitimate Government is
responsible for the crumbling of the economic and
humanitarian situation in Yemen. They also continue
to politicize humanitarian action so as to expand the
financing of their own war and build their economic
networks by collapsing the value of the national
currency, obstructing trade movement, transferring
goods and money, and carrying out terrorist acts and
arrests. The militias also monitor the private sector and
use it to serve their narrow interests and fund their war
efforts. Those militias have also fomented an oil crisis
in the areas under their control in order to promote
black market activities and increase oil prices, despite
the fact that nine tankers transporting such products
have transited through Al-Hudaydah port since the
second half of April.

We call upon the Council to exert pressure on the
Houthi coup militias in order to implement the agreement
to exchange prisoners, detainees, the disappeared
and those under house arrest, in accordance with the
principle of all-for-all that we agreed upon before
Stockholm discussions. This is a humanitarian issue
that should not be subject to any kind of political gains
and calculations. It is an issue that has a great impact
on alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people,
particularly during the sacred month of Ramadan. It
will also provide relief to thousands of Yemeni families
in which the parents have been separated from their
children, as asserted by the President of the Republic in
his recent letter to the Secretary-General.

The Yemeni Government calls on the United
Nations and the international community to exert
serious and great pressure on the Houthi militias to
lift the restrictions and obstacles they have put in the
way of food and medical assistance so that such aid
can reach those in need in zones under the control
of the militias. The Houthi militias must also stop
confiscating and looting humanitarian aid, targeting
humanitarian workers and forcing international
organizations to pay customs duties on products that
are exempt from such duties by law. Since the signing
of the Stockholm agreements, the Ministry of Human
Rights has documented the confiscation and looting
of 415 trucks containing humanitarian aid, medicines
and oil products. In addition, those militias carry
out attacks against World Food Programme supplies
and the Red Sea Mills, shelling them on 9 May, at a
time when millions of Yemenis are suffering from
severe malnutrition.

The World Health Organization report of 7 May
mentions the cholera epidemic, particularly in Houthi-
controlled areas. The Yemeni Government has warned
the militias over continuing their abhorrent policies,
which prevent targeted people from having access to
medicines and medical convoys. The Human Rights
Watch report of 9 May also states that the Houthi
militias were responsible for horrible explosions in the
residential areas of Sawan in Sana'a governorate on
7 April, taking the lives of 15 pupils in neighbourhood
schools and injuring more than 100 people, including
45 children.

The Yemeni Government is extremely keen to
ensure lasting peace based on the agreed terms of
reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference and relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). However, it will
not be possible to make progress towards peace or to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people without a
decisive position of the Security Council and exerting
maximum genuine and serious pressure while sending
a clear message to the Houthi militias that they must
implement the Stockholm Agreement and prevent the
possibility of failure. All necessary measures must
be taken against those who obstruct the Agreement,
which, if it is implemented, will be a glimmer of hope
and a confidence-building step towards achieving a
comprehensive political solution.

I would like to note that the Yemeni Government
has appealed to the Secretary-General regarding the
bad situation of the floating oil tanker FSO SAFER
in Ras Isa port, which contains 1.14 million barrels
of crude oil and could cause a terrible environmental
disaster in the Red Sea. The Yemeni Government asked
the United Nations to help it in assessing the situation
of that oil tanker and to do the necessary maintenance
work on it in order to prevent any oil leak.
