Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2386 (2017), extending the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei (UNISFA) for another six months. We thank
the United States, as the penholder, for faciliating
the negotiations on the resolution, as well as for the
flexibility shown in order to achieve the necessary
consensus.We also thank all members of the Security
Council for their support.

No doubt, we would have liked to see the UNISFA
mandate renewed as a whole, maintaining the integrity
of the mission, especially given the fact that the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
(JBVMM) and UNISFA are mutually reinforcing and
that the former is in fact an integral part of UNISFA.
What UNISFA has been able to achieve in maintaining
peace and stability in the Abyei Area and in preventing
confrontations along the border between the Sudan
and South Sudan has much to do with the JBVMM. Of
course, we understand that the Council resolved last
time that the support UNISFA provides to the J BVMM
would be withdrawn unless the parties took concrete
steps to achieve the full operational capability of
the Mechanism.

Over the past six months, we have witnessed some
encouraging progress with regard to the JBVMM, but
we also recognize that what has been done falls far
short of what the parties have agreed to carry out in the
benchmarks they have set for themselves. We expect
the parties to build on the positive momentum gained
by the meeting of the two Presidents in late October in
Khartoum. The continued support of UNISFA to the
JBVMM. directly depends on the achievement of the
benchmarks set forth in the resolution the Council has
just adopted. The parties certainly bear the primary
responsibility in that regard, and we are hopeful that
they will live up to their commitments.

Finally, it is absolutely critical that the two parties
take advantage of what UNISFA has been able to
accomplish in the maintenance of peace and stability
in the Abyei Area and beyond to address some of the
most important outstanding issues. We call on both
parties to engage continuously and constructively in
swiftly implementing the various agreements they have
concluded, including the formation of the joint interim
institutions that were supposed to be put in place
pending the final resolution of the Abyei issue.

