Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous for introducing the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General on
Afghanistan (S/2011/772*). We also thank the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his invaluable assessments.
We thank him for the dedication and commitment he
showed during his tenure as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. South Africa appreciates the
participation of the Deputy Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Ludin, in today's
meeting and thanks him for his statement. We
congratulate Mr. Jan Kubis on his appointment as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and pledge our support for him.

Afghanistan continues to face numerous political,
security and humanitarian challenges. South Africa
supports the concerted efforts of the Afghan
Government to address those challenges, with the
sustained assistance of the international community.
The International Conference on Afghanistan held in
earlier this month in Bonn, in which South Africa
participated, again signaled the resolve of the
international community to support the Government
and the people of Afghanistan beyond 2014 in
consolidating their transition to peace and stability.

My delegation is pleased to note that the National
Assembly resumed its functions on 8 October,
following a year-long impasse. We are further
encouraged by the conclusion of the traditional Loya
Jirga that convened from 16 to 19 November 2011,
reaffirming the importance of continued dialogue and
outreach among the various parties and groupings in
Afghanistan.

South Africa fully supports efforts to strengthen
political outreach activities. Political dialogue and
reconciliation is a critical factor for the Afghan people
and their Government for ensuring sustainable peace
for the country, which has suffered severely as a result
of continued insecurity.

South Africa is concerned by the increase in
security-related incidents. We reiterate our
condemnation of the assassination of the former
President and head of the High Peace Council,
Mr. Rabbani, in September. That tragic incident should
strengthen the resolve of Afghans to reject attempts by
those who are intent on derailing the peace and
reconciliation process. My delegation commends the
courageous conciliatory response of the Government of
Afghanistan in the face of that provocation.

We condemn the bloody attacks in Kandahar on
31 October, which claimed the lives of United Nations
personnel. We also condemn the 6 December terrorist
attacks in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif, which caused
numerous deaths and injuries among civilians who had
gathered on the occasion of Ashura. South Africa hopes
that those who committed the atrocities will be brought
to justice.

In spite of some progress, the precarious security
situation continues to have a negative humanitarian
impact on Afghan civilians, especially women and
children, who are the most vulnerable. We are
concerned by the increase in the number of internally
displaced persons, which is worsened by the severe
drought in the northern and western regions of the
country. It is therefore essential for the international
community to actively support Afghanistan in
addressing that critical issue and to fulfil all
obligations made.

As we have stated previously, my delegation
believes that there is a link between development and
security in Afghanistan. We are pleased that the Afghan
Government continues its commitment to address the
socio-economic situation facing the country. In that
context, we encourage the Government to increase its
efforts to improve institutional capacity and to offer
viable alternatives to poppy cultivation and narcotics.

Sustainable peace in Afghanistan will be
enhanced by regional cooperation. In that regard, we
welcome the outcomes of the Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan, held on 2 November, jointly convened by
Turkey and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), which developed confidence-
building measures to improve regional cooperation.
Other regional initiatives, including the upcoming
trilateral summit among Afghanistan, Iran and
Pakistan, will contribute to improving relations
between Afghanistan and its immediate neighbours.
That in turn will facilitate normalization of the
situation in Afghanistan.

National ownership and leadership remains
crucial to political, security and social and economic
progress in Afghanistan. We therefore welcome the
continued progress in the implementation of the Kabul
process. For its part, the international community
should continue its supportive role in the country's
transition from conflict to stability and prosperity.
South Africa will continue to work with its partners in
the Security Council in supporting that process.

Once again, we thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his service to UNAMA and wish him well in his new
responsibilities.

