Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Mr. President, I should like to thank you for
convening today's open debate to discuss this
important item at the request of the countries members
of the League of Arab States. At the same time, I
should like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Alvaro de Soto, for his
excellent presentation today and to congratulate him on
the work he has done so far in carrying out his difficult
mission.

In our view, recent developments are a further
indication of the extreme fragility of the situation in
the Middle East, in particular in relation to the Israeli-
Palestinian track. Unfortunately, after some months of
relative calm, the level of violence has increased
significantly, mainly affecting the civilian population
on both sides. The new wave of violence jeopardizes
the achievements of recent months and could greatly
erode trust between the parties. For that reason, we
believe that the seriousness of the situation must not be
underestimated either by the international community
at large or by the Security Council.

Argentina strongly condemns all recent terrorist
acts that resulted in the death of innocent civilians. In
particular, I should like to state our unequivocal
condemnation of the suicide bombing that took place
on 12 July in the city of Netanya and of the Qassem
rocket attacks fired from the Gaza Strip. All of those
acts are unjustifiable. We would recall that the
Palestinian Authority has the obligation to take
decisive measures against terrorist groups and to
prevent the territory under its control from being used
as a base for attacks against the population of Israel.
We are aware of the challenges faced by the Palestinian
Authority in this field, and we welcome the recent
efforts made by President Mahmoud Abbas. However,
we believe that those efforts should be strengthened to
send a clear message to Palestinian extremist groups
that violence cannot be accepted or tolerated.

Israel has the legitimate right to defend itself
against such attacks, but it must be exercised in
conformity with the principle of proportionality and
must, despite all the difficulties in this regard, be in
accordance with international law. Accordingly, we
request that the practice of targeted killings not be
resumed and that the human rights of the Palestinian
population and humanitarian law be respected at all
times.

As we have said, we believe that Israel should act
in conformity with international law in respect of the
construction of the separation barrier and settlement
activities. My country has previously expressed its
opposition to the construction of the separation barrier
in the occupied Palestinian territories. Today, we
reiterate that position and call on the Israeli
Government to comply with the July 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice and with
General Assembly resolution ES-10/15.

The 9 July decision of the Israeli Cabinet to
accelerate the construction of the barrier in East
Jerusalem is manifestly contrary to the reiterated calls
of the international community; we believe it should be
revised, and we call on the Government of Israel to do
so. Likewise, we believe that all settlement activities
should cease and that settlement outposts should be
dismantled in accordance with the road map.

In spite of the negative developments we have
described, we believe that the sole option for Israel and
for Palestine is a future of peaceful coexistence, with
both of them living side by side in peace and security.
In that regard, we consider that plans to withdraw from
the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank should go
forward as a first step towards putting an end to the
occupation that began in 1967. The commitment of
both sides to cooperate in the implementation of that
initiative is essential, as is the active participation and
assistance of the international community. Less than a
month before the withdrawal begins, all efforts should
be concentrated on its successful completion. The
parties should therefore refrain from taking measures
that could undermine the initiative. Here, we
congratulate Prime Minister Sharon and the Israeli
Knesset on their continued firm position in that regard.

With regard to the situation in the region in
general, we welcome the recent formation of a new
Government in Lebanon as a consequence of the
elections that concluded a month ago. We congratulate
Prime Minister Fouad Siniora and the members of his
Cabinet on their appointment. We hope that the
formation of the new Government will help to stabilize
the situation in that country, thus allowing the people
of Lebanon to live free of violence and intimidation.
Likewise, we hope that such progress in the political
process will contribute to the implementation of the
outstanding provisions of Security Council resolutions
related to the situation in Lebanon. In addition, I wish
to reiterate our condemnation of the repeated violations
of the Blue Line and our call upon the parties to cease
such violations and respect the Line in its entirety.

I wish in conclusion to reaffirm my country's
commitment to a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East based on resolutions adopted by the
Security Council.

