Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): I should like to join other
colleagues in extending our deep condolences to the
Government of France, the French people and the
families of all the victims who lost their lives in a string
of terrorist attacks in different locations, including a
Cambodian restaurant - Le Petit Cambodge - in Paris
on 13 November. Shocked and deeply saddened by the
attacks, the Royal Government of Cambodia and the
Cambodian people strongly condemn the abominable
crimes and hope that the criminals will be severely
punished.
Permit me to congratulate you, Sir, on the United
Kingdom's accession to the presidency of the Council
for this month, and to thank you for organizing this
open ministerial debate on the foremost relevant topic at
the present time. Your concept note (S/2015/845, annex)
compels us to generate practical results to possibly
achieve our commitments under the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), and is likely to lead us on the path to equitable
sharing and caring, which are the building blocks of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We have a long road to travel and rigorous actions are
needed.

It is unfortunate that armed conflicts continue to
rage and claim the lives of combatants and civilians
alike, including children in some parts of the world.
Violent extremism, which continues to pose threats
to peace and security, has diminished our hope. We
may understand the root causes of a conflict, yet we
do not stand united enough to join together to address
them. In that regard, my delegation buys into the ideas
contained into the concept note, which rightly points
out that the cycle of conflict arises from people being
left out, marginalized, excluded and malnourished, and
may therefore easily fall into the traps set by the groups
of violent extremism, organized crime and terrorism.
These factors could result in slow development.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
played an important role in ending conflicts around the
world and establishing peacebuilding principles in many
regions. I believe that good governance and the rule of
law are essential preconditions for stability, without
which societies cannot function, let alone flourish. All
Governments need the stability and predictability of
good governance to flourish. Such partnerships at all
levels of Government and society will be essential to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and the
broader 2030 Development Agenda.

As a post-conflict country, Cambodia has achieved
full peace. One of the solutions that can secure long-
lasting peace is through win-win policy that addresses
the needs of all parties concerned. Through its lessons
learned, Cambodia's win-win policy - initiated by
Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen,
Prime Minister of Cambodia, to wipe out the political
and military organization of the Khmer Rouge at that
time - contained three key points: securing a safe
environment for peaceful coexistence; ensuring careers
for those who were willing to integrate themselves into
society; and safeguarding the property of those who
defected to the Government. Despite the this policy,
justice still needs to be handed down. In the case of
Cambodia, the top perpetrators of serious crimes have
been brought before the hybrid court whose functions
are coordinated by the Royal Government of Cambodia
and the United Nations.

In a wider context, my country believes that the culture
of peace must be cherished in the hearts of all people,
regardless of their religious beliefs. Confidence-building
measures and preventive-diplomacy, through multilateral
and regional mechanisms, must be established. Similarly,
mediating the interests of all social groups - be they
poor, unequal or of any ethnic community - and
adopting reconciliation in a step-by-step process on a
variety of levels will ensure durable peace and security.

The United Nations branches have their own role to
play in establishing more peaceful and secured societies.
However, conflicting interests have diminished the
core value of each entity. I believe that we have not
yet exhausted our efforts to save the whole world from
sliding into conflict.

In conclusion, I hope that our debate today will
send a good message to the outside world that the
United Nations is relevant in its endeavours to maintain
international peace and security. In this regard, we
must work to ensure the fundamental freedoms of all
humankind. We must work to enhance and respect
human dignity, international norms, equity and
inclusiveness for all nations and population.

