Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, and Ambassador
Wronecka for their briefings. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Wronecka for her work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan.

Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan in September 2018, South Sudan has
seen a drastic reduction in conflict, the ceasefire
has been maintained in most parts of the country
and the security situation has continued to improve.
China welcomes those developments. Meanwhile, the
country still faces challenges in achieving peace and
stability amid a dire humanitarian situation and a
further extension of the deadline for the formation of
the Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity. The top priority now is to continue to assist the
country in maintaining the hard-earned momentum
towards peace. The implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement is key to a political resolution of the issue
of South Sudan. The assistance of the international
community, and the Security Council in particular,
should focus on facilitating the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement by all parties through greater
efforts in the following three areas.

First, the leadership of the Government of South
Sudan should be fully respected. The parties in South
Sudan bear the primary responsibility for implementing
the Revitalized Agreement. The international
community should enhance communication with all
parties, particularly the Government, listen carefully
to their opinions and proposals and provide the
necessary funding and material and technical support
on the political and security fronts, based on the
country's needs.

Secondly, support to the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) should continue
so that it can play its role as the main mediation
channel. The United Nations and the Security Council
should enhance coordination with the African Union,
IGAD, other regional and subregional organizations
and the countries of the region, including the Sudan.
They should support their mediation efforts, focusing
on helping the Government of South Sudan and the
opposition consolidate mutual trust and confidence and
maintain a dialogue in order to reach consensus as soon
as possible on such core issues as security arrangements
and the number and boundaries of states.

Thirdly, humanitarian and economic assistance
to South Sudan should continue. The international
community should help it address issues such as
food security and the return and resettlement of
displaced persons, as well as increasing investment in
agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education, health
care and other fields in order to improve the capacity of
the South Sudanese people to rebuild their homes and
resume development.

China highly commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan for its important contribution
to maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan and
supports the Mission in its assistance to the South
Sudanese parties in implementing the Revitalized
Agreement and advancing the peace process. China
has been a consistent supporter of the peace process
in South Sudan. To help the country implement the
Revitalized Agreement, we are sending a batch of food
and material assistance to South Sudan and working
actively to ensure that it is delivered. We are ready to
work with the international community to continue to
play a constructive role in achieving peace, stability
and development in South Sudan.

