Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of this resolution.
The Security Council had to respond to the request
made to it by the African Union and, of course, to the
urgency of the situation in Darfur.

Indeed, in security and humanitarian terms, that
situation is extremely worrisome. Over recent months
we have seen continued and even growing violence. Its
primary victims are civilians, a great number of whom
are the direct targets of atrocities. Millions depend on
international assistance for their subsistence. Yet the
security conditions in which humanitarian aid is
delivered continue to deteriorate. Access to those
needing assistance is becoming more limited, and if the
deterioration of the security situation continues, most
humanitarian operations in Darfur will be threatened.

The Abuja Agreement, whose signing was a
significant step towards a return to peace, is being
weakened by the refusal of many movements to join it
and by the continuing violence. The African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) is thus operating in
particularly difficult conditions; it recently suffered
further human losses. The African Union's resolute
engagement to support peace in Darfur deserves our
full support.

The text that we just adopted confirms the
Organization's resolve to assist in the return of peace
to Darfur. Indeed, it envisages a remarkable effort by
the United Nations, whose peacekeeping operations
have now reached an unprecedented level. That is a
real challenge for the Organization, and it is our
collective responsibility to ensure that it is successful.
That will require continued consultation with the
Sudanese authorities, whose cooperation will be
essential for the deployment of the operation in Darfur
and for the fulfilment of its mission. Of course, the
United Nations has no goal other than to provide its
assistance to one of its Members, the Sudan.

The remarkable cooperation established between
the African Union and the United Nations must also
continue, both at the political level and in terms of the
presence on the ground. The United Nations operation

in Darfur will, as envisaged in the resolution, have a
distinctly African character and rely on strong African
participation.

Finally, it will be important to continue to address
the Darfur crisis in its regional dimension. Indeed, in
recent months we have seen all the repercussions that it
could have on the stability of neighbouring countries,
particularly Chad and the Central African Republic.
With regard to all of these points, the resolution that
we just adopted contains clear guidelines, which my
delegation welcomes. The spirit of cooperation that
characterized the drafting of this text should also guide
its implementation.

