Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to you, Sir, for arranging this meeting, and
we wish to express our gratitude to Mrs. Ogata for the
briefing.

In the past 10 years, in her capacity as High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs. Ogata has made
positive efforts for resolving refugee problems the
world over. These have won her the highest acclaim
from the international community. We wish to avail
ourselves of this opportunity to express our gratitude
for her contribution.

Mrs. Ogata has informed us in this briefing, as
well as in previous ones, of the serious situation of
refugees and internally displaced persons in different
parts of the world. She has mentioned the need for
protection of humanitarian personnel. In particular, she
has noted the link between United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the question of refugees,
including the direct impact of refugees on countries in
the regions concerned. This has also been duly noted
by the Security Council mission to West Africa. Our
consideration of the Brahimi report has also touched
upon such issues.

Over recent years, the Security Council has
adopted a number of resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of humanitarian personnel,
and, in particular, in January of this year it adopted a
presidential statement on the protection of United
Nations and related staff and humanitarian personnel. It
is necessary for the Security Council, while striving to
strengthen peacekeeping operations, to make a further
study in greater depth on the strengthening of
coordination among United Nations bodies in an
integrated approach to security issues. The real
solution, in a fundamental sense, of the refugee
problems lies in the prevention and early settlement of
disputes and conflicts. As the organ which has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
has an unshirkable duty in this regard.

In the context of the Security Council, special
mention must be made of African refugees. Over a long
period of time, as a result of war and natural disasters,
Africa has consistently been the continent with the
greatest number of refugees and internally displaced
persons. I wish to recall here that Mrs. Ogata gave a
special briefing on African refugees to the Security
Council; in response, many countries urged the
international community to accord equal treatment to
refugees in different parts of the world and to increase
assistance to African refugees so as to help alleviate
their very serious humanitarian situation at an early
date. Let us all hope that the international community
will continue to make efforts in this regard.

