Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset, allow me,
Sir, to extend, on behalf of the delegation of Oman, our
sincere thanks to the Secretary-General for his lucid
report on the situation in Tajikistan. We take this
opportunity to extend our support to him and to his
Special Envoy, Mr. Pr'riz-Ballon, for the role they are
playing in trying to help the Tajik parties achieve national
reconciliation and to bring about a peaceful end to their
conflict.

While we welcome the positive results arising from
the Kabul meeting between the President of Tajikistan,
Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov, and the leader of the Tajik
opposition, Mr. Abdullo Nuri, and the convening of a
fourth round of talks in Almaty from 22 May to
1 June 1995, we particularly welcome the decision taken
by parties to extend the agreement on a temporary cease-
fire and cessation of other hostile acts.

My Government concurs with the views expressed
by the Secretary-General in his report to the effect that,

 

despite the efforts exerted in this regard, the parties are still
some way away from reaching a comprehensive settlement
or addressing the substantive political issues, even though
14 months have passed since the first round of talks was
convened.

We therefore commend the Secretary-General's
initiative in calling on the two parties to spare no time in
making progress towards national reconciliation in
Tajikistan through direct talks and candid cooperation. This
is the only means to build mutual confidence between the
parties, thus paving the way for the achievement of a
comprehensive political solution to the crisis, given that the
Tajik parties themselves must assume the responsibility for
resolving the conflict and that the United Nations can play
only a conciliatory and facilitating role in assisting them to
achieve practical solutions. We call upon all parties to
refrain from any act that could cause a deterioration of the
situation, and we stress the need to respect international
borders.

There is no doubt that the Joint Commission
established to monitor and verify violations of the cease-fire
agreement has been functioning in a way that is not up to
our expectations and not in accordance with the mandate
assigned it by the protocol to the Tehran Agreement. We
hope that the parties will give the Commission the required
attention and will cooperate with it in a manner that will
enable it to discharge its tasks more effectively.

We join the consensus prevailing among the members
of the Security Council, who share the opinion today that
there is a need to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT), as
recommended by the Secretary-General, and we appreciate
the positive role the Mission has been playing. My
delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

