Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/397)
on progress towards the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, presented by his Special Envoy,
Ms. Guebre Sellasie. We take this opportunity to
congratulate her on her appointment and to recognize
the work done by her predecessor, Mr. Romano Prodi.

The report describes the initiatives taken and
progress made in implementation of the governance,
security and resilience pillars laid out in the integrated
strategy for the Sahel, while recognizing the complex
challenges and tasks that must be faced to make
progress in terms of peace and stability in the region.
We note the regional initiatives and the meetings and
programmes hosted by the United Nations through
its agencies and other members of the international
community. They illustrate the importance attached to
the situation in the region and the urgency of making
progress towards concrete results.

My delegation believes special attention should be
paid to strengthening the rule of law and its institutions
and engaging in cooperation to that end. We appreciate
the series of meetings held under the theme of the first
strategic objective, namely governance, particularly
considering that a large number of countries will have
elections in the coming two years and they will need
to be credible, transparent and clean. In that regard,
we would like to highlight the importance of ensuring
the full and effective participation of women in those
electoral processes from their earliest stages and, in
general, in the public political arena and the economic

sector. We acknowledge the efforts and work that the
United Nations Office for West Africa, UN-Women and
the Economic Community of West African States are
carrying out in this area.

In relation to the second objective, which is
security, the region now faces a complex and difficult
situation. The report describes the events in Mali and
Libya and the activities of terrorist groups in the region.
The uncertainty facing the region due to transnational
crime, the activities of extremist groups, trafficking in
arms and drugs and environmental issues, among other
challenges, continues to hamper progress and requires
a swift and appropriate response.

There was a 60 per cent increase in terrorist attacks
in the Sahel and the Maghreb between 2012 and 2013
and an increase in the presence of extremist groups
and jihadists. Enhanced efforts are therefore needed
so that the countries of the region, with the support of
the international community, can proceed to establish
mechanisms or instruments that enable them to respond
to those threats. Only a coordinated response in which
there is a fluid exchange of information between national
entities will allow them to confront those scourges. We
welcome, in that respect, the first meeting of officials
from the police, customs and intelligence services who
are responsible for border control in 11 countries of the
Sahel and Maghreb.

In terms of resilience, the humanitarian situation
in the region is fragile, and the numbers in the report
are troubling. Twenty million people at risk of food
insecurity, 5 million children at risk ofmalnutrition and
over 1.5 million displaced are alarming figures. We hope
that the development for the first time of a three-year plan
with a view to providing a comprehensive multisectoral
response and generating stronger partnerships between
the humanitarian community and the development
community will respond to those pressing needs. We
hope to have more background on the development and
implementation of that plan.

At a time when there is talk of donor fatigue,
it seems necessary to not only rethink mechanisms
to respond to emergencies, but to be generating
mechanisms or partnerships to make progress in the
region's development. Failure to respond adequately
to these situations is to risk allowing criminals and
extremist organizations to use precisely such conditions
to capture and recruit vulnerable groups, in particular
youth.

We take note of the various initiatives and
mechanisms adopted in order to make progress on
implementing the integrated strategy for the Sahel.
We stress the importance of all such initiatives and
mechanisms being properly coordinated and maintained
over time and, in particular, responding to priorities
determined by the countries themselves. Such an
approach in which, alongside national ownership, the
link between the rule of law, security and development
will be recognized, will allow for the complex situation
in the region to be adequately addressed.

