Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): The delegation of Guinea-Bissau wishes to
take this opportunity to reaffirm its firm position and
determination in the fight against all acts of terrorism in
all forms; these endanger or end innocent lives and
adversely affect international relations, to the detriment of
the peace and security of States.

We consider that acts of terrorism, irrespective of
their magnitude, are catastrophic for our homes, our
families, our societies and our States. Such acts are blind,
cowardly and repugnant. No one can be absolutely certain
that he is safe from them.

Hence, my delegation believes that, beyond the
question of respect for the sovereignty and integrity of
States and the responsibility of every country to guarantee
security within its borders, the international community
must further strengthen cooperation at all levels and
reaffirm its determination to combat this scourge by
adopting practical, effective measures to spare our
societies from these odious acts.

My delegation Wishes once again to reaffirm its
commitment to the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism, adopted by the General Assembly
in 1994, which states clearly that the suppression of acts
of international terrorism, including those in which States
are directly or indirectly involved, is an essential element
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We reaffirm also our respect for article III of the Charter
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), which
unreservedly condemns political assassination.

 

With respect to the item on our agenda, my delegation
reiterates its vigorous condemnation of and its indignation
at the terrorist assassination attempt against President
Hosni Mubarak that took place on 26 June 1995 at Addis
Ababa. We express once again our friendship for and
fellowship with the Governments of Egypt and of Ethiopia.

The seriousness of this matter calls for it to be given
the appropriate attention by the international community, in
particular by the Security Council and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). Accordingly, operative paragraph 7
of the draft resolution before us asks for close cooperation
between these two bodies and the authorities of the Sudan
in the search for a comprehensive solution to this crisis.

My delegation would like also to thank the Secretary-
General of the OAU and all the individuals who are making
efforts to assist the Government of the Sudan in locating
and extraditing the three suspects so that they can be tried
by the Ethiopian authorities.

We strongly encourage the Sudanese Government to
continue to cooperate with the OAU, the Security Council
and the countries involved, with a view to finding an urgent
and satisfactory solution to this painful issue.

In conclusion, the delegation of Guinea-Bissau will
vote in favour of the draft resolution, while hoping that the
Sudan will continue to cooperate, as it has said it will on
numerous occasions, in order to achieve a speedy
conclusion to this dispute, which, in any case, should not
exist between brotherly, neighbouring countries.

