Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The
international community, including every member of this
Council, has been forced to address raw aggression and war
crimes in the former Yugoslavia for years now. The
resolution the Security Council has adopted today rightly
condemns the offensive action by the Bosnian Serb forces
against the safe area of Srebrenica and against personnel of
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR). The
resulting exodus of tens of thousands of displaced persons
north to Potocari is the sole responsibility of the Pale
leadership. The brazen treatment of the Dutch peace-
keepers by the Bosnian Serbs is outrageous. These actions
fall squarely within the jurisdiction of the war-crimes
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. The Pale leadership
should understand that its aggression against Srebrenica and
any future attacks against any other safe areas, notably
Zepa and Gorazde, will deepen its isolation from the world
community and distance it further from a settlement in
Bosnia.

One of our immediate needs is to address the
humanitarian crisis in the Srebrenica area. The Bosnian
Serbs must comply with the Council's demand for
unimpeded access to the area for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
international humanitarian agencies. My Government will
assist these new victims of Bosnian Serb aggression, and
we encourage other Governments to work with the United
Nations to meet their needs.

There is much talk today about failure: the failure of
UNPROFOR, of the Security Council, of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), of the rapid-
reaction force, of our respective Governments. We have
all suffered a grave injury in recent days, but it is the
Bosnian Serbs who have failed to comply with the most
fundamental principles of international law and the legally
binding demands of this Council.

In recent days the Bosnian Serbs have attacked the
very core of this institution and brought more death and
misery to tens of thousands of Bosnian citizens. While on
the ground the Pale militia is advancing, its leaders are in
full retreat from all that we stand for as an international
body committed to peace and security under the rule of
law.

Even as we condemn the Pale Serbs' contempt for
the international community, we must acknowledge
shortcomings in our efforts. The Council resolution today,
which we co-sponsored, must be the beginning of credible
resolve in this body, in our respective capitals and on the
ground in Bosnia.

Obviously, we all prefer peaceful means, but when
brutal force is used the Secretary-General must have the
right to use the resources available to him, in consultation
with the relevant troop contributors, as stated in this
resolution, to employ our resources in the most effective
manner possible to meet the humanitarian needs of so
many desperate Bosnian citizens and to achieve a lasting
peace. To help achieve these ends, my Government firmly
believes that UNPROFOR must remain in Bosnia,
supported by the rapid-reaction force.

The United Nations has made significant
contributions to the welfare of the Bosnian people.
UNPROFOR has a difficult mission that requires tough
decisions under often intolerable conditions. The
leadership of UNPROFOR will need to make even
tougher decisions in the days ahead. My Government
believes that the role of NATO, to which we have
committed significant resources, will be vital to those
decisions in support of UNPROFOR. Also, we support
full and speedy deployment of the rapid-reaction force,
and we are prepared to provide necessary airlift and other
logistical support for that purpose. Recent statements by

 

many of our leaders to make the rapid-reaction force an
effective instrument in support of UNPROFOR should now
be implemented.

In closing, let me take this opportunity to commend
the Dutch contingent formerly based in Srebrenica. The
Dutch peace-keepers have set a standard for bravery and
dedication to the civilians in Bosnia that will be long
remembered.

