Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Allow me to begin
by congratulating Mauritius on organizing this debate.
The high level of participation and interest shows that
it is timely, and we certainly agree with the comment
made by the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Louise
Frechette, when she said earlier today that it is good to
have this meeting chaired by a success story from
Africa.

I would also like to welcome my old friend
Minister Amara Essy and to wish him all the best as he
undertakes his historic transformation. As he said, this
will not be the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
part 2; this will be the African Union - a different
body.

The Council has covered a wide area in the
debate so far, and I notice that many of our colleagues
have tried to answer the many questions that you,
Mr. President, have posed. But we would just like to
focus on one key word: results. Indeed, the very third
sentence of your paper reads, "Since both
organizations" - the OAU and the United Nations -
"aim at finding solutions to disputes/conflicts, it is of
vital importance that their actions complement one
another for effective results." (5/2002/46, annex, first 
paragraph)

If I heard the Ambassador of Cameroon correctly
through the interpretation, I thought at one point he
also said that there seems to be an inverse ratio
between meetings and results. Clearly, that is an area
that we need to focus on.

We did some research for this debate, and I
noticed that the last time the Council debated the
situation in Africa - and I think the Ambassador of
Cameroon reflected on this, too - was in December
1999, when the meeting was chaired by the then-
Council President, Mr. Peter Hain, the United
Kingdom's Minister of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs. Indeed, immediately after the
meeting he tried to summarize what he thought were its
conclusions.
This is what he said. First, he concluded that
there was a broad consensus on the need to institute
regular and more structured consultations and
coordination within the Council and the OAU and the
regional bodies. I suppose Mr. Essy's presence here is
one concrete result. Secondly, he also felt that there
was a need for greater political engagement from the
Council in conflicts in Africa to meet especially its
peacekeeping needs more quickly and effectively.
Thirdly, emphasis was given to the vital importance of
preventive action to address the root causes of conflict,
including better early warning and exchange of
analysis.

Those conclusions were relevant then. They are
still relevant now. Particularly interesting are the
remarks he made at the very end, when he said, "I shall
ask our permanent representative to start work with
others around this table to ensure action by the Council
as quickly as possible I hope that we will see the
first results within the next few weeks." (S/PV4081 (Resumption 1) p. 32)

The first question on our minds is, What results
have we achieved between December 1999 and January
2002? We have actually had a big problem trying to
answer a simple question like that because one of the
structural weaknesses of the Council - I am sorry to
say this, Sir - is that there is no institutional memory.
There is no linkage between one debate and another
debate on the same subject. I am glad that, for
example, in a technological breakthrough, this debate
is being telecast live on a web site. But it would be
good if you could also go to the web site and get
concrete information on what we agreed on in 1999,
what we have done and where else we have to go.

The absence of such knowledge means, of course
that in a sense, we have to make stabs in the dark to
find out what has happened. As usual, when you try to
find out whether progress has been made, you find
there is bad news and good news. If one wants to look
for bad news, one need look no further than quoting
what the report of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development itself said: "The poverty and
backwardness of Africa stands in stark contrast to the
prosperity of the developed world." I think the Foreign
Minister of Guinea made a similar comment when she
spoke today. The report adds that in Africa, half of the
population lives on less than one dollar a day. The
mortality rate of children under the age of five is 140
per 1000. Life expectancy at birth is only 54 years.
Only 58 per cent of the population has access to safe
water. The rate of literacy of people over 15 is 41 per
cent. The most telling point it makes is that you need a
growth rate of 7 per cent to eliminate poverty but that
the current growth rate is about 3 per cent.

Clearly, if you want to refer to bad news, you can
find it. But there is also good news. As we all know, in
the area of conflicts, there have been significant
improvements. I think several speakers have noted that
the situation in West Africa today is certainly much
better than it was in 1999, when, one may recall, the
Revolutionary United Front was holding United
Nations peacekeepers hostage. Even the situation in the
Great Lakes region has improved in the last two years.
Indeed, the United Nations overall has been doing a
betterjob in the field of peacekeeping in Africa.

But even here, I want to balance what I have just
said by quoting another distinguished son of the
continent who now serves in the Organization Mr.
Olara Otunnu, in "The Peace and Security Agenda of
the United Nations", said:

"that the United Nations should invest its political
and material resources where they are needed
most and where they are likely to make the
greatest difference is of course understandable.

"While selective engagement is perhaps a
necessary response to the present realities, it also
poses a serious moral predicament as a long-term
policy. Under selective engagement, conflicts will
inevitably fall into two categories: on the one
side, those 'adopted' by the United Nations or
other international organizations and, on the
other, the ones that are allowed to fall between
the cracks of the international system."

Clearly we cannot allow this to carry on, and we
have to find a solution to this problem. But I hope that
as a result of this debate, we will try at some point to
come up with a concrete, comprehensive analysis as to
whether we are moving forward or are moving
backward in our efforts to promote peace and
development in Africa.

Incidentally, I will mention as an aside that what
we tried to do at the last wrap-up session, in December
last year, was to look at what were the most successful
and least successful files of the Security Council in an
effort to try and see where we need to pay attention.

It is for this reason that we welcome your
proposal, Sir, for a working group, and we hope that
your proposal will be endorsed. We agree with the
views expressed by the Parliamentary Under-Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs,
Baroness Amos, when she spoke earlier today and
supported the working group, saying it needs "a clear
mandate designed to produce concrete and deliverable
outcomes within a specific time frame".

We support this emphasis on results because we
ourselves have participated in many, many meetings on
Africa. In the 1980s, when I had the pleasure of serving
with Minister Amara Essy, I chaired meetings of the
United Nations Programme of Action for African
Economic Recovery and Development (UNPAAERD).
Two years ago, I also chaired the meetings on the
causes of conflict in Africa. So, it is clear that we have
had lots of meetings on African issues. That is why it is
important to remember some very wise words of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan. In December 1999,
when he opened the Council's debate on the situation
in Africa, he made the rather pertinent remark that if
meetings alone could solve problems, he believed that
all of Africa's problems would have been solved by
now. Clearly, we have to move beyond meetings to
action.

Here, I must say I am very pleased, Sir, that you
have in an important innovation encouraged the
participation of the President of the Economic and
Social Council. Clearly, the issues of conflict and the
issues of development are interrelated, and if we are to
solve the problems, we have to come together with the
other agencies in the United Nations and work with
them. I noticed that the Ambassador of Cameroon also
suggested the importance of such coordination. This is
why I will end with one final quotation, taken from a
World Bank report published two years ago, entitled
"Can Africa Claim the 21St Century?" The report's
central message was:

"Yes, Africa can claim the 21St century. But this is
a qualified yes, conditional on Africa's ability -
aided by its development partners - to overcome
the development traps that kept it confined to a
vicious cycle of underdevelopment, conflict and
untold human suffering for most of the 20th
century."

We hope that as a result of this meeting, we will all
come together.
