Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is grateful
for the convening of this meeting and the comprehensive
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix. We
are also pleased to welcome once again to New York
His Excellency Mr. Tieman Coulibaly, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.

Just a few days after the three-year anniversary of the
signing of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali as a result of the Algiers process, once again we
have an opportunity to assess the progress achieved in
the implementation of the Agreement and to evaluate
the work and functioning of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA). My Government welcomes
the achievements made by the Government and the
signatory movements in the implementation of the
Agreement, as noted in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/541), although some challenges
still remain. We especially underscore the timeline
for priority actions and the road map - adopted,
respectively, in January and March.

With regard to the measures and reforms on matters
of security and defence, the redeployment of the army
to several of the country's cities and the tentative
resumption of mixed patrols composed of elements of
the Malian defence and security forces and the platforms
in the north, as agreed in 2016 within the framework of
the Operational Coordination Mechanism, are positive
signs that generate trust among the security forces and
the various local armed groups. It should be recalled
that the mixed patrols have been considered the
impetus for the reconfiguration of the Malian armed
forces, in which former members of rebel armed groups
are included, and that the Mechanism's mission is
fundamentally to protect and promote the progressive
stabilization of the northern regions of the country.
Equatorial Guinea commends the efforts of the
Government to stabilize the country and welcomes the
Prime Minister's recent visit to the north, which we
believe will contribute to finding a lasting solution to
the problem.

Despite this encouraging climate, we believe that
it is important that there be significant short- and
medium-term progress in the economic and social
spheres. In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea encourages the parties to redouble their efforts
to ensure the timely implementation of the Agreement.
Although the parties have reiterated their commitment
to its implementation, the anticipated peace dividends,
such as the provision of basic services, have not yet
materialized for the population, despite the Agreement's
provisions to establish a strategy for the development of
the northern regions.

We hope that this positive trend of progress in
the implementation of the Agreement will continue
through the holding of the presidential elections in
July. In that regard, my Government endorses the
3 June communique of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission calling on political actors in Mali
to act with restraint and to refrain from any action that
could increase tension and provoke greater political
polarization. It is also important for the political leaders
in Mali to ensure the holding of presidential elections
under the necessary conditions of peace, security and
transparency, so that they contribute to ending the
crisis in Mali.

The political process in Mali must continue, as
reflected in the country's Constitution. That requires
strict compliance with the planned timetable for
elections, namely, presidential elections now and
legislative elections later. In the light of the mandate of
MINUSMA under resolution 2364 (2017), the Mission
must continue to provide technical support and exercise
its good offices for the holding of the elections. We
believe that those are aspects that should be included in
the Mission's mandate.

My Government commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General in conducting the independent
strategic review of MINUSMA and agrees with its
primary recommendations, namely, to support national
dialogue in order to promote ownership of the Agreement
by the people of Mali and a strengthening of the nation
beyond State reform; to promote a common vision
among regional and international actors in support of
the peace and stabilization process; and to promote a
peace agreement among the Government, the Security
Council, the United Nations and international partners
under which assistance would be provided in accordance
with clear reference points, including with regard to
progress, good governance and political reforms.

MINUSMA has helped to stabilize the situation in
the country. We believe that its current form has been
very useful for the country and, therefore, we think it
should continue as such. We support the renewal of its
current mandate.

