Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for their insightful contributions. Let me also today,
through the Deputy Secretary-General, thank the
women and men of the United Nations around the world
for their service and courage.

The United Kingdom aligns itself with the upcoming
statement of the European Union.

Conflicts rarely follow a predictable path. We
must move beyond the idea of a set of sequential
responses, which is why the United Kingdom supports
the Secretary-General's vision for a more holistic and
inclusive approach to conflict prevention, management
and resolution. Sustaining peace requires that all of the
United Nations system be aligned in every context and
able to carry out multiple tasks simultaneously.

I would like to focus on two issues today related to
sustaining peace.

The first is how peacekeeping missions should be
situated within wider United Nations efforts. At the
most basic level, the starting point for any peacekeeping
mission should be from all of the information gathered
by the United Nations family over the years, including
what the United Nations has already achieved in the
field. It should be clear what and how peacekeeping
missions will deliver with United Nations partners
during their deployment, and how they will hand over
to other United Nations actors when they leave. For
example, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
may be the second-largest in the world, but it is also
only one of 20 United Nations bodies and agencies
represented in the country.

We in the Council must reflect on these questions
during mission mandating and planning. We need to
take in clear views and understand ground truth from
the field. The Council must be more disciplined in
setting out strategic goals that can be translated through
mandates into prioritized objectives, benchmarks for
success and plans for mission drawdown once these
have been achieved.

On the ground, the whole of the United Nations
should have a joint analysis of the situation, common
objectives and clarity over roles and responsibilities
towards meeting them. In the context of Liberia's
transition, a shared peacebuilding plan has gone some
way towards achieving that. Moreover, a better balance
of responsibilities between missions and country
teams needs to be struck. Not every conflict driver
can be addressed within the lifetime of a peacekeeping
mission. Long-term change is best supported by
United Nations country teams. They should be taking
on responsibilities much earlier, not waiting until a
mission drawdown looms. Important lessons will soon
emerge from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Darfur - contexts where more may be asked of
country teams.

Support from the top is needed for an integrated
approach. The coordinating role of the Strategic
Planning and Monitoring Unit in the Executive Office
of the Secretary-General is a welcome start. It will
enable more integrated analysis and a more coherent
cross-United Nations review of activity in-country. We
would like to see the Unit regularly reviewing peace
operations and look forward to its contribution to the
review of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Peacekeeping missions cannot create the conditions
for their own exit without a sustainable political solution
to conflict. As such, the second issue I should like to
focus on is the primacy of politics.

Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
need to be politically active, using their good offices and
leveraging support from their missions and the wider
United Nations system. We must accept that missions
are political tools in themselves, both representative
of the will of the Council and in their actions on the
ground. The tasks of peace operations are never merely
technical. For example, the re-establishment of effective
States often situations at the centre of mission exit
plans, but missions cannot improve the functioning of
State institutions without an understanding of how these
institutions will be used and by whom. Politically blind
capacity-building efforts risk worsening the situation.

United Nations country teams integrated into
the wider effort also have a role to play in promoting
sustainable political solutions. Greater understanding
of who does and does not benefit from development
programming and how this is linked to political
dynamics is critical. Let us face the facts - where
political regimes are unaccountable, unresponsive to
their own people and unrepresentative, including of
women, appeals to national ownership will ring hollow.

Finally, we in the Council must be politically
engaged and ready to speak. A Council united around
a shared political strategy to de-escalate tensions could
have a powerful effect, but even in the face of flagrant
violations of its resolutions the Council too often finds
itself deadlocked and unable to act. Gert Rosenthal
notes that the Security Council rarely acts to prevent
conflict. My own short experience here has shown that
we are not willing to act even when, as in South Sudan,
there has been conflict for five out of the six years of
the country's existence, a third of the population is
displaced, half are living in food insecurity, and United
Nations resolutions and promises made have been
repeatedly broken.

Peacekeeping is one tool in the sustaining piece
toolbox. It cannot be used in isolation, and we are seeing
progress towards more integrated approaches. Even the
most coherent United Nations response will still be
blunt without attention to the primacy of politics. In
that regard, we have further to go.

