Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
congratulating you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. My delegation also welcomes
Kuwait's assumption of the chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group of the Security Council on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

We all acknowledge that to respond to the
increasingly complex, overlapping and interconnected
challenges to global peace and security, the Council
must become more accountable, inclusive, transparent
and effective, an imperative that demands and warrants
continued improvement in its working methods.

Presidential note S/2017/507, of August 2017,
addresses the Council's practice in a holistic manner.
Our focus should remain on the effective and consistent
implementation of the measures identified in that note.

In this regard, I would like to highlight four key
points and make four key suggestions.

First, enhanced engagement of the Council with
the wider United Nations membership is critical. We
all have a stake in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The number and proportion of open
meetings of the Council must therefore be increased.

Similarly, meaningful participation of States with
a legitimate stake in the Council's deliberations should
be ensured throughout the decision-making process.
This is especially true for troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries, Pakistan
being among the more consistent and leading ones.

While we are encouraged by a separate section
in the revised note on consultations with troop- and
police- contributing countries, it is essential that the
Council's effective partnership with TCCs be extended
beyond the mere operational aspects of a mandate
and include decision-making, policy formulation and
mandate formation as well. The implementation of note
S/2013/630 remains pertinent in this regard.

Together with the United Kingdom, my country
led informal consultations by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping on triangular cooperation. The
recommendations flowing from these consultations will
now be considered during the upcoming meeting of the
Special Committee, and we are confident that they will
serve as a point of departure in our efforts to improve
and strengthen existing triangular mechanisms.

Secondly, the Council should be more transparent
and balanced in the working of its subsidiary organs.
Elected members should have a more equitable
representation on these organs. Additionally, they
should also play a bigger role as penholders on issues
on the Council's agenda.

In the same vein, and as other colleagues have also
said this morning, there is no justification for limiting
the scope of the Ombudsman to only one Sanctions
Committee. The mandate of the Ombudsperson for the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities should be expanded to other committees.

Thirdly, we believe that the Council should rely
more on the instrument of diplomacy and pacific
settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the United
Nations Charter. Better utilization of regional and
subregional organizations in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter would surely help.

Increasing reliance on Chapter VII can lead to an
impasse and at times a diminished focus on diplomacy,
which is obviously not desirable. Before mandating
actions under Chapter VII of the Charter, the Council
should ensure that all recourse to peaceful means have
been exhausted and that this remains a measure of
last resort.

Fourthly, nothing undermines the credibility of the
Council more than selective implementation of its own
resolutions. The Council should therefore periodically
review the implementation of its own resolutions,
especially on long-standing issues such as the Jammu
and Kashmir dispute. Failure to enforce its own
resolutions undercuts not just the Council's standing in
the world but also both the image and standing of the
United Nations.

During Pakistan's most recent term in the Council,
which was just a few years ago, we reintroduced
wrap-up sessions, which have now become the norm.
Pakistan also made specific proposals on enhancing
intra-Council communication and organized Arria
Formula meetings. These steps were taken to augment
openness and transparency in the Council's work.

We have not been alone in this endeavour. Over
the years, elected members of the Council have led
the charge in bringing improvements to its working
methods. There is in fact an inextricable link between
the nature of the membership of the Council and the need
felt to make the Council more open and transparent.
This link is called "accountability".

The best way to enhance the democratic and
representative character of the Council is therefore to
reinforce this norm of accountability and not to support
any actions that threaten to undermine or reverse
these ideals.

