Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I thank Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I also
thank the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for their statements.

The peace process in the Middle East is at a
delicate and critical juncture. The situation remains
tense. It is therefore critical that the parties resume
negotiations without delay. We commend the
international and regional efforts that have been
undertaken to restart the negotiations. We call on the
parties to embark on negotiations with a view to
achieving comprehensive peace based on the vision of
two democratic States - Israel and Palestine - living
side by side in peace and security.

We are encouraged by the continued efforts of the
Palestinian Authority in the West Bank to fulfil its
obligations under the Road Map, particularly in the
sectors of security and economic development. We
remain deeply concerned about the continued
construction of settlements and settler violence in the
occupied territory. We note the announcement by
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu in November 2009 of
a 10-month freeze on new housing projects in the West
Bank. This is a positive step. However, we call for a
complete freeze on all settlement activity, including
natural growth.

We are concerned about the recent firing of
rockets by Hamas into Israel and the air strikes by
Israel into Gaza during the reporting period. We call on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and to avoid
further escalation. This is yet another reminder of the
need for a permanent ceasefire, as envisioned in
resolution 1860 (2009).

We commend Egypt and others for the role they
have continued to play in promoting intra-Palestinian
dialogue. We call on all Palestinians to resolve their
differences within the framework of the intra-
Palestinian dialogue in order to achieve unity.

We remain concerned by the grave humanitarian
situation in Gaza. However, we welcome the recent
opening of the Kerem Shalom crossing into Gaza by
Israel to allow some exports to leave, humanitarian
goods to be transferred and some building materials to
enter. However, we think that this is not enough. We
call for the complete lifting of the blockade on Gaza in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009).

We are encouraged by the peaceful political
situation in Lebanon during the reporting period. My
delegation is concerned, however, about the incidents
that continue to occur, which are likely to heighten
tensions in the region. We call on all parties to fully
implement resolution 1701 (2006).

Finally, the heightened tensions in the Middle
East and the lack of progress in the peace process are
reminders that the Security Council should remain
fully seized of and engaged in support of these
processes. Uganda, for its part, will continue to support
the efforts of all parties to achieve a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East, as envisioned in relevant
Security Council resolutions.

