Mr. Simfio (Mozambique): It is with great pleasure
that I wish to extend to you, Sir, my congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. You can rest assured of my
delegation's cooperation as you discharge your duties. Let
me commend your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador
Alfredo Cabral of Guinea-Bissau, for the exemplary manner
in which he presided over the Council's work last month.
I also wish to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his strong leadership in dealing with the growing
concerns facing this body, in particular with regard to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The representative of the Chairman of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security, my dear brother and
colleague, His Excellency Mr. Stanislaus Mudenge,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, has already
highlighted our major concerns on the issue before us
today. In doing so, he has also reiterated the Southern
African region's continued support for and solidarity with
the people of Angola, as well as our collective desire to
contribute, to the best of our ability, to the attainment of a
lasting peace and tranquillity in that sister country.

His Excellency Mr. Venancio De Moura, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Angola, has just given us a vivid picture
of the latest developments in his country. My delegation
has examined the Secretary-General's report contained in
document S/1996/827, dated 4 October 1996, and other
relevant documents before the Council. We salute the
Secretary-General for his objective report, which we see as
a good basis for our discussions today.

In reading that report, my delegation wishes to
commend the fact that the ceasefire continues to hold
throughout the territory of Angola, despite several
violations registered during the period under review.
However, we are concerned with the slow pace of
implementation of major provisions of the Lusaka Protocol.
These include, inter alia, the quartering of UNITA troops,
the formation of the Angolan Armed Forces, and the
demobilization and socio-economic reintegration of former
soldiers. In this context, the issue of the low quality of
weapons and ammunition surrendered by UNITA to the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) must be urgently addressed. This fact, coupled with the
discrepancy between the number of troops initially declared

 

by UNITA and the numbers of those which have actually
been registered in the assembly areas, casts serious doubts
over the real intentions of UNITA in the overall peace
process. Moreover, restrictions imposed by UNITA on
demining and road-rehabilitation activities will only delay
the undertaking of the needed humanitarian relief
operations. Therefore, these actions, which are contrary to
the well-being of the Angolan people, should be stopped.
As illustrated in the Secretary-General's report, a
summit meeting of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security was recently held at Luanda, in an effort to
reverse the apparent stalemate in the implementation of
the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. The summit, inter
alia, expressed deep regret over the absence of Mr. Jonas
Savimbi from the meeting at this crucial time in the
process, and made a strong appeal to UNITA to fulfil its
commitments within the deadlines established by the
Lusaka Protocol and Security Council resolution 864
(1993).

As I emphasized in my statement before the General
Assembly, Mozambique, along with other SADC
countries, deems it of the utmost importance that the
conflict in Angola be finally settled. Peace in Angola is
a matter of regional concern. It will contribute decisively
to the achievement of the strategic goals set forth by
SADC, and it will allow our region to embark on the
process of regional integration and dedicate our collective
efforts to the well-being of our peoples.

Continued instability in Angola has prevented that
country from contributing more effectively to the
implementation of projects envisaged by our Community
and other initiatives on the continent. Angola itself is a
coordinator of an important sector - energy - within
SADC. Therefore, peace in that country is vital to enable
the people and the Government of Angola to play a more
active role in the efforts for national reconstruction and
development, as well as in the search for solutions to
other conflicts still prevailing in other African countries.
Furthermore, instability in Angola hinders regional efforts
aimed at creating a favourable environment for
investment. For these reasons, the leaders of the region
have resolved to give their utmost priority to the speedy
implementation and satisfactory conclusion of the peace
process in Angola. We believe that in order to ensure the
expeditious implementation of the "Acordos de Paz" and
all relevant Security Council resolutions, this body should
send a strong and clear message to UNITA, urging it to
comply fully with its commitments.

 

