Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, as
well as Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their briefings, which provide us with
a very clear framework for analysis and action. I also
thank Mr. Beasley and Ms. Jarhum for their important
briefings on the situation in Yemen, which is more
worrisome than ever.

France believes that, when confronted with the
increasingly devastating humanitarian tragedy in
Yemen, we have the collective responsibility, and now
an opportunity, to put an end to the war and pave the
way for a political solution. Despite the scope of the
problems, there is a window of opportunity today
that the Security Council must take advantage of by
doing all it can to support the necessary cessation of
hostilities and the Special Envoy's mediation efforts. In
that connection, I would like to turn to the situation in
Al-Hudaydah, which is the tipping point for the situation
in Yemen, and touch upon the constant deterioration of
the humanitarian situation.
Recent clashes and bombardments, which have
claimed the lives of many people, are endangering
civilians, especially women and children, as well as
endangering civilian infrastructure and blocking aid
delivery routes. The ongoing daily deterioration of
the humanitarian situation is pushing us ever closer
to total disaster, while the latest estimates point to
widespread famine, a large-scale cholera epidemic
and the possibility that several generations of Yemenis
will be completely deprived of an education. In that
respect, military pauses are a means of reducing the
intensity of clashes and fostering a positive climate for
the resumption of political discussions, but it is clear
that we must go further.

My second point is that it is more important than
ever to respond to Mr. Lowcock's five specific asks.
That must be our top priority. The Council must call for
a lasting cessation of hostilities as soon as possible and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
especially ifit is critical to the country's economy. The
access and delivery of humanitarian aid and imports,
including between Sana'a and Al-Hudaydah, as well as
the stabilization and recovery of the Yemeni economy,
are essential, as was so eloquently voiced earlier.

Humanitarian and medical personnel who operate
in a high-risk environment must not only be protected,
but must be able to plan their operations and implement
them safely. I would like to reiterate our full support
for the efforts of humanitarian actors, who work in
particularly difficult conditions. We also commend the
work of the United Nations and all the teams involved
to develop a single road map on the humanitarian
dimension in relation to the World Bank, the
humanitarian response plan and the new Famine Early
Warning Systems Network, which must be adequately
financed, as Mr. Lowcock indicated. Finally, I would
like to reiterate France's full support for Special
Envoy Griffiths. I thank him for his tireless efforts to
resume negotiations in order to reach an inclusive and
lasting political solution. France resolutely stands with
Mr. Griffiths.

We believe, again, that there is now a real window of
opportunity to relaunchacrediblepoliticalprocess~the
only solution to the crisis in Yemen. The humanitarian
tragedy looming over the country must compel us to
act. As the Special Envoy indicated, several obstacles
have been removed, such as the sensitive issue of the
evacuation of wounded Houthis, which is an important
step towards ensuring that the Houthis are present at the
negotiating table. We therefore encourage the Special
Envoy to continue discussions with all parties with a
view to making further progress on confidence-building
measures. The momentum must be maintained. We are
ready to collaborate on a draft resolution to respond
to the humanitarian emergency by fully endorsing
Mr. Lowcock's five asks and supporting the efforts of
Mr. Griffiths to reach a sustainable, comprehensive and
inclusive agreement. In that connection, as Ms. Jarhum
noted, women's participation in resolving the Yemeni
crisis is essential.

We therefore call on the parties to engage with the
Special Envoy immediately, without conditions and in
good faith. We call on all those involved to facilitate
that work, and we welcome the recent announcements
of support for the United Nations process made by
stakeholders in the region. The quest for a solution
is becoming more urgent every day. For millions of
Yemenis, it is now a very real question of life or death.
France will remain fully committed in that regard.

