Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of March and to thank
you for holding this debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2009/ 135)
on the situation in Afghanistan. I am also grateful to
my friend, Mr. Kai Eide, for his comprehensive
briefing here today and for his able leadership of the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). We have taken note of his
important points, the suggestions that he has made and
the concerns that he has raised.

The Security Council is discussing Afghanistan at
an important time. In two days, the people of
Afghanistan will celebrate our new year, so we begin
today from a new perspective of hope. The
preparations for our presidential and provincial
elections provide a chance to strengthen legitimacy and
national unity. The continuing insecurity in parts of the
country threatens those objectives but also gives us a
clear goal in the coming months.

There has been a welcome increase in
international focus on Afghanistan. Afghans are
pleased to note the many recent strategic reviews and
recommendations, including the upcoming conference
to be held in The Hague on 31 March. We hope that
that new spirit of engagement will help us proceed in a
constructive, unified and coordinated way.

The international community should join
Afghanistan in that spirit. In the past eight years,
Afghanistan has made progress. We can continue to
make progress. Afghans are fully invested in a
legitimate, inclusive democratic process, and we see
that in the strong engagement in the national debate
surrounding the upcoming elections. Afghans want to
ensure that their country's future is a continuation of
the peaceful modernization that began in the early
twentieth century.

Afghans are eager to work with the international
community to eliminate the threat of the Taliban, Al-
Qaida and other terrorist groups. The Taliban is not an
organic part of Afghan society. It is a product of the
violence, cross-border madrassas and foreign
indoctrination that disrupted our stable society. Today,
a mere 4 per cent of Afghans want to see the Taliban in
power.

The international community should also be
encouraged by the reminder that Afghans supported the
United States-led intervention in 2001. Afghans
welcomed the defeat of the terrorists and extremists
who had invaded and corrupted our homeland. As long
as the international forces provide safety, security and
the promise of a democratic future, Afghans will
continue to be staunch allies. But Afghans are
simultaneously driven by the urgency of keeping the
dark days securely behind us. The devastation of the
Taliban is a constant reminder of the effects of
neglecting the destruction of war. The greatest blunder
of our time is to forget that the ruins of war breed
angry, desperate and radicalized people.

The world has an obligation to act so that the
Taliban and Al-Qaida do not return to power. That
obligation is both moral and practical. Morally, the

horrific abuse of civilians, particularly children and
women, anywhere is a threat to freedom everywhere.
In practical terms, terrorism knows no borders. Attacks
in New York, London, Mumbai and Kabul by the same
groups show that the threat in Afghanistan is, indeed, a
global threat. Global action is the answer to a global
threat.

Afghans have seen the significance of our
partnership with the international community. Our
biggest accomplishments - our constitution, the
elections, the improvements in the Afghan National
Army, infrastructure, education and health - are the
projects that have received the strongest international
commitment. International dedication bears fruit.

But we have only just begun. In the areas where

Afghans received less international attention - the
Afghan National Police, governance, corruption and
judiciary reform - we have not achieved all we

should. After the Bonn Conference in 2001, the
international community's light-footprint approach
brought minimal engagement in Afghanistan. We have
only recently refocused, so we cannot expect results
immediately. It takes time to build a stable, prosperous,
democratic society after more than 30 years of war.
Progress is a process, completed only over time. Thus,
we must stay the course. There is still important work
to be done.

That work should focus on the priority of a self-
sustaining, functioning State that serves Afghans, for a
functioning State is the strongest bulwark against
terrorism. Only a democratic, stable Afghanistan will
stop terror and destruction. Democracy should be
strengthened, not weakened.

In strengthening the Afghan State, we must have
a comprehensive strategy. Today, I would like to
highlight a few areas for focus.

First, we should ensure that there are free, fair
and transparent elections in August. That process
should encourage a protective, inclusive debate that
strengthens the legitimacy of the institutions that we
have already created through the Bonn process.

Secondly, Afghan ownership must continue to be
the linchpin of international efforts. We understand that
the ultimate responsibility for our country lies in our
own hands. We will do our own work. Therefore,
economic development should continue to be
implemented through the framework of the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy and the Paris priorities.
We must ensure that aid and expertise are available
promptly and delivered effectively, efficiently and
transparently. Every penny in Afghanistan should be
delivered to Afghans. We should also continue to build
the Afghan army and police so that Afghans can take a
stronger role in the fight against terror. There should be
greater Afghan oversight over joint operations with our
international partners and an increased focus on
preventing civilian casualties.

We want to stress, too, that reconciliation can
take place only under the leadership of the Afghan
Government. The Government of Afghanistan
recognizes the importance of a political solution. We
negotiate with those elements of the Taliban who are
willing to be reconciled, but any talks must be held
with full respect for the constitution of Afghanistan and
must be conducted from a position of strength.

Thirdly, Afghans appreciate the new regional
focus on our challenges, which protects the sovereignty
of our State. We welcome the new trilateral process
involving the United States, Afghanistan and Pakistan
that started recently in Washington, D.C., and we look
forward to a future of increased cooperation. Our
neighbours will be the first to benefit from a stable
Afghanistan: fewer refugees, less narcotics, more trade.

Today, Afghans hope that the Security Council
will continue its newly developed and refocused efforts
to help us regain our footing after decades of war.
Afghans still look with great hope to the international
community and fully approve the extension of
UNAMA's mandate in support of the Government of
Afghanistan.

Despite the continued challenges of terrorism and
violence, despite the critics, despite the resignation and
despite the doubts, we know our better history.
Afghanistan began its journey towards modernization
in the 19005. Our first constitution, in 1924, made
modern education available to all. By the 1960s, we
guaranteed equal rights for men and women. Afghans
then survived and persevered through three decades of
foreign intervention, a bloody civil war and the brutal
rule of the Taliban. If we could do all of that, we can
succeed in Afghanistan today, for Afghanistan has
been, can be and will be once again a peaceful,
democratic crossroads of our region and a contributing
member of the world community. We begin the new
year in that spirit of hope.
