The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Italy, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. F rancese (Italy)
took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1999/563, letter
dated 17 May 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council; S/ 1999/600, letter dated 24 May 1999
from the Permanent Representative of Djibouti to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/1999/611, letter dated 26 May 1999 from
the Permanent Representative of Eritrea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its alarm at the
serious deterioration in the political, military and
humanitarian situation in Somalia and concern at the
reports of increasing external interference in Somalia.

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment
to a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
situation in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political

independence and unity of Somalia, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It reiterates that full responsibility for
achieving national reconciliation and for restoring
peace rests with the Somali people.

"The Security Council expresses its support for
the activities of the Standing Committee on Somalia
and calls upon all Somali factions to cease
immediately all hostilities and to cooperate with the
regional and other efforts to achieve peace and
reconciliation.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
recent reports of the illicit delivery of weapons and
military equipment to Somalia in violation of the
arms embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992) of
23 January 1992 which could exacerbate the crisis
in Somalia and endanger the peace and security of
the region as a whole.

"The Security Council reiterates its call upon
States to observe the arms embargo and to refrain
from any actions which might exacerbate the
situation in Somalia. It further requests Member
States having information about violations of the
provisions of resolution 733 (1992) to provide this
information to the Committee created pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) of 24 April 1992.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the humanitarian impact of the long-
lasting crisis, and in particular condemns attacks or
acts of violence against civilians, especially women,
children and other vulnerable groups, including
internally displaced persons. It also condemns
attacks on humanitarian workers, in violation of the
rules of the international law.

"The Security Council calls upon the Somali
factions to cooperate on the basis of the principles
of neutrality and non-discrimination with the United
Nations agencies and other organizations carrying
out humanitarian activities. The Council urges all
parties to guarantee the security and the freedom of
movement of humanitarian personnel and to ensure
unhindered access to those in need of assistance. In
this regard, it also commends the existing
coordination of all efforts of the international
community to meet the humanitarian needs of the
Somali people undertaken by the Somali Aid
 

Coordination Body, comprising donors, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations.

"The Security Council urges all States to
contribute generously to the appeal of the United
Nations to ensure continued relief and rehabilitation
efforts in all regions of Somalia, including those
aimed at the strengthening of civil society.

"The Security Council welcomes the continuing
efforts of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) in
Nairobi.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to submit periodic reports on the situation in
Somalia.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/ 16.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.

