Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
long as weapons exist, it will be impossible to achieve
peace. Arms are a catalyst to armed conflicts.

The arms market has perverse consequences. In
1998 there were 588,000 deaths in various conflict
areas as a consequence of the use of small arms and
light weapons. In 41 countries, 300,000 child soldiers
take part in active combat, while insurgent and
paramilitary groups have recruited another 500,000. If
we add the number of displaced people and of those
whose fundamental rights have been affected by
violence, the total number of victims is intolerable.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms and, in particular, its
emphasis on the need for the Security Council and the
General Assembly to coordinate their efforts to
regulate the traffic and use of these weapons. In this
context, we consider it essential for the Security
Council to cooperate in the full implementation of the
Programme of Action adopted by last year's United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

War is a business. Regardless of how bloody or
unjust it may be, war is always a business. Ninety-eight
countries maintain arms industries that, by definition,
depend on war to exist. Among those States only 22
have published official reports on their sales and
transfers of weapons. Arms manufacturers profit from
war and, on occasion, do so at the expense of public
treasuries. The production of weapons is also highly
subsidized. Various Governments offer financial
incentives to their weapons industries through "offset
agreements" and "recoupement fees" in order to make
those industries more competitive on the global level.
The States with arms industries are therefore indirectly
responsible for wars.

Greater transparency in the international weapons
market is required. Currently, only 20 per cent of the
international legal market in small arms and light
weapons can be documented and traced through the
respective customs services. Sales licences, end-user
and final-destination guarantees and other measures to
control the arms market are totally insufficient.

Illicit parallel arms markets continue to exist,
thanks to the action, or inaction, of many Governments.
In 2001 alone, 54 States were linked to transfers or
resales of arms, in clear violation of existing
international arms embargoes.

This deadly trade, which does not respect
borders, requires international regulation. Therefore,
although we welcome the adoption of the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its three Protocols, we regret that it does not
cover the sale or transfer of arms among States or non-
State entities. Unfortunately, the Programme of Action
adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects suffers from the same deficiencies.

Costa Rica fully endorses the first
recommendation in the Secretary-General's report to
the effect that the Security Council should support the
negotiation of an international instrument on the
transfer of small arms. Since 1997, my country has
been advocating the adoption of an international code
of ethics for arms transfers. The draft instrument,
which seeks to ban the transfer of military hardware
and personnel and to eliminate financial and logistical
support for those States whose armed forces, police or
paramilitary units participate in or contribute to the
violation of human rights, was prepared and endorsed
by 19 individuals and institutions - all Nobel Peace
Prize laureates - including our former President,
Oscar Arias Senchez. We urge all Member States that
are committed to a stable and lasting peace to support
that initiative.

We also support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Council resort more
frequently and resolutely to embargoes on arms and
ammunition and adopt strong measures to ensure full
compliance and verification. It is essential for the
Council to examine the possibility of imposing
sanctions on those States that flagrantly violate-
whether directly or indirectly - arms embargoes.
Likewise, all States must participate in the United
Nations Conventional Arms Register and publish
reliable information on their military expenditure and
arms transfers.

My delegation fully agrees with the Secretary-
General that the Security Council must examine and
respond to the harmful interrelationship among the
illicit transfer of weapons, drug trafficking and the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. In this regard,
we would like to recall the valuable and courageous
reports on the illicit exploitation of natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola.

We believe that it will be necessary to request
similar reports to evaluate the actual implementation of
arms embargoes and to study the sources financing of
the illicit arms trade.

Of the 138 States that have provided information,
51 devote more resources to their military budgets than
to education, health care and preventive health care. In
the twenty-first century, there are too many societies
that are armed, yet illiterate and sick. The fight against
the use and proliferation of these weapons requires the
demilitarization of our societies and the creation of a
true culture of peace in which the basic rights of all are
recognized.

In this context, the Security Council must not
only support efforts at disarmament but promote the
reduction of military budgets. We note the Secretary-
General's seventh and eighth recommendations to the
effect that the Security Council should include
measures aimed at the disarmament and demobilization
of combatants within the mandate of peacekeeping
operations. We believe it necessary, however, for those
mandates also to seek the total disarmament of those
societies in which there is armed conflict, as a
necessary step towards stable and lasting peace.

Costa Rica fully supports the holding of the first
biennial meeting to be convened in accordance with the
Programme of Action of the Small Arms Conference.
We trust that the meeting will be held in July 2003 here
in New York.

