Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank you personally, Mr. President,
for having organized this open debate on Kosovo. I
also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and in-depth report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
and to thank Deputy Prime Minister Nebojsa Covic': for
returning to the Council table. I would also like to
welcome Mr. Michael Steiner to the Council. I must
say that I was very impressed by the clarity of his
presentation, which reflects a determined and clear
approach to Kosovo's problems and which augurs well
for a robust continuation of the excellent start of his
mission in Kosovo. My country is convinced that the
efforts made by both Mr. Covie and Mr. Steiner to
normalize the situation in Kosovo will contribute to
achieving the objectives of the international
community set out in Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria associates itself with the statement to be made
later by the Permanent Representative of Spain on
behalf of the European Union. I would nevertheless
like to make a few comments in my national capacity.

My country supports the approach of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General aimed at
defining major priorities in the work of UNMIK that
emphasize the establishment of a viable economy that
can improve the living conditions of members of all
ethnic communities and combat organized crime and
violence.

Bulgaria welcomes the establishment of a central
executive body of the provisional institutions of self-
government of the province. We hope that the entry
into the Government by representatives of all
communities will be achieved soon. The establishment
of provisional institutions of self-government and the
setting up of an effective administration whose
membership reflects Kosovo's multi-ethnic character
will contribute to normalizing the lives of the
population. My country supports UNMIK's efforts to
ensure equal opportunities for the participation of all
communities in the formation of central and local
administration in Kosovo.

Bulgaria supports UNMIK's efforts to improve
security in the province and to combat organized crime
and violence in all their forms. My country fully
supports the delegation of the United Kingdom and
others that have forcefully spoken of the need to better
control organized crime in Kosovo. At the same time,
Bulgaria condemns continued manifestations of
ethnically motivated violence, including violent attacks
against representatives of UNMIK, KFOR and the
Kosovo Police Service. Such attacks must be
categorically condemned by the provisional institutions
of self-government and by all political officials in
Kosovo. Bulgaria is following those events closely and
finds unacceptable any attempts by groups or
individuals, regardless of ethnic affiliation, to
undermine stability and the international community's
efforts through the Special Representative to bring life
in Kosovo back to normal.

My country will continue to insist on a definitive
establishment of the facts regarding the brutal murder
in Kosovo of the Bulgarian citizen Valentin Krumov
and on the need for the perpetrators of that act to be
handed over to UNMIK.

Bulgaria welcome's UNMIK's cooperation with
Macedonian authorities aimed at creating a common
commission of experts entrusted with settling practical
problems regarding a common border on the basis of
agreements reached. The attempts by certain political
groups and individuals in Kosovo to use this technical
element for political ends are totally unacceptable and
do not contribute to strengthening regional stability and
security.

My country believes that continued cooperation
between UNMIK and the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is of particular importance.
That cooperation improves security and strengthens
confidence on the regional level. The agreement
reached on various issues - in particular on prisoner
transfer and the return of refugees - is both a concrete
measure to strengthen confidence between
communities and a sign of improvement in the overall
atmosphere in Kosovo.

Bulgaria supports the international community in
its efforts to respond properly to the need to ensure the
implementation of projects of vital importance to
Kosovo. My country favours having the European
Commission and the World Bank draft a strategy to
reduce Kosovo's dependence on external assistance.
We also welcome the idea of establishing criteria to
allow the province gradually to shoulder responsibility
for its own finances.

Bulgaria will continue to participate in collective
peacekeeping and stability mechanisms in Kosovo. My
country is doing its part by contributing 143 police
officers to the international police forces, as well as
soldiers to KFOR.

In recent months, we have begun to see a certain
ethnic tolerance coming to light in Kosovo. My
delegation is fairly optimistic about the future of inter-
community relations. My country will continue to
support the emergence of a multi-ethnic society in
Kosovo that respects universally recognized principles
and norms of human rights and the rule of law.

We share the view that the process of the return
of refugees and displaced persons is one of the most
important signs of the normalization of life in Kosovo.
That process is directly tied to an improvement in
security conditions, the rebuilding of the economy and
the creation of new jobs.

The presence of UNMIK and KFOR in Kosovo is
a key factor for security. We encourage UNMIK and
KFOR to continue their efforts to guarantee security
and a normal life for all the inhabitants of the province,
along with the provisional institutions of self-
government.

