Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Sir, first of all, to congratulate you once again for
the manner in which you led the Council mission to
Kosovo and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
follow up on and assess development in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

From the outset, I would like to say that this
mission, like all those the Council has taken to the
field, was a complete success because it was able to
observe first hand the level of commitment of the
various parties with regard to resolution 1244 (1999)
and also of obstacles perceived by the parties in the
implementation of the relevant provisions of the
resolution.

The meetings of the mission with President Putin
and President Kostunica were of particular importance
because they enabled members of the Council to hold a
fruitful exchange of views on the requirements of the
particularly sensitive phase through which the entire
subregion is currently passing. The meetings the
mission held with the various Kosovar communities
enabled those groups to express their concerns. They
also enabled the Council members to convey to them a
clear message to the effect that multi-ethnicity is a sine
qua non for lasting peace, not only in Kosovo but in the
entire subregion.

At this stage of my statement I would like to
thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, the Under-Secretary-
General, for the excellent analysis that he has just
presented to the Council on the report of the Secretary-
General on Kosovo. The Tunisian delegation feels that
there is no alternative in that country to tolerance and
cohabitation. It goes without saying that establishing
lasting confidence-building measures among the
various communities is the foundation of a future
multi-ethnic Kosovo. There are of course a number of
both structural and circumstantial reasons that underlie
the breach of trust and continue to fuel mistrust and
mutual rejection. This, in my delegation's opinion, is a
predicament to which an urgent remedy must be found,
because any settlement of this question basically
depends on the support by the parties of a shared vision
of a common future.

In this context we are gratified that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has focused its activities in the field and
among all the parties concerned on the basic
prerequisite of coexistence among the various
communities and has kept them closely channelled
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). With
the help and support of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the civilian police unit, UNMIK has achieved
significant success in the implementation of its
mandate.

The operation's present critical phase requires
stronger political and financial support for UNMIK so
that it can be sure of providing the follow-up to and
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999), which in the
opinion of my delegation remains the perfect
instrument for the resolution of the Kosovo question.

Tunisia feels the time has come for the Kosovar
parties themselves to undertake a direct and
responsible dialogue on the many issues of contention
that they raised in their meetings with the Security
Council mission to the region. In this context it must be
made quite clear that resolution 1244 (1999) is not
negotiable, for it constitutes the international guarantee
for a durable peace in Kosovo and among all Kosovars.

The recommendations in the mission's report are
also unanimous messages that the Council is sending to
all the parties concerned. The political process in
Kosovo must indeed proceed in conformity with
resolution 1244 (1999), and all the parties, in particular
the Kosovo Serbs, must take an active part. Remaining
on the sidelines will certainly not make it any easier for
that community to assert its concerns about security
and other issues.

The promulgation of the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government and the
decision to hold elections throughout Kosovo on 17
November are two important stages that must be
supported by all the parties concerned. We are gratified
that President Kostunica has launched a pressing
appeal to the Kosovo Serb community in Kosovo,
calling on them to commit to the electoral process. We
are convinced that it is only by supporting this process
that the Serb community in Kosovo can assert its views
and concerns and find its place in society.

The establishment of Pillar I by the Special
Representative is an additional guarantee promoting
justice and an end to impunity. Financial means are
necessary for justice and the police system to continue
to contribute to allaying fears and establishing security
for all.

It is essential that the question of the return of the
refugees and displaced persons be handled rapidly,
preferably before the forthcoming elections. The same
applies to persons who have disappeared or are in
detention. Finding solutions to the humanitarian
aspects of the question will promote reconciliation
among the various communities in Kosovo.

The situation in Mitrovica demonstrates the
breadth and depth of the gulf between the Albanian-
speaking and Kosovo-Serb communities. Just as that
city embodies that rift, and the paranoia and even
distrust of what the international community is
undertaking for Kosovo, so must the international
partners in Kosovo maintain their efforts rapidly to re-
establish trust between the main communities of the
city and encourage interaction between them in the
various spheres of social life.

The international programmes for the economic
recovery of that iconic city can be seen as a tool for
consolidating the interdependence of the two
communities. The experiment begun in that context by
the European Union has proven effective and should be
stepped up. It has the merit of helping ethnic divisions
to be healed through co-existence, which in turn will
become a condition for the stability and prosperity of
all ethnic groups. This will ultimately prove to
Kosovars of all ethnicities that it is up to them and
them alone to create the conditions to guarantee lasting
reconciliation.

In conclusion, I wish to pay a ringing tribute to
Mr. Hans Haekkerup for his commitment to the mission
with which he has been entrusted. His outstanding
leadership of UNMIK and his sense of restraint have
made him a respected interlocutor of all Kosovo
communities. My delegation also wishes to
congratulate the Commander of KF OR and all the men
and women who serve under him, as well as the
civilian police elements of UNMIK, for their
selflessness and devotion to the cause of peace.

