Judge Pocar: It is a privilege to appear once
again before the Security Council as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

This is the fifth report of the President of the
Tribunal pursuant to Security Council resolution 1534
(2004). It explains the concrete measures taken, as well
as the challenges faced by the Tribunal from December
2005 to May 2006 in its efforts to meet the objectives
of the completion strategy. I will also update the
Council on new developments that have taken place
since its submission.

It is a special honour to address the Security
Council during your presidency, Madam. On behalf of
the Tribunal, I sincerely thank you for the strong
support your country has demonstrated for our work
over the years. We have also benefited from the
experienced and dedicated service of one of your
citizens as an ad litem judge at the International
Tribunal.

Allow me to begin with a brief overview of the
judicial work of Chambers. In the reporting period, the
Trial Chambers continued to function at maximum
capacity and heard six trials simultaneously, while
managing 22 cases in the pretrial stage. In addition,
Chambers proceeded with four contempt trials
involving six accused and one guilty plea. Almost 200
pretrial decisions were issued and three judgements
rendered. Following the termination of the Milosevic
trial, I reorganized the Trial Chambers to fully engage
the judges of that Chamber in new judicial work and to
allow for the commencement of the three multi-
accused trials involving 21 accused several months
earlier than originally planned. Notably, the first of the
multi-accused trials began in April 2006, involving six
accused, and the other two multi-accused trials,
involving a total of 15 accused, are on track to start in
July 2006.

Similarly, the Appeals Chamber has continued
working at full speed and disposed of 127 appeals both
from this Tribunal and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), including three final
judgements. In July, two more judgements will be
issued and another two are expected in the fall.

To date, 161 persons have been charged by the
International Tribunal and proceedings against 94
accused have concluded. In addition, the Appeals
Chamber of the International Tribunal has concluded
12 ICTR cases and proceedings, involving 16 accused.
Furthermore, other international criminal tribunals are
now benefiting from the International Tribunal's
jurisprudence and experience.

I shall new update the Security Council about the
latest developments following the deaths of Milan
Babic and Slobodan Milosevic since my video-link
conference with the Council on 31 March 2006.

First, with respect to Mr. Milosevic, on 5 April
Dutch authorities finalized their confidential report on
their inquest into his death under Dutch law. The report
confirms that Mr. Milosevic died of natural causes, in
particular of a heart infarction, and rules out any
suggestion of suicide or criminal conduct such as
poisoning.

Secondly, on 15 May, the report on the general
audit of the United Nations Detention Unit by Swedish
authorities, which I authorized, was made public.
While the team of Swedish experts was generally
satisfied with the overall operation of the Detention
Unit they made specific recommendations to improve
the conditions of detention, as well as the management
structure of the Detention Unit. In response, the
International Tribunal established a working group
comprised of representatives from Chambers, the
Registry and the Detention Unit itself, to follow up on
those recommendations.

Thirdly, on 30 May, after the submission of the
report, Judge Kevin Parker, whom I appointed to lead
an internal inquiry into the death of Mr. Milosevic,
submitted his report. The report concludes that there
was proper provision of medical care to Mr. Milosevic
while he was being held at the Detention Unit both by
the Detention Unit's medical doctor and by
independent cardiologists and specialists.
Mr. Milosevic's serious health problems were
complicated by the fact that he insisted on representing
himself, against repeated medical advice. In an effort
to afford Mr. Milosevic the right of self-representation
while not jeopardizing his health, the Trial Chamber
progressively reduced his trial schedule and often
adjourned the trial pursuant to medical advice.
Mr. Milosevic's health was also complicated by his
refusal to comply with the treatment prescribed by his
doctors. On a number of occasions, he refused to be
tested or hospitalized. In addition, Mr. Milosevic failed
to take some prescribed medications, varied the
prescribed dosages and self-medicated with non-
prescribed medications, such as rifampicin, at times
disrupting the effectiveness of prescribed medications.

Judge Parker's report further concludes that the
circumstances suggest that non-prescribed medications
were smuggled into the Detention Unit during
privileged visitations to Mr. Milosevic. Unique
arrangements were made available to the accused by
order of the Trial Chamber in September 2003 for
privileged communications with legal associates and
witnesses in order to allow him to effectively conduct
his own defence. Mr. Milosevic therefore had a private
room with a telephone, computer and facsimile
machine. Those arrangements led to security
deficiencies in the Detention Unit. Where abuses were
discovered, the Tribunal endeavoured to take
appropriate action while still upholding Mr.
Milosevic's rights. The measures taken reduced, but
did not eliminate, the capacity for misuse of the
privileged room.

Finally, Judge Parker's report makes a number of
recommendations and emphasizes that in future close
attention must be paid to the experience of the
Milosevic case in making arrangements for accused to
represent themselves, so as not to compromise security
in the Detention Unit. Specifically, there should be
provision of special training for inspection of materials
brought into the Unit by privileged visitors. On 2 June
I ordered that the working group implementing the
recommendations of the Swedish audit also follow up
on Judge Parker's report.

With regard to Mr. Babic, Dutch authorities
completed their final, confidential report on the results
of their inquest into his death under Dutch law at the
end of May. The report confirms that the cause of death
was suicide and that there was no evidence of criminal
conduct. Judge Parker's internal inquiry could not be
completed until receipt of that extensive report by
Dutch authorities. At present the Dutch report is being
translated into English, and it has become evident that
some aspects require follow-up investigations by Judge
Parker. He has informed me that those investigations
will be concluded in a few days and that his report will
follow soon thereafter. At that time copies of Judge
Parker's report will be forwarded directly to members
of the Council.

Those matters aside, let me now address my first
topic, regarding the completion strategy and the
concrete measures taken by the Tribunal towards its
implementation during the reporting period.

The working group on speeding up trials, which
is chaired by Judge Bonomy with the assistance of
Judges Hanoteau and Swart, issued its final report in
February 2006 and made specific recommendations to
enhance the efficiency of pretrial and trial proceedings
by shifting from a party-driven process to one that is
closely managed by the Tribunal judges. Following an
open dialogue on the report, the judges met in an
informal plenary meeting in April and adopted specific
measures, which are having a fundamental impact on
the efficiency of the Tribunal's trials.

First, a policy has been put into place whereby at
the earliest possible stage all pretrial cases are
transferred to the Trial Chamber that will hear the trial.
In that way, the pretrial judge and the pretrial staff
already familiar with the case will also serve on the
trial, and thus facilitate more efficient proceedings.

Secondly, on 30 May, after the submission of the
report, I convened a second plenary meeting of the
judges of the Tribunal, which adopted an amendment
to rule 73 bis of the Rules with regard to indictments.
The judges have been increasingly aware that the
length of trials starts with the complexity and breadth
of the indictments, which lead to a lengthy presentation
of the parties' cases. Previous efforts by the judges to
change that pleading practice have been largely
unsuccessful. Under this amendment, Trial Chambers
now have the explicit ability, at the pretrial stage, to
invite the prosecution to reduce the number of counts
charged or to direct the prosecution to select the counts
on which the trial should proceed.

The basis for that amendment is the statutory
responsibility of a Trial Chamber to manage the trial
with respect for an accused's right to a fair and
expeditious trial and the right of those in pretrial
detention to be tried within a reasonable period of time.
It also follows a practice common in national
jurisdictions of avoiding overloaded indictments to
protect the integrity of the proceedings. At the same
time, the amendment respects prosecutorial
independence in bringing indictments before the
Tribunal and seeks the prosecution's cooperation in
shortening trials through focused indictments.

Additionally, substantial steps are being taken by
pretrial judges to more proactively manage pretrial
proceedings. In that way they can focus proceedings,
ensure trial readiness and shorten trials. I cannot
mention all the measures, but I would like to highlight
some of them.

Specifically, pretrial judges are establishing work
plans of the parties' obligations at trial, with strict
timetables for presenting their cases and ensuring strict
implementation of such work plans. They are also
requiring the prosecution to, at an earlier stage, specify
its trial strategy, submit a focussed pretrial brief, and
produce the final statements of all prosecution
witnesses to be called at trial. They are obliging the
defence to submit, in a timely manner, a focused
pretrial brief and disclosure of expert testimony in
order to identify points of agreement and disagreement
between the parties, and they are making greater use of
the power to sanction a party for failure to comply with
disclosure obligations.

Additionally, Trial Chambers are ensuring
increased efficiency of the trial proceedings by
shortening the prosecution's case, by determining the
number of witnesses the prosecution may call, limiting
the time available for the presentation of evidence, and
fixing the number of crime sites or incidents charged.
They are making greater use of written witness
statements in lieu of examination-in-chief and
exercising greater control over the cross-examination
of witnesses.

The next topic I wish to raise briefly concerns the
Tribunal's ad litem judges, who have continued to be
an invaluable asset for realizing the objectives of the
completion strategy. During the reporting period, five
new ad litem judges, including one reserve judge, were
assigned to two cases.

In this connection, let me express again my
extreme gratitude to the Council for having adopted
resolution 1660 (2006) in February this year, which
amended our Statute to allow for the assignment of ad
litem reserve judges. The presence of reserve judges
will obviate the need to restart the large, multi-accused
trials should one or more of the judges on the bench be
unable to continue sitting on a case.

My next topic detailed in the report concerns the
referral of cases of intermediate- and lower-ranking
accused from the Tribunal to competent national
jurisdictions pursuant to rule 11 bis. To date, six
accused have been referred to the Special War Crimes
Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and two accused
have been referred to Croatia for trial before its
domestic courts. If all the pending motions are
successfully referred, 10 cases involving 16 accused
will have been removed from the Tribunal's docket.

However, no other cases are earmarked for
referral, as they do not involve intermediate- or lower-
level accused. I wish to note also that, for those
referrals to the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court to
be successful, it is imperative that sufficient resources,
including detention facilities meeting international
standards, be made available to the Court. If that Court
does not receive the support needed to conduct fair
trials, the international community faces the possibility
that referred cases may have to be deferred back to the
International Tribunal under rule 11 bis.

Turning to my next topic, the cooperation of
States with the International Tribunal, I would
emphasize that the success of the Tribunal in
completing its mandate within completion-strategy
dates hinges upon such cooperation. Primarily, the
assistance of all States, and specifically those in the
region, is needed for bringing the six remaining high-
level accused, in particular Karadzic and Mladic, to the
Tribunal's jurisdiction without delay. Additionally, I
take note of the fact that Lukic was transferred from
Argentina last February and that Zelenovic has not
been transferred so far.

The final topic that I wish to bring to the
attention of the members of the Council is an update on
the prognosis for the Tribunal's implementation of the
completion strategy. As in my last report to the
Council, I can confirm that trials will indeed run into
2009 and reiterate that the estimate of all trials
finishing by that date may hold, provided that the
multi-accused trials run smoothly; that the cases
referred to the former Yugoslavia are not deferred back
to the International Tribunal; that the new amendment
to rule 73 bis is effectively implemented such that
indictments are more focussed; and that, of course, the
six remaining high-level fugitives are transferred to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal very soon.

In conclusion, notwithstanding the challenges
encountered in these last six months, the International
Tribunal pressed on full speed with its work, resulting
in a productive period in the International Tribunal's
history. I would stress that, as demonstrated by the
concrete measures taken during this reporting period,
the Tribunal is absolutely committed to doing
everything in its power to meet its obligations under
the completion strategy while upholding the norms of
due process.

In looking to the future, the International
Tribunal will make every effort to develop additional
tools to improve the efficiency of its trial and appeals
proceedings. In addition, the Tribunal will intensify its
ongoing efforts to contribute towards building judicial
capacity in the former Yugoslavia. The effective
continuation of the International Tribunal's historic
work by national jurisdictions in the region will be a
key component of the Tribunal's legacy.

