Mr. Przydacz (Poland): There is no doubt that
combating terrorism in all its forms is one of the major
challenges that the international community faces. In
today's global world, terrorism, alongside organized
crime, the illegal trade in weapons and trafficking,
poses a major threat to international peace and security.
There is also no doubt that terrorism is constantly
evolving and that combating it always requires new
approaches, mechanisms and tools. Cyberterrorism
and foreign terrorist fighters have become challenges
that need to be addressed in a comprehensive and
concrete manner.

Terrorism can be effectively and ultimately
eradicated only when there is the common will and
determination of all stakeholders to do their part.
The unique role of the United Nations in combating
terrorism is undisputed. The United Nations not only
has the responsibility to act decisively on its own
but also should step up its efforts by reaching out to
other actors.

Bearing in mind the central role of the United
Nations in combating terrorism, cooperation with
regional organizations in that regard is not only
possible, as stipulated in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, but clearly welcome. It not only
helps to promote good governance, the rule of law
and other democratic values but also fosters regional
cooperation in economic, political and security affairs,
leading to the establishment of sustainable peace
and prosperity. Regional organizations, as they have
a narrower geographical focus, may sometimes better
understand regional specificities and better address
specific challenges locally. Strong and coordinated
action by the United Nations and regional organizations
in combating terrorism has significant potential
to strengthen the responsiveness and agility of the
international community.

Poland strongly supports close cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations and plays
an active role in such cooperation with, among others,
the European Union, NATO, the Council of Europe
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. It is of utmost importance, however, that the
spirit and principles of the United Nations be at the top
of any activities and decisions taken by all stakeholders.
Regional organizations will contribute to international
peace and security only if they act as honest brokers
whose actions are the result of consensus between all
their member States.

Without clarity on this and without full respect
for such basic rules, it would be difficult to define the
goal of potential cooperation. The United Nations must
avoid any deviation from its own basic rules.

The common objective of the States members
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) is
counteracting separatism, extremism and terrorism.
SCO member States assert that they respect the pivotal
role of the United Nations system and of the World Trade
Organization in shaping the global order politically
and economically, and hence it is justified to expect
the SCO member States to engage in accommodating
the activities of both these universal organizations to
present challenges and requirements.

It should be recalled that regional organizations
truly play their role only when they reflect the interests
of all their members and are not used as a tool for the
domination of a few. Let us not forget that regional
organizations willing to cooperate with the United
Nations in combating terrorism need to abide by and
promote among themselves and their member States
all the principles of the United Nations, including the
principles of the inviolability of State borders, the
recognition of existing borders and the rejection of
unlawful territorial annexations. Let us reiterate also
that international law imposes the obligation of the
non-recognition of the legal effects of illegal acts.

Unfortunately, the position of the SCO and of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Commonwealth of Independent States with regard
to the illegal annexation of parts of the territory of
Ukraine puts their impartiality in question. Their lack
of will to take the appropriate measures to respond to
the aforementioned conflict, as well as the conflict in
Georgia in 2008, unfortunately casts a shadow on the
organizations' contribution to the promotion of peace,
security and stability.

In that light, I would like to reiterate that so long as
there is no common approach with regard to issues of
such fundamental importance to the global architecture,
the cooperation of the United Nations with such partners
in combating terrorism will be disputable.

