Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, for your wise
leadership of the Council during the month of
December, and I thank you for convening this monthly
meeting on an issue that continues to be among the
most important issues before the Security Council.
Being one of the oldest threats to international peace
and security, it must remain under close scrutiny by the
Council. I also wish to thank Mr. Robert Serry for the
briefing that he gave to the Council.

Allow me, at the outset, to associate myself with
the statement made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We have invited the Council numerous times to
assume its responsibility in the ongoing crisis in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, and to
give it the attention it deserves in order to preserve the
Council's credibility and to find a solution to this issue.
Indeed, two days ago, the Council adopted resolution
1850 (2008), which is its first on the Palestinian
question in the past five years.

The Council's adoption of a resolution to move
the stagnant peace process forward is undoubtedly a
commendable act, which, in principle, we welcome.
But, unfortunately, it is in principle only because the
resolution suffers from substantial shortcomings, as it
overlooks and ignores the obstacles that compromise
the chances of achieving a comprehensive and
sustainable peace in the region, most notably the issue
of Israel's illegal settlements in the occupied Arab
territories and its consequent violations of international
law and of the human rights of the Palestinian people.

08-6603]

Our repeated calls to the Council to deal with the
ongoing crisis in the Middle East, with a view to
reaching a comprehensive settlement that includes all
aspects of the problem, do not reflect our view alone;
rather, they reflect the view of the Council. This was
stressed in the presidential statement issued on
12 December 2008 (S/PRST/2008/46), on the occasion
of the adoption of a resolution to renew the mandate of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
Accordingly, we wonder why the substance of that
statement was not reflected in resolution 1850 (2008).
That, understandably, caused the resolution not to be
adopted unanimously.

My understanding is that the Council agrees with
me that the achievement of a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East, along with the
securing of a sustainable solution to the Palestinian
issue based on two States living side by side in peace
and security, is our common objective, without
exception. We all seek a lasting solution to the Arab-
Israeli conflict. We all seek to solve the outstanding
issues, including core issues such as Jerusalem,
refugees, borders, security, settlements and water.
When we talk about the two-State solution, it is
necessary to stress the need that the Palestinian State
must enjoy full sovereignty and must be contiguous
and viable, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

However, the illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied Arab territories and the construction of the
apartheid Wall in those territories constitute an obstacle
to the establishment of a Palestinian State. The Israeli
authorities' insistence on building illegal settlements in
defiance of the United Nations resolutions and despite
the international consensus on the illegality of those
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory
undermines the chances for peace and constitutes a
severe setback for the Annapolis process, which is the
latest of several initiatives that have not been accepted
by the Israeli side. It is therefore imperative for the
Security Council to reaffirm its resolution 1850 (2008)
by adopting the Arab draft resolution on Israeli
settlements, which is before the Council in blue.

Among the serious challenges to international
peace and security are the terrorist acts perpetrated by
Israeli settlers against defenceless Palestinian civilians,
such as in the occupied Palestinian city of Hebron,
where extremist settlers are hammering away against
the Palestinian population while the Israel authorities
sit by passively, doing nothing to stop them. As an

occupying Power, Israel is blatantly violating
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. This finding was
confirmed recently by Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, in his
condemnation of these heinous acts. There is no doubt
that the impunity enjoyed by the Israeli settlers
encourages them to persist in terrorism.

This Council should be able to persuade Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan and the
remaining occupied Lebanese territories, to cease its
continued Violations of Lebanese airspace, and to abide
by its obligations under the Road Map and pursuant to
the international legitimacy represented by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

One serious obstacle to realizing comprehensive
peace in the occupied Palestinian territory is Israel's
continued policy of aggression, siege and starvation of
the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip, which is a
serious violation of all laws, agreements, principles
and ethics. The blockade threatens the lives of Gaza's
inhabitants and has claimed hundreds of victims,
including dozens of children who died because of
power shortages and the lack of essential medicines
and drugs. The Israeli authorities have not stopped at
these disgraceful acts; they have gone even further by
preventing humanitarian relief from reaching the Gaza
Strip, such as the Libyan ship Al-Marwa and a ship that
sailed from Jaffa loaded with humanitarian relief and
gifts on the occasion of Eid al-Adha, among others.
Mr. Richard Falk, the Special Rapporteur on Human
Rights, described the Palestinians as "a civilian
population being collectively punished by policies that
amount to a crime against humanity", and said that "it
would seem mandatory for the International Criminal
Court to investigate the situation and determine
whether the Israeli civilian leaders and military
commanders responsible for the Gaza siege should be
indicted". He added that Israel allows "barely enough
food to stave off mass famine and disease", leaving the
Palestinians in a "desperate plight". Can this be the
behaviour of a civilized society?

It is incumbent on the Security Council to
demonstrate the seriousness of resolution 1850 (2008).
The Council is also responsible for following up on the
implementation of that resolution.

