Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
welcomes the opportunity to participate in the
Council's discussion of the Secretary-General's latest
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2009/323). I
would also like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Sir, on my Government's behalf, and to congratulate
you on your leadership of this Council over the past
month.

Australia appreciates the United Nations
leadership of international civilian engagement in
Afghanistan, and we would like to acknowledge again
the tireless efforts of Special Representative Eide in
that regard. As we have said before and will no doubt
say again, international engagement in Afghanistan
must address security, governance and regional
cooperation. We all understand the importance of
creating a secure environment in Afghanistan in which

development and economic opportunities can grow.
That is why we are increasing our force levels by 40
per cent. Australia is also helping to build and
strengthen the capability of the Afghan National Army
in Uruzgan, and we will contribute $200 million to the
Afghan National Army trust fund.

At the same time, we must not lose focus on
developments in the civilian area. Afghan authorities
and the international community must continue to work
together to ensure that forthcoming elections are
secure, credible and inclusive and that all candidates
are able to compete on a level playing field.

Australia will provide supplementary support for
the conduct of the elections, including short-term
military support through the deployment of an infantry
company for a period of eight months. We will also
make a small financial contribution to support the
conduct of elections and, of course, we will be
dispatching a civilian observer team.

Last year, Australia pledged $250 million in
development and reconstruction assistance to
Afghanistan, bringing our total assistance to date to
approximately $600 million. That is a fairly significant
amount, given that Afghanistan falls outside our sphere
of influence, but it underlines the importance of our
bilateral relationship with Afghanistan and the
importance that this issue has for the international
community as a whole.

We have also provided funding to the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund. This Fund is working to
strengthen the resilience of Afghan communities and
expand economic opportunities and access to essential
services, including by supporting the National
Solidarity Programme. I am told that some 68 per cent
of Afghanistan's rural population have benefited from
this Programme, and we note that the World Bank
considers the Programme to be one of the most
successful in supporting rural and community
development. We therefore encourage Member States
to pledge additional funds to this worthy work.

Despite the deteriorating security conditions,
progress has been made in Afghanistan. Average per
capita gross domestic product in Afghanistan has
almost doubled since 2002. The World Bank reports
significant progress in public financial management,
and that is something that has been reflected in the
reports we have had from the Special Representative.
There have also been impressive advances in

increasing basic education, with a sixfold enrolment
increase since 2001, of which 35 per cent are girls. But
as Ambassador Eide has reminded us separately, we
may now have 6 million small boys and girls in basic
education, but small boys and girls grow up, and we
need to be ready to support them as they move through
the primary and tertiary periods of their education as
well.

The international community must continue to
unite to build on these successes. It is continued
cooperation with Afghan authorities and with each
other that will create the secure and prosperous future
that Afghanistan deserves.

