Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we should again like to express
our deep sympathy and condolences to the people and
the Government ofFrance, to Paris, and to all countries,
all people, all cities that have fallen victim to these
horrible terrorist attacks, some of which may be facing
the terrorist threat on a daily basis. In expressing our
condolences, we would like to state loudly and clearly
our solidarity in the joint fight against terrorism.

We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
having presented the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/862). We most certainly pay tribute to all
the humanitarian workers, whether from the United
Nations or from other international organizations, who
are working in Syria and very often are risking their
lives to help those who need medical assistance, food
and housing.

Enormous humanitarian efforts are being
undertaken. Every month, over 4 million individuals
receive food assistance. The system for the delivery and
distribution of humanitarian assistance across borders
pursuant to resolution 2165 (2014) and under United
Nations oversight is working effectively. By the end of
October, over 207 convoys had crossed Syria's borders
with Turkey and Jordan, which represents over 4,500
truckloads. A great deal is being done by the Syrian
Government to ensure the delivery of humanitarian
consignments, not only in territory under its control,
where most of the internally displaced persons are
concentrated, but also in territory that is beyond its
control, as the report of the Secretary-General indicates.

Praise is also due to the very noble actions of the
people of Syria themselves, whether in the form of
the Red Crescent volunteers who are providing basic
necessities across front lines, or of the individuals who
are hosting refugees in their homes. It is entirely clear
that, regardless of the scope of the humanitarian efforts,
and regardless of how many convoys are sent across
borders or front lines, the problem will not be solved in
this way. Only by reaching a political settlement and,
in parallel, waging a determined fight against terrorism
will we achieve a real and viable improvement in the
situation.

The international community must unite its
efforts in its fight against the terrorist threat, from
which the people of Syria have already suffered for
five years now. It is a threat that recognizes no limits
to barbarism and pays no respect to geographical
borders. That is something we have seen time and time
again - in the tragedies in Beirut, Paris, Baghdad,
Ankara and other cities. The participants in the meeting
of the International Syria Support Group in Vienna
on 14 November condemned these terrorist acts.
Furthermore, they proposed a number of steps to move
the political process in Syria forward and underscored
the importance of ensuring humanitarian access to all
parts of the country.

What is especially unacceptable at the current,
very decisive stage in which political efforts are being
stepped up is the politicization of human rights and
humanitarian topics. Making specious observations in
this respect in an attempt to score political points is
simply immoral. We are outraged by various reports
that have alleged civilian deaths and the destruction
of civilian infrastructure as a result of missile and air
strikes by the Russian armed forces.

The operations of the Russian armed forces are
covered in daily briefings for Russian and non-Russian
journalists. During these briefings an objective
picture is drawn and attempts at disinformation are
exposed. For example, reporting on an airstrike on a
hospital in Sarmin on 20 October, the media claimed
and confirmed to have allegedly resulted in civilian
casualties. Incidentally, that was also referred to in
paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General's report. The
media circulated photographs of a destroyed building.
However, on satellite pictures taken on 31 October, the
hospital in Sarmin is clearly whole and has not been
damaged. Once again, we reiterate that the use of only
information that is confirmed, verified and reliable is
one of the main criteria for ensuring the unbiased and
impartial nature of the United Nations system.

We note that the new report of the Secretary-General
has been drawn up in a more balanced way, insofar as it
does not contain any hasty assessments and unverified
data on possible civilian casualties. We regret that the
authors of the report did not have the courage to refute
the disinformation regarding the actions of the Russian
Aerospace Forces that was contained in the previous
report on the humanitarian situation.

Russia continues to provide the Syrian population
with humanitarian aid. Numerous flights of the Russian
Ministry for Emergency Situations are delivering basic
goods to Syria. Russia has donated 100,000 tons of
wheat to Damascus. We are also providing assistance
through United Nations organizations, including
through the World Food Programme and the United
Nations Development Programme.

The path to a sustainable political settlement and
effectively fighting terrorism lies through a combination
of international and regional efforts. There is growing
understanding of the need to create a comprehensive
anti-terrorist coalition under the aegis of the United
Nations. The recent terrorist attacks have clearly shown
that it is not only terrorism that cannot be justified in
any way, but what also cannot be justified any longer is
the passivity and the lack of unity in the fight against
this evil. We stand ready to continue joint work in that
field.

