Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I wish to start by
thanking His Excellency Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu
Mammadyarov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Azerbaijan and President of the Security Council today,
for the initiative to hold this debate. I congratulate him
for the presidential statement that was just adopted
(S/PRST/2013/l6). I would like to also thank His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Secretary-General,
and His Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, the
Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), for their respective presentations.

As previously stated in the Council, debates
of this nature present opportunities to reflect on
ways of reinforcing cooperation in areas of common
interest between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in relation to the maintenance
of international peace and security. In accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
the United Nations has recognized the need to work
together with regional organizations for reasons such as
geographic proximity, expediency and burden-sharing.
It is now a fact that partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations have been leading to positive
outcomes in the maintenance of peace and security,
given the advantage of local knowledge, proximity
and the capability to mobilize and respond quickly. We
believe that the OIC should also be understood in this
context.

At its thirty-eighth ministerial meeting, held in
Astana in July 2011, the OIC - which, I recall, is a
viable organization with 57 member States, representing
1.6 billion Muslims around the world reflected on
its intention to engage more seriously with the growing
number of international stakeholders, including in its
growing role in conflict prevention and the promotion
of dialogue and tolerance.

 

The OIC has a track record of mediation and
peacekeeping in conflict zones. We recognize its
efforts, in partnership with the United Nations and
other regional and subregional organizations, to
restore peace and security in Somalia, Afghanistan,
the Sudan and the Middle East. We also commend its
member States that are already contributing troops to
peacekeeping missions in Africa and around the world
and recall that half of the ten top United Nations troop-
and police-contributing countries are members of the
OIC.

Despite those significant developments, however,
and as is the case with most other regional organizations,
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
OIC has yet to reach its full potential. That cooperation
should therefore be substantially streamlined, mainly
in the areas of mediating and resolving international
conflicts. We believe that the OIC can do more.
Indeed, building partnerships with other international
organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States or the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and reforming its process
through capacity-building and other means will
improve its ability to contribute to the resolution of
the seemingly intractable conflicts that are affecting
the Middle East, including the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, as well as to the fight against terrorism and
the promotion of intercultural and religious dialogue
around the world.

We believe that the OIC has special expertise
with which it can tackle the cultural components that
have always been driving factors of conflict in its
member States. Those cultural and linguistic skills
are invaluable in conducting knowledge-based and
culturally sensitive mediation. The OIC's cultural
competency gives it access to specific conflict zones
that would have otherwise remained unreachable to
other organizations, including the United Nations.

For instance, in Somalia, due to its rigorous
understanding of local Somali culture, the OIC was
allowed by Al-Shabaab to intervene in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in their areas of control. That
comparative advantage could be used in other complex
situations, including in Syria. It is therefore important
that the United Nations maintain this partnership with
the OIC, not only to strengthen cooperation in areas
of mutual interest, but also to keep open channels of
communication in difficult areas where the United
Nations and other, regional organizations do not enjoy
full access.

Of the 57 OIC member States, 27 are members of
the African Union, 22 are members of the League of
Arab States and 7 are members of both the African
Union and the League of Arab States. That is why we
make the call for the OIC to partner with other regional
organizations in order to enhance coordination and
avoid duplication of efforts. It is only through synergies
between all those organizations that the OIC will have
greater potential to achieve success in the maintenance
of peace and security in our regions.

