Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this important meeting of the
Security Council, and thanks also to Mr. Hedi Annabi
for his comprehensive and informative briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
situation in East Timor during the past month. The
situation has been extremely difficult following the
emergency that resulted from extensive flooding. It was
with deepest regret that my delegation heard the reports
of the tragic loss of human life and the extensive
destruction of property in West and East Timor.
UNTAET responded urgently and provided assistance
to the Indonesian Government's relief efforts. We
would like to express our appreciation to all those
involved in these operations.

The first issue I would like to touch upon is the
refugee situation. My delegation is pleased to know
that the total number of returnees to East Timor had
exceeded 160,000 by the end of last month. By the
number of those who have decided to return, one could
measure, in fact, the progress made towards regaining
normality in East Timor. However, we are concerned
that, according to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, repatriation from
West Timor has decreased over the past few weeks,
presumably due to increasing reports of harassment of
those returnees inside East Timor. In this regard, my
delegation underlines the importance of continued
efforts on the part of UNTAET and the other
international agencies concerned to facilitate the return
of an estimated 125,000 refugees who remain in West
Timor to their places of origin in safety and dignity.
Clearly, all these people have to be given an
opportunity to determine freely where they want to go
and settle.

More often than not, economic reconstruction
forms an integral part of peacekeeping. We believe that
the economic and social conditions in East Timor are
areas which clearly warrant further and more focused
action. We are encouraged to hear from Mr. Annabi
that the Secretariat works actively with the World Bank
and other financial institutions to accelerate the pace of
both contributions received by to the United Nations
Trust Fund and the disbursements on the ground.

The start of a number of rehabilitation projects
has been mentioned. However, it is disappointing that
the progress achieved in this respect has sometimes
been very slow. Of course, this task is a complex one
which also requires essential input from all the
partners. We would be interested to be briefed on the
grant agreement recently concluded with the World
Bank to help revamp the health sector. We believe that
this project should be given priority attention.

The capacity of the entire political process in East
Timor will be extremely limited until the local
population is involved in various matters of
governance. In our view, UNTAET acts with this
perspective in mind. There have been many
experiences of successful cooperation at the local level
between the East Timorese and the international
presence in East Timor since the district advisory
councils were set up. Ukraine highly appreciates the
important work the Administration continues to
perform in the development of the private sector along
with setting up the civil service. In this context, we
welcome the inauguration of the Civil Service
Academy.

Turning to the security issue, the implementation
of the Memorandum of Understanding on security,
boundary-crossing, the passage of refugees and the
provision of humanitarian assistance along the border
between East and West Timor seems to be keeping pace
with the expectations of the international community.
The number of major incidents, the briefing indicates,
has declined significantly. The security situation is
generally stable. However, some outstanding issues
remain. In this context, I would like especially to stress
the significant role played by the civilian police
component of UNTAET. The basic task of the civilian
police - to maintain a security presence throughout
the country and in this way law and order in East
Timor - is essential to carrying out the UNTAET
mandate. We would be grateful if the Secretariat could
comment in a more detailed manner on the recent
developments regarding the indigenous police force.

The international community has invested heavily
in the reconciliation and reconstruction process in East
Timor. But even more extensive international
involvement will still be needed in East Timor. Ukraine
will remain actively engaged.
