Mr. Keating: I want to thank all of the members
of the Security Council for inviting me to participate
in this briefing.

Twenty years ago, Madam President, your country,
Nigeria, and mine, New Zealand, sat beside one
another as members of the Council. I had the dreadful
responsibility in April 1994 of presiding over a Council
that refused to recognize that genocide was being
perpetrated against the Tutsi in Rwanda and failed
in its responsibilities to reinforce the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in Rwanda in order to protect as
many innocent civilians as possible.

My first responsibility today is therefore to
remember the Victims, the almost 1 million who died,
and the survivors. It is good that the Council will today
make its own commemoration of the genocide and
discuss the need to prevent genocide in the future. This
briefing also provides a fitting opportunity, for me in
my capacity as former President of the Council in April
1994, to apologize for what we failed to do in 1994 and
for that to be formally recorded in the official records
of the Security Council.

Secondly, I want to acknowledge those Council
members that joined with New Zealand in 1994 and
supported our efforts to condemn the genocide and
to reinforce the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Rwanda (UNAMIR). In this regard, Nigeria deserves
great credit, as do the Czech Republic and Spain. Two
other members that gave support and encouragement
were Argentina and Djibouti.

We must also remember those in the field who
displayed great courage and did their best to protect
civilians. Force Commander General Romeo Dallaire
is first among these, as are the brave soldiers from
Belgium and Senegal who gave their lives. I want to pay
tribute especially to the major contingents from Ghana,
Senegal and Canada, which remained in Rwanda
throughout the genocide. While sitting in Amahoro
Stadium during the genocide commemoration in Kigali
last week, I could not but recall the bravery of the
United Nations soldiers who protected many thousands
of Tutsi in that stadium during the genocide. I was also
reminded that despite what many people believe, the
United Nations did not desert Rwanda completely.

I also want to pay tribute to two organizations:
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Medecins sans frontieres. Both had their people in
several locations outside Kigali. As President of the
Council, I met with their New York representatives,
usually every morning, and was able to update the
Council with objective information from the field.

We all know how important the flow of information
to the Council can be - especially information during
the early stages of an emerging conflict, when there are
still options for prevention or deterrence. In March and
April 1994, the Council was not getting useful reports
from the Secretariat. Even after the genocide had
begun, events were being described for several weeks
as simply a resurgence of the civil war. The wholesale
slaughter of civilians was not being conveyed to the
Council. Moreover, the Secretariat had concealed from
the Council a critical piece of advice - a cable from
the Force Commander in January 1994, which gave
graphic early warning of probable genocide. And, in
terms of early warning, a vital piece of evidence also
existed in the United Nations system in Geneva - a
report by a Special Rapporteur to the Commission on
Human Rights warning of the likelihood of genocide. It
was never drawn to the Council's attention.

All this confirms that there are many lessons about
information, about early warning and about how to
use information that I believe are still relevant today.
I know there are hesitations among some here about
the value of horizon-scanning, but if they want to take
prevention seriously, then some creative alternative is
desperately needed.

I need to explain what led the Council in April
to downsize UNAMIR. Some months earlier, a
permanent member was seeking to reduce the number
of peacekeeping missions. It selected UNAMIR as
a target for a special attention because of the slow
progress in the peace negotiations in Arusha. It
pushed for UNAMIR to be put on a very short leash.
Accordingly, resolution 909 (1994) scheduled a review
of the mandate for mid-May. Clear signals were given
in consultations that there would be no agreement to
renew the UNAMIR mandate if there were further
obstacles in the Arusha peace process.

In hindsight, we can see that this was a naive gift
to the genocidaires in Kigali. Their ambassador was
sitting as a member of the Council. They were privy
to all the discussions in the informal consultations.
They knew that the mandate was at risk. They had
every reason to believe that all they had to do was to
create conditions of chaos in Rwanda for the UNAMIR
mandate to be terminated.

Against this background, all Council members
will appreciate the political difficulties for those of us
who were arguing for a reinforcement of UNAMIR. To
reinforce UNAMIR required a new formal decision,
but it was absolutely clear from the negotiations that
a draft resolution to strengthen the force would meet
with a veto. The task became even more difficult once
some major troop contributors decided unilaterally
to withdraw. Belgium had suffered serious losses; it
believed all its troops were at risk and it began lobbying
the Council and other troop contributors to evacuate.
Some contingents, especially those that were lightly
armed and lacked protective equipment, also feared for
the safety of their personnel and wanted to leave. Thus,
another challenge at that time was how to maintain
the morale and confidence of the troop-contributing
countries (TCCs).

To that end, I organized daily informal meetings
between the President and the TCCs, and at the same
time with Nigeria and others, seeking to negotiate the
best possible compromise on the future of UNAMIR.
But that compromise inevitably had to be a downsizing
rather than reinforcement. For me, the bottom line was
to keep UNAMIR in existence and to retain as many of
the most effective troops as possible, because we knew
that the Force Commander would use whatever capacity
he had to protect as many civilians as he could, and
we hoped that this would be a foundation for the early
reinforcement of UNAMIR.

Perhaps this history demonstrates some lessons
about the important and necessary interaction between
the Council and troop contributors that I think are
probably still relevant today.

I will now turn to the efforts of New Zealand and
the Czech Republic, with the support of Argentina and
Spain, to name and condemn the genocide. Despite
improved briefings by the Secretariat and the flow
of information I was relaying to the Council from
non-governmental organizations in the field, most of
the permanent members were objecting. Their reasons
varied, but the net result was that several members were
blocking a draft presidential statement.

As the days wore on and the end of the month
approached, New Zealand put in blue a draft resolution
condemning the genocide. The words were drawn
exactly from the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. As President,
I announced that unless there were agreement on a
presidential statement based on the exact language of
the Genocide Convention, I would convene an open
meeting of the Council at 11.55 p.m. on Saturday
30 April and put the draft resolution to the vote.
Ultimately, presidential statement S/PRST/ 1994/21 was
agreed, condemning the atrocities in Rwanda, using all
ofthe language that we had proposed from the Genocide
Convention, but at the insistence of some permanent
members, the specific word "genocide" was removed.

In early May, New Zealand and Nigeria each
introduced draft resolutions to reinforce the number
of troops and to give the operation a formal mandate
for the protection of civilians. But it took until 8 June
before resolution 925 (1994) was adoped. Even then,
the resolution was equivocal and did not allow full
deployment. Ultimately, the genocide stopped only
when the forces of the Rwandan Patriotic Front took
control of the whole country.

That is the tragic history of April, May and June
1994. Time does not permit a detailed discussion of
events in the following months, such as the mistaken
decision of the Council to authorize Operation
Turquoise or the events leading up to the establishment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. But
please permit me to make some brief final observations.

My first observation is a message ofhope. I think it is
very important to contrast the failure in 1994 regarding
Rwanda with what the Council did in 2010 concerning
Cote d'Ivoire. On C6te d'Ivoire, the Council members
knew that there was a serious risk of ethnically based
mass atrocities. They had good information from the
Secretariat. They had put in place a proper protection
mandate. The United Nations had properly resourced
the Mission. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, through its Capstone Project, had in place
a useful set of doctrines. The TCCs showed courage
and determination, and they were well supported by the
United Nations. Most importantly, Council members
were fully agreed on the need for limited robust action
to ensure protection.

I would like to add that the development of the
principle of responsibility to protect, which is referenced
so clearly in the draft resolution before the Council
today, gives further reason for hope. Recent Council
practice in Mali and the Central African Republic and
with the Force Intervention Brigade in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo further demonstrates that some
important lessons have been learned.

My second observation relates to the belief in 1994
that the international community did not have the means
to intervene in Rwanda; but it was false. In early April,
just after the genocide began, a number of countries
mounted a major unilateral military intervention in
Rwanda. That was done to protect and extract foreign
nationals, but those forces then departed. They left the
Tutsi to their fate. Again in 1995, when the genocidaires
and much of the civilian population had fled to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a further major
intervention was launched, this time in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Ironically, that was
to help those who had undertaken the genocide. The
truth is that there was no lack of capacity. What was
missing, both in Rwanda in 1994 and again in 1995
when the Council failed to act to establish security in
the camps in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
was political will.

My third observation relates to the cascade of
tragedy that can occur when there is a failure of political
will, such as in 1994. The Deputy Secretary-General
has already touched on this. A toxic accumulation of
events unfolded and eventually embroiled the whole
region. Twenty years later, we are still dealing with the
consequences in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.
The failure in Rwanda in 1994 not only caused genocide,
but also led to an appalling humanitarian catastrophe in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in 1995.
That led directly to the civil wars in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to human tragedy on an even
more massive scale. Some estimates suggest that up to
5 million may have died. Major instability has afflicted
the whole region.

If we truly want prevention to work, then we need
better political, operational and financial mechanisms
for the Council and the wider United Nations system to
achieve better outcomes. I believe that this means new
mechanisms for improved early warning, better systems
for briefing and presenting options to the Council at the
early stages of potential crises, enhanced preventive
diplomacy, more effective use of Chapter VI tools of
the Charter of the United Nations, quick preventive
deployment, and, if all else fails, robust deterrence. I
suggest that the costs of investing in such mechanisms
would be insignificant when set alongside the dreadful
human, political and financial costs of inaction that
flowed from our collective failure in 1994 to respond to
the genocide in Rwanda.

