Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Ukraine's initiative to convene today's
open debate of the Security Council on the protection
of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks. We
welcome Foreign Minister Klimkin's presiding over the
meeting. We listened attentively to the briefings made
by the Secretary-General's Chef de Cabinet, Ms. Viotti,
and the other briefers.

With the deepening of economic globalization and
the interconnection of countries becoming increasingly
close, infrastructure is ofgreat significance for countries
as they develop their economies and strengthen
interconnectivity and economic integration. On the
other hand, the global counter-terrorism situation is
increasingly serious, and infrastructure is increasingly
becoming an easy target for terror attacks. Recently,
a series of terrorist attacks on infrastructure, such as
airports and mass-transport stations, has caused panic
and resulted in serious losses of life and property. The
international community should pay close attention
to such developments and work together to fight
this phenomenon.

First, countries need to focus on ensuring the
security of regional interconnection projects and other
critical infrastructure. Regional collaboration has
significant bearing on global economic development
and prosperity. China's Belt and Road Initiative makes
infrastructure interconnection a cooperation priority
with a view to supporting the countries along the
Road, improving their infrastructure development and
achieving mutually beneficial win-win cooperation and
synchronized development for the benefit of everyone.
To date, more than 100 countries and international
organizations have joined the Belt and Road Initiative.
China hopes to strengthen cooperation in areas such
as intelligence-sharing, risk assessment and joint law
enforcement through bilateral and multilateral channels,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Security Council and the General Assembly, so
as to effectively protect interconnection projects and
transboundary infrastructure from terrorist attacks
and to ensure the safety and security of the Belt and
Road construction.

Secondly, countries need to effectively assume
primary responsibility for the protection of their
infrastructure. China hopes that, in accordance with
the requirements of resolution 2341 (2017), countries
will strengthen their coordination and develop relevant
national-security policies, factoring in the risk ofterror
attacks so as to strengthen their capacity to protect
infrastructure from such attacks through monitoring,
early-warning systems and emergency response,
with a View to ensuring the safety and security of
their infrastructure.

Thirdly, countries need to strengthen international
cooperation in the area of infrastructure security.
Countries need to comprehensively strengthen relevant
international cooperation from the vantage point
of building a human community of shared destiny.
Developed countries should help developing countries
strengthen capacity-building in that regard. Parties
need to strengthen cooperation in information-sharing,
law enforcement and judicial assistance in order to
crack down on terror attacks against infrastructure.
Relevant international and regional organizations
should help Member States to share best practices and
enhance national prevention capabilities. The United
Nations and the Security Council should play a leading
role in the relevant international cooperation.

Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind.
Whenever, wherever and in whatever forms it occurs, it
must be countered resolutely. Countries need to adhere
to uniform standards and staunchly crack down on all
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
International counter-terror actions should maximize
the leading role of the United Nations and its Security
Council and abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter ofthe United Nations so as to enhance effective
coordination. China, as an important member of the
international counter-terrorism camp, will continue
to pursue bilateral and multilateral cooperation in
accordance with its national law on counter-terrorism
and the relevant international conventions in order
to ensure the effective protection and security of
infrastructure and work with the international
community to combat terrorism and safeguard
international peace and security and stability.

