The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on
the fifth report (S/2017/467) of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh to international peace and
security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat.
As I was listening, I heard many of us remembering
the areas that have been targets of terrorist attacks
in recent months: Berlin, Istanbul, Kabul, Baghdad,
Melbourne, Mogadishu, Saint Petersburg, Stockholm,
Alexandria, Manchester, Paris, Manila, London and
Tehran. Remembering the places in which hundreds of
people have lost their lives and others have been injured
reminds us of the fact that we are facing a global threat
that requires a global response. The briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Feltman, which showed that ISIL
has suffered setbacks in many areas of conflict, was
very timely.

Bolivia is increasingly alarmed about the new
ways in which ISIL/Da'esh is developing in terms of
how it is carrying out its attacks and the countries
in which it is doing so, above all with regard to
financing. We must remember that ISIL/Da'esh has
used its propaganda and information technology in
order to attract sympathizers and to mount attacks in
countries where it resides, focusing on methodologies
to develop improvised explosive devices. The finances
of Da'esh have been reduced somewhat, but they
have compensated by imposing additional taxes over
the populations it controls and via trafficking in
smuggled antiquities and agricultural products, selling
electricity, extracting minerals, "foreign donations"
and kidnapping for ransom and human trafficking, in
addition to selling hydrocarbons.

We also condemn the destruction of, and trafficking
in, cultural heritage - directly or indirectly - as well
as, among others, the destruction of archeological sites,
museums and libraries, which generates income for this
terrorist group's recruitment and strengthening. It is all
the more worrying that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
has documented cases of "selling, gifting and trading"
of women and children among fighters. We therefore
urge Council members to join efforts to combat that
human scourge.

We welcome the fact that United Nations Member
States and regional, subregional and international
organizations are continuing to develop and strengthen
new tools to improve the response to those rapidly
evolving threats from ISIL/Da'esh and from foreign
terrorist fighters. However, we believe that is not enough.
We urge that States provide adequate humanitarian
protection and assistance to refugees fleeing from
conflict zones, including support in connection with
the increase in migratory flows owing to the impact of
ISIL/Da'esh in such areas.

Finally, Bolivia supports the various initiatives put
forward at this meeting, in particular those relating to
cutting off financing for terrorism. In that connection,
we highlight the fact that there is a need to focus on
investigations into the use of financial safe havens
for the funding of terrorism. In addition, we should
take effective measures with regard to returning
foreign terrorist fighters, as well as on countering
terrorist propaganda.

At the same time, however, we think it is crucial
that we not forget some of the structural causes of
terrorism and the evolution, in this instance, of ISIL/
Da'esh. Interventionist and regime-change policies
are among the causes behind the wave of terror we are
experiencing in many countries today.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
