The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United States.

I am very grateful to today's briefers.

The eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/934) on resolution 2231 (2015) describes an
abundance of Iranian activity carried out in flagrant
disregard of Council resolutions. We appreciate the
Secretary-General's detailed report on the 14 September
attacks on Saudi Aramco oil facilities. As we have said
numerous times, Iran is responsible for those attacks.
The United Kingdom, France and Germany have
joined us in that assessment. There is simply no other
plausible explanation. Only Iran could have carried out
an attack of this complexity and scope. The weapons
used in the attack did not have the range to come from
Houthi territory. The unarmed aerial vehicles (UAVs)
had numerous characteristics in common with Iranian
designs, and the damage at the oil facilities shows that
the attack came from the north, not from the south, as
one would expect if the Houthis were responsible.

The Council should pause and consider what
that means. The Islamic Republic of Iran attacked
a sovereign nation from its own territory. That
provocative act must be condemned by all nations,
regardless of their stance on the nuclear deal. The
Council must hold Iran accountable. The Secretary-
General's report also confirms that Iran continues to
destabilize the region, prolong violence in Yemen and
support the expansion of terrorist groups and proxies.
For instance, the Secretary-General highlights Iranian
transfers of advanced missile technology to Hizbullah
in Lebanon and the Houthis in Yemen. Further, Iran
continues to saturate the Middle East with arms, in
violation of resolution 2231 (2015). Among numerous
examples are rocket-propelled grenade-launchers
shipped to Aden, cruise missiles passed to the Houthis
and drones and explosives provided to Syria by the
Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps.

In late November, the United States interdicted a
vessel carrying arms offthe coast onemen. That follows
the pattern of Iranian shipments to the Houthis. In this
shipment was a large amount of advanced weapons,
including sophisticated components of anti-ship cruise
missiles, land attack cruise missiles, air defence
missiles, UAV components and anti-tank missiles. Our
investigation into those weapons is ongoing. We expect
to provide additional details in the near future. We
have also given United Nations arms experts access to
that material.

Imagine what the Houthis might have done with
those Iranian weapons. With a cruise missile, they
could once again attack a civilian airport as they did
and Abha, Saudi Arabia, last year. With an Iranian
anti-ship missile, the Houthis could take aim at the
world's shipping as they did when they hit a Turkish ship
carrying wheat in 2018. When Iran supplies weapons to
it the proxies, the threats are not abstract - just one
of those missiles could spark a regional confrontation
none of us wants.

Iran also continues to defy the Security Council's
call in resolution 2231 (2015) to refrain from activities
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclearweapons. Meanwhile, the Commander
of the Al-Quds Force of the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard, Major General Soleimani, travels freely around
the region to help Iran's proxies plan attacks and crush
peaceful protests. We remind all Member States that
they are obligated to prevent Soleimani's entry into, or
transit through, their territories, pursuant to resolution
2231 (2015).

Regarding the assets freeze, Iranian Revolutionary
Guard firms on the resolution 2231 (2015) sanctions list
continue to work in third countries, in violation of the
resolution. That shows the importance of updating the
resolution's list of sanctions individuals and entities with
accurate information. Such updates will help Member
States ensure full compliance with the assets freeze.

Iran's provocations are relentless, and their
attempted explanations for each of the ones I have just
discussed strain credibility. In that way, Iran repeatedly
demonstrates its contempt for the Security Council. As
noted in the report, following Iran's announcement
that it would begin uranium-enrichment activities
at the Fordow facility, the United States announced
the termination of the sanctions waiver regarding the
centrifuge cascade modification project, effective
15 December 2019. The United States rejects Iran's use
of nuclear brinksmanship to normalize is destabilizing
behaviour. Iran originally constructed Fordow as a
fortified underground bunker to secretly enriched
uranium. There is no legitimate reason for Iran to
resume enrichment at that site. Iran must immediately
cease its enrichment activity there.

The United States is willing to engage in dialogue
with Iran to negotiate a deal that will better serve
international peace and security, but we will not sit idly
by while Iran continues to destabilize the region. We
will do everything in our power to curb malign Iranian
behaviour, and we urge our partners on the Council to
do the same.

I also want to raise an issue of grave concern to the
United States. Iran's response to recent protests across
the country has been brutal. The United States strongly
condemns Iran's response, and we stand in solidarity
with the Iranian people. Although we still do not have a
full picture of the regime's repression and human rights
abuses during those protests, we are deeply troubled
by what we do know. Videos from the scene show
that 40 to 100 protesters were massacred by Iranian
Revolutionary Guard forces in Mahshahr. It is likely
that the regime's crackdown has been even been more
brutal than reports to date indicate.

The United States welcomes recent statements of
concern by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, but more must be done. We urge the
United Nations to focus on this matter, and we stress
that the relevant United Nations entities and Special
Rapporteurs should conduct a thorough investigation
into the Iranian Government's response to the protests.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

