Slovakia commends Germany for its initiative in organizing the open debate on climate and security to underscore the nexus between human security and environmental security. My delegation associates itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 18). We are living through an extraordinarily difficult period in global history. The coronavirus disease reminds us that life is precarious and interconnected. Our world was already fragile, but violent conflict, humanitarian need and displacement - influenced and intensified by climate change - have all increased over the past decade. The growing impact of climate change became visible with frequent droughts, floods, warmer temperatures, rising sea levels and extreme weather events. Climate disasters lead to humanitarian disasters, food shortages and economic, social and demographic shocks, and can exacerbate already overwhelming challenges, especially for underresourced, fragile State Governments. The 2019 Climate Action Summit was a crucial advocacy moment to shape the climate agenda. Slovakia is a strong proponent of climate action, peace, human rights and the rule of law. That commitment to values, peace and leaving no one behind was reaffirmed by our President, Ms. Zuzana Caputova, at the Climate Action Summit. In her words, "if we succeed in uniting on our action for climate, we can generate a new sense of solidarity in other areas. This can become a basis to overcome divisions among nations, and bring new opportunities". The interaction between climate change, the loss of biodiversity and international security must absolutely become a key item on the conflict-prevention agenda. It is the only way to anticipate tomorrow's threats and help the most vulnerable countries. With climate already adversely affecting security, we need the United Nations and the Security Council to play their part. We thank Germany for their great leadership in the field of climate and security at the Security Council. The international community needs to act fast. We encourage the Security Council and the United Nations to create a comprehensive database on climate-related security risks. We should integrate short and long-term climate and environmental risk factors in the assessment and management of threats to peace and security at the country, regional and international levels. We encourage the international community to draw on the expertise of the whole United Nations system and to strengthen the Organization's missions on the ground in order to find operational responses to those risks. Thanks to the work of the Climate Security Mechanism, under the leadership of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs (DPPA), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), we have managed to make some progress in that regard. We have to continue identifying ways of addressing the impact of climate change on conflict and to seek necessary global policy responses. Alongside Germany and several other partners, Slovakia would like the Secretary-General to present a report on this issue every two years before the General Assembly and the Security Council. The report would provide not only a clear assessment and analysis of specific risks, but also recommendations for action. The United Nations response should work hand in hand with the Security Council, and focus on preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding, peacekeeping and resilience. Institutional and sectoral divides must be overcome to work in a more integrated fashion to link humanitarian, development, climate mitigation, peace and security action. The final issue I would like to mention is the heightened vulnerability of women and girls to the impact of climate and security. The latest report, Gender, climate and security: Sustaining inclusive peace on the frontlines of climate change, issued by UNEP, UN-Women, UNDP and DPPA, reveals the close links between gender, climate and security. The report shows that women on the front lines of climate action are playing a vital role in conflict prevention and sustainable, inclusive peace. Supporting local ownership, improving leadership and broadening inclusion in conflict and fragile settings, with special attention to gender and youth, remain vital. To the best of its ability, the United Nations should lead in facilitating and coordinating global efforts on climate action, working with regional partners and other stakeholders, including non-State actors such as businesses and local authorities, which play an increasingly important role in this field. Multilateralism is a key tool that can and should deliver on global solutions, including climate change. Slovakia is fully committed to playing a part in that collective responsibility.
