Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and
your team on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I wish you
every success in carrying out your work. We would
also like to thank Mr. Ian Martin for his comprehensive
briefing today.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, of
which my country is a member.

Uruguay has always supported efforts to improve
the working methods of the Security Council in order
to give them greater transparency and efficiency.
Although progress has been made, we must continue
working to further advance such achievements. In my
statement I would therefore like to refer to three aspects
that we consider to be pertinent.

First of all, increased interaction between the
Council and the membership should be encouraged.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
provides that the Security Council is to act on behalf
of States Members of the Organization. Accordingly,
it is appropriate to encourage the holding of meetings
in formats that promote transparency and improve
information flow with the wider membership. Public
meetings, open debates, informal interactive dialogues,
Arria Formula meetings and wrap-up sessions are
all mechanisms that make it possible to have greater
interaction between the members of the Council and the
rest of the membership.

Uruguay supports the holding of briefings where
members of the Council can deliver public statements.
In addition to promoting transparency, that enhances the
legitimacy and effectiveness of the work of the Council.
Closed consultations should essentially be restricted to
cases where it is necessary to deal with sensitive issues
or which require further debate or interaction among
the 15 Council members. Throughout its recently
concluded participation as a non-permanent member,
Uruguay followed the practice of making public
statements in all open meetings held by the Council in
order to promote transparency.

Secondly, I would like to emphasize the need
to increase consultations with the troop- and
police-contributing countries in all phases of
peacekeeping operations. At a time where Member
States are making progress in the reform process of
peacekeeping operations to make them more efficient
and effective, Uruguay underscores the value of a
productive relationship between those who mandate,
plan, administer and execute peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, the strengthening of triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat is
a central aspect that must be considered in the reform
process. In that connection, we already have a good
theoretical and practical framework available.

Theoretically speaking, the report (A/7l/19) of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
devotes and entire section to such cooperation.
Similarly, within the scope of the Security Council, the
note by the President S/2017/507, updated in August,
also provides for valuable means of enhancing such
cooperation. In practice, we note that consultation
meetings - both formal and informal - are held
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop- and police-contributing countries. In our view,
both formats are complementary and can be further
enhanced. On the other hand, the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations has also
proven to be a conducive environment for the three
actors to discuss relevant issues.

Finally, the question of the veto is the third issue that
I wish to address. The existence of the veto is a major
obstacle to the work of the Council, which has often
been paralysed in cases where its action is imperative in
order to be able to respond to the threat or perpetration
of atrocities. Uruguay reiterates its commitment to the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, as well as to the French-Mexican
initiative on limiting the use of the veto in situations
of mass atrocities, as we are convinced that the veto
should not be used to block Council actions that seek
to prevent or eliminate abhorrent crimes committed in
complete disregard for human dignity.

