Ms. Adamson (European Union): I am honoured
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia; align themselves with
this statement.

First, I would like to commend Japan for holding this
open debate at a particularly opportune moment, and
also thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
Addressing complexity is a challenge that no single
actor, instrument or forum can take on alone. We are
pleased to provide our contribution to that work as part
of the wider international community. The focus of this
debate addresses the very core of the Council's mandate
and indeed the international community's capacity to
prevent, manage and resolve crises. The complexity of
today's challenges requires adapting our tools, avoiding
silos approaches, working more closely together and
addressing issues early on.

As the Secretary-General reminded us in his first
statement to the Security Council in his new functions
almost a year ago (see S/PV.7857), conflict prevention
is not a priority, but the priority. Recognizing and
addressing situations early on is crucial to ensuring
our possibilities for success, preventing them from
worsening, and avoiding the loss of lives. We stand
ready to accompany the United Nations in the Secretary-
General's efforts to conduct the reform process. We also
see the need and potential of engaging, motivating and
coordinating efforts with other stakeholders - namely,
the private sector- whether in the area of peacebuilding
or sustainable development efforts.

Indeed, the increasing complexity of challenges
also calls on us to change so as to be better equipped
for breaking the conflict cycle. It is not only a moral
obligation, but a pragmatic imperative, with huge
economic advantages. Last year, the European Union
adopted a global strategy reiterating our commitment
to a global order based on international law, including
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
That commitment translates into an aspiration to
address the root causes of conflicts so as to provide
the basis for sustainable change. In particular, we
are looking forward to working with members of the
Security Council to help establish a practice of holding
early discussions in the Council on situations at risk
of becoming violent conflict cases, and the pursuit of
early collective action to prevent violence.

The global strategy for the European Union's
Foreign and Security Policy indeed identifies "the
integrated approach to external conflicts and crisis"
as one of its priorities, which strongly has resonated
with the overall United Nations agenda, which also
strives to enhance coherence both within its system
and the international order. It requires the EU to
further strengthen the way in which it brings together
institutions, expertise, and instruments, and works with
member States in prevention, peacebuilding and crisis
response, as well as stabilization, in order to contribute
to bring about sustainable peace.
The integrated approach addresses all policy
dimensions ofa conflict or a crisis by bringing together
a multidimensional, multiphased, multilateral and
multilevel approach. While addressing conflicts early
on is necessary, staying the course is an even more
substantial challenge. Relapse into conflict is more the
rule than the exception, especially if proper follow-
up and implementation of peace agreements are not
done. The EU translates that "multi-approach" through
engagement at various levels. A multidimensional
approach means that the EU is ready to contribute to
the maintenance of peace through its various policies,
tools and instruments. A multiphased approach means
that we will remain a committed partner throughout the
conflict cycle - investing in prevention, resolution,
and stabilization - while avoiding premature
disengagement when a crisis erupts elsewhere. A
multilevel approach entails the need for acting at local,
national, regional and global levels. The multilateral
approach is translated through a commitment to engage
with all players present in a conflict, who are necessary
for its resolution. That includes our key partners, such
as regional and international organizations, as well as
civil society actors.

Conflicts are best resolved by those who have to
live with their outcomes, but we have a possibility,
and indeed a duty, to support them. That increased
emphasis on conflict prevention, human security
and fostering the resilience of States and societies,
including by building capacities to manage conflicts
peacefully, has been translated through concrete
change in the European External Action Service. In
January, we created a dedicated unit to implement that
new approach to addressing the entirety of the conflict
cycle: early warning, conflictprevention, security sector
transformation, stabilization and conflict response, as
well as mediation. That unit, known by its acronym
PRISM, is already enjoying close cooperation with the
United Nations and is ready to enhance it further.

Only last week, the European External Action
Service presented a new concept on stabilization,
aimed at addressing complex situations in peace and
security. Addressing complex political and security
situations requires more than ever an integrated
approach, with a range of interlinked and concurrent
actions, including partnerships with the United Nations
and other key actors. Without a holistic and concurrent
effort, stabilization will only be partial.

It is also more than ever needed to ensure that
conflict sensitivity is embedded into everything
we do. Indeed, sound, joint conflict and resilience
analysis is required. Addressing complex contexts
begins with a thorough assessment of the situation. We
are undertaking joint analysis and strategy thinking
increasingly with our international partners from the
outset, as well as with civil society - a crucial element
in any effective approach to conflict prevention. As
demonstrated by the Arria Formula meeting held by
the Council last Friday, we should not shy away from
recognizing and closely examining new and emerging
challenges to peace and security such as, for example,
climate change. On the contrary, the Security Council
should regularly look at security risks triggered by
climate change with the objective of using its unique
role within the United Nations system to prevent
climate change-induced unrest and conflict.

Lastly, in a complex world, our working methods
need to evolve. By addressing situations earlier and in
a more coherent, integrated manner, and mobilizing the
entire toolbox at our disposal, we can help transform
our approach to conflicts and crises, and in that vein
further empower the Security Council in fulfilling its
core mandate. The EU stands ready to assist the United
Nations in that process.

