Mr. Ramdin: I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for allowing the Organization of
American States (OAS) to take part in this debate. I
thank members of the Council and give special
recognition to the Prime Minister of Haiti, Mr. Jean-
Max Bellerive, who, together with President Rene'
Preval, symbolizes the hope for the future of the
Haitian people. I thank, of course, our good friend
Ambassador Edmond Mulet for his statement.

The Organization of American States and the
Republic of Haiti, which was a founding member of
the Organization of American States, have had a very
long and meaningful relationship that has covered
many decades. Of course, in the current circumstances,
this relationship has taken on extra meaning, and we
are therefore very committed and ready to support
Haiti in overcoming some of the difficulties that it is
encountering at this point.

I want to share today more about the electoral
process and what the role of the Organization of
American States will be. Let me say from the
beginning that we very much appreciate the

collaboration that exists between the United Nations
and the Organization of American States, especially in
the areas in which we have exchanged views over the
past couple of weeks in terms of the mission that is
currently in Haiti and the mission I led there a couple
of days ago. In that sense, there is a lot of synergy
being built up, which can only bode well for the whole
process. We stand ready to play a role in this process.
We believe it is a role that is going to be
complementary to what the United Nations role has
been in the past, and I will come back to that in much
more detail.

The role of the Organization of American States,
as agreed with the Government of Haiti, is basically in
three areas: governance, the strengthening and
modernization of State institutions, and capacity-
building. In the first phase of this objective, there are
three very concrete areas in which we will provide
support on the basis of our own expertise. The first is
electoral support and assistance to the provisional
electoral council. The second is the continuation of the
project on civil registry, which is going to be critical in
that it will make available a voter list that will be
credible and acceptable to all political parties in Haiti.
The third is the modernization and establishment of the
cadastre. But as I said, I will speak today more on the
issue of the elections.

We welcome the statements made by President
Pre'val and Prime Minister Bellerive on many occasions
that, to avoid the establishment of a transitional
Government without the Parliament, there is a need for
the presidential, legislative and local elections to be
held in accordance with the Constitution. In our
mission from 8 to 10 April, we had the opportunity to
speak on this matter with many stakeholders in society,
and we have already shared these views with the
President.

I would like to share with the Council, if I may,
an element of the perspectives that we received and
that was shared by all the stakeholders. While there is
no discussion or debate on whether the elections
should be held, there is apparently a need for more
information and dialogue with regard to the process. I
think this is one of the factors in creating that platform,
so that challenges do not take place after the elections,
which could create instability. That is one of the things
that I wanted to convey to the Council following
discussions with civil society, the private sector and
political parties.

In terms of the role of the OAS specifically, given
that only seven months remain if elections are to take
place before the end of the year, it will be basically in
four areas. First, we will continue to monitor the
debate around the elections, including the issue raised
by Ambassador Mulet, namely, constitutional reform
and how it can take place. That would be very helpful
to the whole process in general.

Secondly, we will give high priority to producing
a voters' list that is a more or less accurate reflection of
the electorate in Haiti. To that end, we will have to
reissue national identification cards to those who have
lost them. I think it is possible to do that. But we will
also have to at least start to clean up the system by
removing the names of those who have died.

Thirdly, we will have to identify a process for
re-registering those who have left their constituencies
and now live somewhere else, so that they can vote in
the appropriate constituencies. That is not such a great
difficulty for the presidential elections. But, certainly,
if that is not done correctly, it may pose a problem for
the senatorial elections.

Fourthly, we will also redouble our efforts to
support the National Identification Office. I have
already mentioned the efforts to be undertaken in that
regard in terms of the printing, distribution and
reissuance of national identification cards.

Lastly, we will support the Provisional Electoral
Council in training its staff to use software and in
establishing the tabulation centre for the day of the
elections. We will also assist it in the whole process of
reproducing the voters' list, as we have done on
previous occasions.

Those are very concrete activities that we hope to
undertake in the coming six months. But for that to
happen, I think that it is important to recognize that
some political decisions need to be taken. I also think
that the sooner that those political decisions are taken,
the better. For, as the Prime Minister and the President
have announced, elections will be held. In the context
of the Haitian Constitution, the electoral law needs to
be amended if a different kind of electoral machinery is
going to be established. We are therefore awaiting
those decisions. From our perspective, the technical
preparations should start as soon as possible,
independent of the date that is going to be established.

As I announced earlier, I think there may be an
opportunity to engage with the broader society in terms
of understanding where the process is going to lead.
What I am basically saying is that, as much as possible,
we should try to mitigate challenges and tension after
the elections, so as to create a platform for social and
economic development and good governance, and to
deal with the issues that the Haitian people really want
to see addressed at this point in time.

As I have said already, our role is going to be
complementary to the role that the United Nations can
play. In that regard, we will cooperate very closely
with the United Nations under its leadership.

Let me also mention that the Organization of
American States works on the basis of three parameters
when it comes to Haiti. First of all, in all these
activities, we work on the basis of clear and visible
leadership from the Haitian authorities - the President
and the Prime Minister. In the context of the elections,
it is equally necessary to have very strong, clear and
visible leadership from the Haitian authorities and the
relevant institutions. The second is that we always
work in partnership with the international community
and the Haitian authorities. The third parameter on
which our activities are founded is that we only do
things that we can do, and therefore do not duplicate
what others may do much better.

In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity to
express our condolences to the United Nations for the
loss of so many of its staff during the earthquake. I
would especially like to recognize the enormously
valuable roles played in Haiti by Special
Representative Hedi Annabi, Deputy Special
Representative Luiz Carlos da Costa and the head of
the Elections Unit, Gerard Le Chevallier. For many
years, I had the pleasure and honour of working with
them personally on many occasions. We therefore also
share the sadness.

Tomorrow at the Organization of American
States, there will be a full day of meetings on Haiti. I
am pleased to say that, during a special session that we
have organized for tomorrow, the Foreign Minister of
Haiti will be present to speak. Also present will be the
Special Representative of the Caribbean Community,
former Prime Minister James Patterson, the United
Nations representative in Haiti, Ambassador Edmond
Mulet, and a high-level representative of the United
States. Following that, we will have several other
activities. When tomorrow we commemorate the 100th
anniversary of the building of the Organization of
American States, we will do so in honour of Haiti and
to reaffirm the commitment of the OAS to Haiti now
and in the long term.

