Mr. Baconschi (Romania): My delegation is
gratified by your presence, Sir, in the chair of the
Security Council. I must say that the Council summit
held recently under the Philippines presidency made a
powerful impression on us. I wish to congratulate you
on arranging a timely - and, I trust, rewarding -
discussion on the potential of civil society, in particular
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), to contribute
effectively to United Nations action aimed at averting
conflict or settling disputes by peaceful means in
accordance with the provisions of the United Nations
Charter. That is a rich topic, as it relates to the role of
important partners in the peace efforts of the United
Nations and of its Security Council. I shall
nevertheless be brief, since Romania associates itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the United Kingdom on behalf of the European
Union.

The international community's approach to
conflict prevention and the settlement of disputes
continues to evolve in response to the changing nature
of threats to peace and security in today's world. In
past years, the United Nations system has expanded its
capacity for the early detection of potentially
dangerous situations, for preventing the escalation of
tensions and to help parties to manage and eventually
settle peacefully their disputes. However, even when
the analytical and planning capacities of the
Organization are displayed at their finest, realities on
the ground make clear that there is a continuous
demand to further identify and put together additional
resources.

Our debate today is therefore more than welcome
as a means of fostering reflection on enhancing the
capacity, knowledge, resources and tools of the United
Nations to ensure better outcomes in conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Having acknowledged and taken stock of the ever-
growing contribution of civil society in these
processes, we should explore further avenues and
modalities for its deeper involvement. The added value
provided by the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society organizations
in the work of the United Nations has been repeatedly
emphasized in this very Chamber, where we
recognized that these components of civil society are
highly instrumental in making a difference at
practically all stages of a conflict and in ensuring that
whatever political solutions emerge to end a conflict
are durable and sustainable.

Such organizations are actively involved in
conflict prevention, based on a series of assets such as
firsthand knowledge of the situation on the ground and
unhindered contacts with the relevant players. As a
result, in certain cases, NGOs and civil society
organizations are more effective in sensing emerging
crises, thus becoming invaluable resources for a
dedicated early warning system for international
agencies acting in the field.

In other cases, such organizations are able to
produce the most accurate assessment of the danger of
escalation in a specific dispute, which is always a
crucial element in halting a conflict before it actually
breaks out. Moreover, unlike international
involvement, which is occasional, temporary and
fragmented, the continued presence of civil society
creates opportunities to build long-term relationships,
thus creating a sense of trust among the parties to a
dispute as well as opening up more reliable and
sustainable channels for dialogue. The longevity of
their presence and their subsequently enhanced
credibility provide civil society organizations with a
superior capacity to access and influence actors
involved in the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
they allow them to explore innovative ways and means
to assist in the process. Finally, since most of today's
conflicts have at their core ethnic or religious issues,
neutral actors such as multi-ethnic or inter-faith-based
civil society organizations are in a privileged position
to overcome sectarian divisions and foster better
understanding among the religious and ethnic
components of society.

Given the potential represented by the knowledge
and intuitive understanding of civil society actors,
emphasis should be placed on promoting an improved
and upgraded cooperation between the United Nations
system and civil society organizations, to make
activities associated with conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes more sustainable and
cost-effective. Conflict prevention encompasses
modalities such as participation, empowerment and
national ownership, enabling a timely reaction before a
dispute reaches the conflict stage. The international
community must help to foster home-grown political
processes in which civil society shares ownership of
prevention processes with the international community
and local governmental actors.

Dialogue among civil society actors is to be
encouraged and facilitated to allow for healthy debate,
nurture transformations, build consensus and translate
policy into practice. In countries where communities
are distrustful of one another or where conflict has
deeply eroded societal structures, there is a particularly
great need to explore all effective models for
participatory conflict prevention and dispute
settlement, including, as appropriate, enhanced
cooperation between civil society organizations and the
United Nations system and its relevant mechanisms
and partners.

In that context, I would like to highlight the role
of the media. By giving voice and visibility to all
people - including and especially the poor, the
marginalized and members of minority groups - the
media are well placed to help remedy inequalities,
corruption, ethnic tensions and the human rights abuses
that form the root causes of so many conflicts. Since
the worldwide toll of journalists and critical support
staff killed covering the story of a conflict or a post-
conflict situation has been spiralling, we should also
contemplate more thoroughly the need to promote and
ensure respect for freedom of expression and opinion,
as well as the basic principles of international
humanitarian law.

We witnessed on Friday the adoption of the
outcome document of the high-level plenary meeting of
the General Assembly of September 2005. We
commend the recognition of the positive contribution
of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, in the promotion and implementation of
development and human rights programmes, which
ultimately are key factors in the prevention of
conflicts, and of the importance of their continued
engagement with Governments, the United Nations and
other international organizations.

The contribution of civil society to conflict
prevention and management is also an important
"lessons learned" chapter from the developing story of
enhancing the relationship of the United Nations with
regional organizations. Such an understanding of
multilateralism is aimed at creating more appropriate
avenues and mechanisms for cooperation with a view
to the better implementation of our common tasks.
